--- Page 1 ---
Joint Optimization of Completion Ratio and
Latency of Offloaded Tasks with Multiple Priority
Levels in 5G Edge
Parisa Fard Moshiri, Murat Simsek, Burak Kantarci
Abstract—Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC) is widely
recognized as an essential enabler for applications that necessitate
minimal latency. However, the dropped task ratio metric has not
been studied thoroughly in literature. Neglecting this metric can
potentially reduce the system’s capability to effectively manage
tasks, leading to an increase in the number of eliminated or
unprocessed tasks. This paper presents a 5G-MEC task offloading
scenario with a focus on minimizing the dropped task ratio,
computational latency, and communication latency. We employ
Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILP), Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO), and Genetic Algorithm (GA) to optimize
the latency and dropped task ratio. We conduct an analysis on
how the quantity of tasks and User Equipment (UE) impacts
the ratio of dropped tasks and the latency. The tasks that are
generated by UEs are classified into two categories: urgent tasks
and non-urgent tasks. The UEs with urgent tasks are prioritized
in processing to ensure a zero-dropped task ratio. Our proposed
method improves the performance of the baseline methods, First
Come First Serve (FCFS) and Shortest Task First (STF), in the
context of 5G-MEC task offloading. Under the MILP-based ap-
proach, the latency is reduced by approximately 55% compared
to GA and 35% compared to PSO. The dropped task ratio
under the MILP-based approach is reduced by approximately
70% compared to GA and by 40% compared to PSO.
Index Terms—5G, Mobile Edge Computing, Task Offloading,
Mixed Integer (MILP) Linear Optimization, Latency, Dropped
Task Ratio, Task Prioritization.
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing demands and the bottleneck in the network
core to access cloud services have called for Mobile Edge
Computing (MEC) in the current technological environment
[1]. With the rapid expansion in the number of connected
devices and the volume of data they generate, conventional
cloud computing models, which include processing data in
data centres, are facing challenges due to bottlenecks in the
backbone network, higher latency, and bandwidth limitations
[2]. MEC tackles these difficulties by deploying computing
resources in close proximity to the data generation site,
namely at the network edge [3]. The close proximity between
components significantly decreases the latency, allowing for
quicker data processing and decision-making, which is es-
sential for applications such as self-driving cars, augmented
reality, Internet of Things (IoT) devices, and intelligent urban
infrastructure [4]. Some of the edge functionalities are used
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5, Canada. E-mail:
{ parisa.fard.moshiri,murat.simsek,burak.kantarci}@uottawa.ca
for real-time communication protocol assistance, such as self-
driving cars [2].
The integration of MEC in a 5G network offers numerous
revolutionary advantages [5]. Firstly, the expanded bandwidth
capabilities of 5G enable more efficient processing of larger
volumes of data [6]. This is especially crucial in situations
where numerous IoT devices are networked, necessitating
the simultaneous transfer of significant volumes of data [7].
Furthermore, the crucial aspect of 5G’s ultra-low latency is
significant in minimizing response times in critical applica-
tions, including autonomous driving and smart grid control
[8]. By processing data at the edge, in close proximity to its
source, and utilizing the low latency of 5G, these applications
can operate with greater reliability and efficiency [9].
To tackle the difficulties posed by the restricted processing
capabilities and limited resources of smart devices, the indus-
try has introduced the concept of computational offloading as
part of the MEC framework [10]. This method entails assign-
ing computationally intensive tasks to dedicated MEC servers
that possess adequate computational capabilities [11]. Once
these tasks are executed on the MEC server, the results are then
accessed by the UE. Additionally, developing applications in
5G heavily depends on computational offloading technologies
to efficiently provide services to UEs [12].
When UE tasks are offloaded to the MEC server, there are
several factors that affect communication and computational
latency together with the task completion rate. Tasks are
placed in a memory queue during the offloading process,
which may result in execution latency. Therefore, tasks that
exceed their predetermined deadline and remain in the queue
are considered dropped. The effectiveness of the offloading
process is highly dependent on the use of offloading methods
and the allocation of resources [13]. This encompasses the
optimization of resource utilization [14], reduction of latency
[15], energy conservation [16], enhancement of network uti-
lization [17], and achieving cost-efficiency [9]. Additionally,
in scenarios where time-sensitive tasks are involved, there may
be UEs whose tasks need urgent or high-priority processing,
which significantly influences the task offloading strategies and
resource management in MEC [14].
Based on a comprehensive review of published works on
this topic, it appears that only a few studies have included
the concept of dropped task ratio as a metric for optimization,
in addition to other metrics such as latency [3] [4] [6]. By
including this metric in the optimization process, it is possible
to come up with more effective decisions in terms of overall
arXiv:2407.11155v2  [cs.NI]  2 Jan 2025


--- Page 2 ---
system efficiency and UE satisfaction [15]. This guarantees
that tasks are not only executed efficiently (with low latency)
but also have a smaller chance of being dropped due to
inadequate or missed deadlines. Therefore, when trying to
achieve the minimum latency, it is crucial to consider the
dropped task ratio.
Previously in [15], we minimized computational delay and
dropped task ratio using MILP and GA without considering the
communication latency or priority levels for the tasks. In this
study, we utilize optimization techniques to minimize not only
computational and communication latencies but also the often-
overlooked metric of dropped task ratio. The optimization
techniques are specifically tailored to ensure a zero dropped
task ratio for urgent UEs’ tasks and prioritize processing for
them, while also aiming to minimize latency for all UEs.
This methodology offers a more comprehensive evaluation of
system efficiency. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
1) This approach specifically targets the offloading of com-
putationally intensive tasks. We examine the impact
of networking parameters, including the quantity of
UEs and tasks, on the latency and dropped task ratio.
Furthermore, the impact of these factors on various
scheduling techniques,including deterministic, heuristic,
and optimization approaches, has been examined.
2) An optimization problem is formulated based on our par-
ticular case, with the objective of minimizing both com-
munication and computational latency and the dropped
task ratio. Based on a thorough analysis of the literature,
this work uniquely considers the combined factors of
dropped task ratio, latency, and task urgency in a 5G-
MEC scenario. Three optimization methodologies are
employed, namely Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), and Ge-
netic Algorithm (GA). MILP is used as the primary
optimization approach, and the results are compared
with PSO and GA, which are reproduced based on
our scenario, to assess its efficiency. The optimization
results are compared with two scheduling algorithms,
First Come First Serve (FCFS) and Shortest Task First
(STF).
3) We guarantee a zero dropped task ratio for urgent tasks
in all optimization approaches by applying penalty in
the objective function.
The latency is decreased by almost 55% compared to GA
[18] and 35% compared to PSO [19] using the proposed
MILP-based method. The proposed MILP-based technique
reduces the dropped task ratio by around 70% compared to
GA [18] and by 40% compared to PSO [19].
II. RELATED WORK
Efficient task offloading can not only reduce energy con-
sumption but also quicken task execution and enhance the UE
experience [30]. Computational offloading has been widely
investigated in MEC networks, with the requirement that only
one edge server handle all UE requests [3] [20]. In [20], Zeng
et al. tackle the optimization issue that jointly optimizes the
offloading rate, the proportion of the tasks that are compressed
during offloading, the power used for transmission, and the
allocation of CPU resources in the MEC server. The cost is
formulated in terms of these parameters, and the objective is
to minimize the overall cost of the system. In order to address
the issue, the implementation of an improved sparrow search
algorithm (ISSA) is employed.
In [14], two approaches based on priority are introduced. to
allocate CPU cycles to offloaded tasks at an edge server. In the
initial approach the edge server is involved in discriminating
between various tasks by their priority classes. A greater
number of CPU cycles per unit of time is assigned by the
edge server to tasks in a higher priority class. In the second
approach, the priority of each device is determined in real-
time by considering the priorities of the tasks that the device
has delegated. The edge server’s CPU resources are assigned
to a task according to the priority of the device that has
delegated the task to the edge server. They improve the average
computational latency of 100 UEs by 50% compared with the
round robin scheduling algorithm. However, they didn’t con-
sider communication latency in their work. Optimizing both
communication and computational latencies ensures efficient
data transfer and processing, particularly for latency-sensitive
applications. In our scenario for 100 tasks, the latencies of
urgent tasks are improved in the proposed MILP-based, PSO,
and GA by an average of 77%, 68%, and 55% compared to
FCFS.
In addition, there has been a greater emphasis on computa-
tional offloading in multi-server MEC networks. This presents
a greater challenge since the offloading decision involves not
only determining whether a request should be offloaded or
not but also determining the most suitable location for the
offloading process. In [21], Seah et al. examine the impact of
joint resource allocation and offloading in MEC. To meet the
requirements of quality of service, this approach takes into
account the communication and computational requirements
of packets. A combined scheduling method called Extended
Weighted Fair Queueing with Latency Constraint (EWFQ/LC)
is proposed. This methodology tries to optimize fairness in re-
source allocation while also meeting the latency requirements
of various service types. When there are sufficient resources,
the scheduler functions similarly to Weighted Fair Queueing
(WFQ) in order to equitably allocate both communication and
compute resources.
In a multi-MEC server environment, users may prioritize
risk-seeking or loss-aversion when deciding which computing
tasks to offload to each server and execute locally. A proba-
bility of failure function is established for each MEC server,
indicating its likelihood of failing to deliver end-user comput-
ing demands due to over-exploitation of its capabilities [28].
To enhance perceived satisfaction, authors in [28], consider
that users offload computational tasks to several MEC servers
using a prospect-theoretic utility function. To find the best
allocation strategy, a non-cooperative game among users is
proposed to determine the Pure Nash Equilibrium (PNE) for
optimal data offloading.
Dynamic caching in MEC is a process that involves caching
and managing data or information in a manner that adjusts to


--- Page 3 ---
TABLE I: Comparison of our work with literature
Paper
UE
Tasks/UE
Task
Urgency
Metric
Algorithm
Min
Max
Min
Max
Computational
Communication
Dropped Task
latency
latency
Ratio
[14]
-
-
-
100
100
✓
✓
✗
✓
nonlinear approach
[15]
10
1000
1,2,5
10
5000
✗
✓
✗
✓
MILP, GA
[16]
50
250
-
10
40
✗
✓
✓
✗
Improved PSO
[17]
2500
2500
-
-
-
✗
✗
✓
✓
DQN
[18]
2
20
-
1
200
✗
✓
✓
✗
Improved GA
[19]
1
500
1
1
500
✗
✓
✗
✗
PSO
[20]
-
-
-
-
-
✗
✗
✓
✗
ISSA, PSO
[21]
-
-
-
-
-
✗
✗
✓
✗
EWFQ/LC
[22]
10
50
1
10
50
✗
✓
✓
✗
nonlinear approach
[23]
60
120
1
60
120
✗
✓
✗
✗
WOA+GWO
[24]
10
20
1
10
20
✗
✓
✓
✗
D3QN
[25]
5
50
5
50
250
✗
✓
✗
✗
MIP
[26]
-
-
-
-
-
✗
✓
✗
✗
MIP
[27]
4
4
1
4
4
✗
✓
✗
✗
MILP
[28]
-
50
-
-
-
✗
✓
✗
✗
Game theory+proposed
algorithm
[29]
-
-
-
3000
7000
✗
✓
✓
✗
Hybrid GA-PSO
Ours
10
1000
1,2,4
10
4000
✓
✓
✓
✓
MILP, PSO, GA
varying situations, UE requirements, or network characteris-
tics. Dynamic caching differs from static caching in that it
continuously updates and replaces cached content in response
to real-time situations, as opposed to preloading and maintain-
ing unchanged content until manually updated. The authors
in [22] examine a collaborative task offloading problem in
MEC that is supported by dynamic caching. The objective is to
minimize the maximum total latency experienced by all UEs.
This is achieved by simultaneously evaluating the decisions
related to service caching, task offloading, and computational
resource allocation. A fair allocation of computer resources
is proposed to enhance equity among UEs, where fairness
is attained by minimizing the UEs’ maximum actual latency.
Offloading multi-dependent tasks in MEC presents a distinct
and significant challenge within the broader context of task
offloading. Multi-dependent tasks are a set of computational
tasks that contain interactions which must be executed in a
specified order. These tasks are essential parts of a broader
computational workload or application and necessitate syn-
chronized execution, wherein the output of one task serves
as the input for another. Ma et al. [19] propose a solution
for multi-dependent tasks that involves utilizing a queue-
based improved multi-objective particle swarm optimization
algorithm. They take into account both the time it takes to
complete the tasks and the cost of executing them.
Feng et al. [23] examine a computational offloading model
that incorporates latency optimization, energy optimization,
and price optimization for computational offloading in MEC.
They examine a model that takes into account these objectives
and suggest a combination of the whale optimization algorithm
(WOA) with the grey wolf optimizer (GWO). They apply the
social hierarchy from GWO to WOA to reach global optimal
while avoiding local optimal. The procedure for improving
search agent positions is adjusted to accommodate the intro-
duction of hierarchy. The encircling stage of WOA is similar to
that of GWO, however, the bubble-net attack approach differs
from GWO’s hunting stage.
Li et al. [29] propose a multi-objective optimization problem
to reduce transmission delays caused by system load balancing
and superfluous hops. They present GA-PSO, a hybrid genetic
particle swarm technique. Their simulation results indicate
that the hybrid GA-PSO method does not outperform cutting-
edge GA and nearest selection algorithms in achieving all task
offloading delays.
Zhu et al. [18] analyze how offloading decisions, uplink
power allocation, and computing resource allocation affect
latency.The objective function is defined as the weighted sum
of task execution latency and energy usage, which is solved
by improved GA. Li et al. [16] aim to reduce the latency
and energy usage resulting from the implementation of the
MEC server in a 5G communication setting. An enhanced
PSO algorithm is offered as an approach for offloading. The


--- Page 4 ---
model aims to minimize communication latency while consid-
ering energy consumption limitations. To achieve a trade-off
between latency and energy consumption, a penalty function is
incorporated. The suggested computational offloading choice
effectively assigns the calculation task to the appropriate MEC
server. The Dynamic Task Offloading and Scheduling problem
(DTOS) is formulated as a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP)
called DTOS-MIP in [25]. They explore the Logic Based
Benders Decomposition (LBBD) technique as a means to
effectively solve the DTOS problem and achieve optimal
outcomes. The DTOS-LBBD algorithm partitions the DTOS
problem into a primary task that handles task offloading and
resource allocation, while also breaking it down into multiple
sub-problems, each concentrating on the scheduling of tasks
for one of the five applications.
Task partitioning is an alternate approach that can be used
to decrease latency in MEC [9]. If a computational task can be
divided into smaller subtasks and assigned to various entities
for execution, including the local device, MEC server, and
cloud server, the workload at each entity can be decreased [9].
Feng et al. [26] investigate the problem of task partitioning and
UE association in a MEC system. The objective is to minimize
the average latency per UE. It is presumed that every task can
be divided into several subtasks that can be performed on local
devices (such as cars), MEC servers, and/or cloud servers.
The subtasks are either independent or dependent. Every UE
is linked to one of the nearby edge nodes. The problem
of jointly optimizing task partitioning and UE association is
formulated as a MIP problem. For subtask dependency, they
break down the problem into two separate subproblems. The
first subproblem aims to optimize the ratio of task partitioning
under a specific UE association, while the other subproblem is
the association of UEs itself. The partitioning is pertained by
the lower-level subproblem, whereas the association of UEs is
involved by the higher-level subproblem.
Due to the increased computational complexity and data
volume associated with Deep Neural Network (DNN) tasks
compared to classical tasks, Mingjin et al. [27] provide a
viable solution by employing task partitioning and offloading.
They examine a DNN-based MEC system, taking into account
several mobile devices and a single MEC server. In order to
improve the task partitioning latency, they initially propose an
approach that predicts the processing latency for DNN tasks.
The goal is to minimize processing time and the computational
load on mobile devices. A MILP-based mechanism is proposed
to partition and offload DNN tasks.
Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) is widely used by re-
searchers for task offloading in MEC [31]. DRL is particularly
effective in dealing with non-linearities and multi-objective
optimization in complex systems, where conventional ap-
proaches may encounter difficulties or require linearization
[32]. It effectively achieves a harmonious equilibrium between
several goals, such as efficiency and speed, without neces-
sitating complex mathematical models [33]. Yun et al. [34]
present a control scheme based on DRL and GA to meet
the demanding QoS requirements using 5G multiple radio
access technology (RAT)-based partial offloading and MEC
resource allocation. In the proposed approach, the MEC server
dynamically changes its resources depending on offloading
requests from different UEs utilizing DRL. The GA decides
whether a task should be processed locally or offloaded. The
objective of the proposed approach is to reduce energy usage
and increase the offloading success rate of servers.
Hsu et al. [17] study computational offloading in a het-
erogeneously loaded MEC-enabled Internet of Things (IoT)
network. A heterogeneous workload regarding MEC refers to
a scenario where the computational tasks or workloads show
significant variations in terms of their resource requirements,
complexity, and characteristics. In other words, tasks and UEs
vary in their computational requirements and processing needs.
This work models the computational offloading as a Markov
decision problem and develops a Duelling-Deep Q-learning
Network (DQN)-based energy and latency-efficient technique.
Cheng et al. [24] focus on investigating the methods and
techniques used for offloading and allocating resources in
MEC with the goal of minimizing latency and energy. Based
on the characteristics of the objective function, a Double-
Duelling DQN (D3QN) algorithm is suggested to address the
issues of overfitting and overestimation in the DQN algorithm.
We summarize all these works based on multiple factors,
as shown in Table I. Based on our thorough review of
the available literature, we have discovered an important
gap in current research regarding the incorporation of the
dropped task ratio with other network parameters, especially
computational latency. In our previous work in [15], we
consider dropped task ratio and computational latency and
ignore communication latency. Also, in [17], they consider
minimizing dropped task ratio with communication latency,
ignoring computational latency. In this work, computational
latency, communication latency, and dropped task ratio are
considered. Furthermore, a limited number of articles take into
account the urgency of tasks in their optimization problems.
In [14], they consider task urgency, but with a limited number
of tasks and an unknown number of UEs. In this paper, we
have up to 4000 tasks and 1000 UEs and aim to minimize not
only dropped task ratio and computational latency but also
communication latency. This article aims to bridge the current
gap by: 1) reducing communication and computational latency,
and 2) minimizing the dropped task ratio.
Fig. 1: Proposed methodology


--- Page 5 ---
Generate 
User
#UE = 10 ... 1000
Generate            
Task per User
#Task/UE = 1, 2, 4
Traffic Generator
Task Distribution w.r.t Urgency
Send Tasks to 
gNodeB
Deterministic 
Models
FCFS            STF
FCFS: First Come First Serve
STF: Shortest Task First 
GA: Genetic Algorithm
PSO: Particle Swarm Optimisation
MILP: Mix Integer Linear Programming
Heuristic
Models
GA
PSO
Optimization
Model
MILP 
Task Offloading
Urgent
Non-Urgent
Urgent
Non-Urgent
1st 
Come
2nd 
Come
Shortest
Duration
2nd 
Shortest
Duration
Communication 
Parameter
{ Bandwidth, Task Size}
Computation
Parameters
{Arrival Time, Processing Time, 
Deadline, Assigning Time}
Send Tasks to 
gNodeB
Communication 
Parameters
Users
Communication Delay
Computation Delay
Dropped Task Ratio
Deterministic 
Models
Heuristic 
Models
Optimization 
Model
Non-Urgent Task
Urgent Task
Dropped Task Ratio of Urgent Tasks =   0 %     for MILP, GA, PSO
Performance 
Evaluation
1st Come Task
2nd Come Task
Shortest Duration Task
2nd Shortest Duration Task
User generating 
Non-Urgent Task
User generating 
Urgent Task
Urgent Task
Non-Urgent Task
Fig. 2: General Process Flow for Proposed Methodology
III. METHODOLOGIES UNDER STUDY
We consider a multi-UE multi-server 5G-based MEC, as
shown in Fig.1. The MEC servers are deployed near a gNB
to handle tasks offloaded from UEs and send back the results
to them. Urgent and non-urgent tasks have been classified in
order of priority in this study.
The Fig.2 illustrates a flowchart for the proposed method-
ology, focusing on how to manage task allocation based on
resource availability to minimize latency and drop task ratio.
It starts with task generation with poisson distribution and
then sends the tasks to gNodeB and MEC servers. Tasks
are categorized as either urgent or non-urgent based on a
Gaussian distribution, where from -3std to -2std and from
+2std to +3std are classified as urgent tasks and the rest
are classified as non-urgent tasks. Tasks are processed us-
ing different strategies, including two deterministic models,
FCFS and STF, two heuristic models, GA and PSO, and
one optimization model, MILP. The optimization models aim
to optimize task offloading based on communication and
computational parameters, leading to a performance evaluation
that considers communication latency, computational latency,
and the dropped task ratio. The goal is to efficiently manage
task offloading while minimizing total latency and dropped
task ratio, particularly ensuring that urgent tasks have a zero
percent dropped task ratio and are processed first.


--- Page 6 ---
A. Greedy Schemes
FCFS assigns tasks to computing resources in the order they
arrive, without considering their computational requirements
or deadlines. Each incoming task is placed in a queue and
waits for its turn to be processed. This offloading strategy,
although easy to implement and fair in terms of task execution
order, can lead to high waiting times, especially for lightweight
tasks that are queued behind heavier ones [35].
STF is a scheduling method that prioritizes tasks with
shorter processing times over those with longer processing
times. The main goal of this strategy is to minimize the total
execution time while also targeting the task completion ratio.
By prioritizing shorter tasks, it reduces latency for varying
task sizes in scalable environments. Although FCFS is fair
and straightforward in task queue management, its sequential
processing might increase latency, especially with large tasks
upfront, making it less scalable compared to STF. This strategy
has the potential to significantly reduce the average task
waiting time. However, there is a possible disadvantage to this
technique as it increases the likelihood of longer tasks being
kept in a queue, as they may consistently be assigned lower
priority levels [36]. The feasibility of implementing the STF
in real-time systems is greatly impeded by its dependence on
having prior knowledge about each task, a condition that is
frequently impractical or impossible in environments where
task sizes and characteristics can be unpredictable, a situation
that is often impracticable or unattainable in real-time systems
where task sizes can be unpredictable.
TABLE II: Notation table for parameters used in the optimiza-
tion problem.
Parameter
Decription
N
Set of tasks
M
Set of servers
Bi
Bandwidth of channel for the UE of task i
p
Transmission power of UE
g
Channel gain
N0
Density of noise power
tdi
Deadline of task i
tai
Arrival time of task i
tci
processing time of task i
tsi
Start processing time of task i
xij
Binary decision variable which is 1 when
task i is assigned to server j.
fj
Frequency of cpu on server j
Si
Size of the task
Ci
Cycles needed to complete the task i
Mitj
Integer scheduling matrix for task i sched-
uled on server j in timeslot t.
B. Mathematical foundations of task offloading
The optimization problem involves an objective function
that seeks to minimize both latency and dropped task ratio.
The goal of objective function is a trade-off between the two
baseline methods, FCFS and STF. Here, we aim to minimize
both latency and dropped task ratio while considering deadline,
duration, urgency and task arrival time.
1) computational: We use a binary decision variable, xij,
for assigning tasks to servers where:
xij =
(
1
task i is assigned to server j
0
otherwise
(1)
We formulate computational latency as in (2), waiting time,
and (3), execution latency. In (2), N is the set of tasks and M
is the set of servers, tsi is the start processing time of task i,
tai is the arrival time of task i, tdi is the deadline of task i and
tci is the processing time of task i. All of the required notation
for mathematical formulas is briefly explained in TABLE II.
T w
i =
tsi −tai
tdi −tai −tci
(2)
The execution latency for task i on server j is formulated
as (3), where fj is the frequency of CPU in server j and Ci
is the cycles needed to complete task i.
T e
ij = Ci
fj
(3)
We formulated, T c
ij, the computational latency as (4):
T c
ij = T e
ij + T w
i
(4)
2) Communication latency: the uplink data rate [6] for the
UE of task i is given as:
ri = Bi log2

1 + pg
N0

(5)
where Bi denotes the bandwidth of the channel for the
UE of task i, p is the transmission power of the UEs that
is identical for all, g represents the gain of the channel, and
N0 is the density of the noise power of the channel. To manage
medium access and mitigate interference between UEs [37],
Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) is
employed [38]. The transmission latency can be expressed as
formulated in (6), where Si is size of the task i. We consider
roundtrip communication latency in this paper.
T t
i = 2 × Si
ri
(6)
3) Dropped Task Ratio: The dropped task ratio is formu-
lated in (7):
Dij = 1 −xij
N
(7)
4) The optimization formula: Our goal is to minimize total
latency (communication + computational) for all offloaded
tasks along with the dropped task ratio as in (8). Thus, tasks
are offloaded with the lowest latency, considering minimiz-
ing the dropped task ratio. Hence, the objective function is
formulated as in (9), a NP-hard problem, on the basis of
(10)-(14), which will be linearized for MILP algorithm in
part 5. The problem is NP-hard, since it’s nonlinear and non-
convex and becomes more and more complex as the number
of tasks increases [39]. The binary nature of xij implies that
the feasible set is not a convex set. Convexity is typically


--- Page 7 ---
considered over continuous domains. When it is restricted to
binary values, the function can exhibit non-convex behavior
due to the discrete nature of the domain.
In our system, urgent tasks are prioritized, ensuring that
they are processed earlier than non-urgent tasks. A penalty
,δ, is incorporated to address the potential consequences of
prioritizing urgent tasks over the execution of non-urgent tasks.
The penalty serves the purpose of maintaining balance in
the system’s operations, guaranteeing that urgent tasks are
first processed while also maintaining efficiency in the overall
processing of tasks.
The objective function is subject to the constraints in (10)-
(14). The constraint in (10) ensures that each task is assigned
to at most one server. In (11), an upper bound of Bmax
is set on the bandwidth. In (12), the first task will start
being processed upon its arrival. In (13), the start processing
time of a task is between its arrival time and task deadline,
taking into account processing and communication latency. It
ensures that the task begins processing at a time that permits
it to be completed before the deadline, taking into account
communication latency. In (14) the total time spent on task i
when scheduled on server j during time slot t does not exceed
the processing time of the task. We define Mitj as an integer
scheduling matrix for task i on server j in timeslot t.
M
X
j=1
N
X
i=1
δ(T t
i + T c
ij) × xij +
M
X
j=1
N
X
i=1
Dij
(8)
M
X
j=1
N
X
i=1
δ

tsi −tai
tdi −tai −tci
+ Ci
fj
+ 2 × Si
ri

× xij+
M
X
j=1
N
X
i=1
1 −xij
N
(9)
S.t. :
X
xij ≤1
(10)
Bi ≤Bmax
(11)
ts1 = ta1
(12)
tai ≤tsi ≤tdi −tci −T t
i
(13)
X
j
X
t
xij · Mitj ≤tci
(14)
5) Linearizing: As the optimization problem is formulated
in the form of an MILP model, we need to linearize nonlinear
equations. Thus, given (15):
xij · A ≥0
(15)
The provided set of inequalities defines a linearization pro-
cess, commonly employed to transform nonlinear problems,
B = xij · A, into a linear format that is more manageable
to solve. This non-linear to linear transformation is performed
according to (16) to (18). Here, A takes values from the set
{0,...,Maxa}.
B −A ≤0
(16)
B −xij ≤0
(17)
xij + A −B ≤Max(A)
(18)
For instance, the (14), Titj = xij · Mitj is linearized as (19)
to (21). Here, Qitj is the maximum value of Mitj.
Titj −xij ≤0
(19)
Titj −Mitj ≤0
(20)
xij + Mitj −Titj ≤Qitj
(21)
We apply the same process for (T t
i + T c
ij) × xij in (8). If
T t
i × xij = To, we can linearize it according to (22) to ( 24):
To −xij ≤0
(22)
To −T t
i ≤0
(23)
xij + T t
i −To ≤Max(To)
(24)
For T c
ij × xij = Tc in (8), we linearize according to (25) to
27:
Tc −xij ≤0
(25)
Tc −T c
ij ≤0
(26)
xij + T c
ij −Tc ≤Max(Tc)
(27)
C. The Algorithm
The algorithm 1 is a comprehensive approach to task
scheduling and optimization, considering both deterministic
and optimization methods. It starts by generating P users and
N tasks, where tasks arrive based on a Poisson distribution,
and their urgency is determined using a Gaussian distribution.
In the deterministic models section, two scheduling ap-
proaches are employed. For FCFS, tasks are scheduled based
on their arrival times. For each run r , the total offloading time
T o
f (r), total computation time T c
f (r), and total dropped task
ratio Df(r) are calculated and averaged over multiple runs.
For STF, tasks are scheduled based on their shortest durations.
Similar to FCFS, the metrics T o
s (r), T c
s (r), and Ds(r) are
calculated and averaged over multiple runs. Urgent tasks are
given special consideration. They are prioritized, and tasks
classified as urgent (with a dropped task ratio of zero) are
processed first.
We use MILP to solve the problem. The model aims to
minimize a specified objective function (9) while adhering
to constraints (10) to (27). For each run, Offloading and
computation delay for both urgent U and non-urgent U ′ tasks
are calculated, along with dropped task ratio for non-urgent
tasks. These metrics are averaged across runs to assess the
performance of the MILP approach. For GA and PSO, we
re-simulate [18] and [19] proposed model.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Settings
The simulations are carried out using a computer equipped
with a core i7 CPU, 4080ti GPU, and 32GB of RAM. The


--- Page 8 ---
Algorithm 1 Task Scheduling and Optimization
1: 1. Generate Users and Tasks:
2: for P ∈{10, 100, 500, 1000} do
3:
for p = 1 to P do
4:
Generate Poisson-distributed arrival times for tasks i.
5:
for i = 1 to N do
6:
Generate task distribution G using Gaussian.
7:
Classify task i as urgent if G ∈[−3σ, −2σ] ∪
[2σ, 3σ], else non-urgent.
8:
end for
9:
end for
10: end for
11: 2. Deterministic Models:
12: 2.1 FCFS:
13: for r = 1 to 10 do
14:
Schedule tasks based on arrival times.
15:
Calculate T o
f (r) = P(T t
i × xij)
16:
Calculate T c
f (r) = P(T c
ij × xij)
17:
Calculate Df(r) = P Dij
18: end for
19: Get average of T o
f (r), T c
f (r), and Df(r) on r
20: 2.2 STF:
21: for r = 1 to 10 do
22:
Schedule tasks based on shortest durations.
23:
Calculate T o
s (r) = P(T t
i × xij)
24:
Calculate T c
s (r) = P(T c
ij × xij)
25:
Calculate Ds(r) = P Dij
26: end for
27: Get average of T o
s (r), T c
s (r), and Ds(r) on r
28: 3. Handling Urgent Users:
29: for i ∈N do
30:
if i ∈U then
31:
Prioritize task c with Dij = 0.
32:
end if
33: end for
34: for i ∈U do
35:
Process urgent tasks first.
36: end for
37: 4. Optimization:
38: MILP:
39: for r = 1 to 10 do
40:
Minimize (9) based on (10) to (27).
41:
for i ∈U do
42:
Calculate T o
1 (r) = P(T t
i × xij)
43:
Calculate T c
1 (r) = P(T c
ij × xij)
44:
end for
45:
for i ∈U ′ do
46:
Calculate T o
2 (r) = P(T t
i × xij)
47:
Calculate T c
2 (r) = P(T c
ij × xij)
48:
Calculate D2(r) = P Dij
49:
end for
50: end for
51: Get average of T o
1 (r), T c
1 (r), T o
2 (r), T c
2 (r), and D2(r)
on r
52: 5. Result Compilation and Analysis:
53: Compile results including task assignments sequences,
total delays, and dropped task ratios.
scenario is simulated in MATLAB, and the parameters have
been set according to [21], [40] as shown in Table III. We
simulate the 5G gNB with four MEC servers. On each MEC
server, there is one CPU for processing tasks, and tasks follow
a poisson arrival. The tasks are DL-based object detection
based on YOLOv5 [41]. Tasks are offloaded with respect to the
FCFS and STF fashion. We formulate the objective function
9 and try to find the best offloading decision to minimize the
dropped task ratio and latency. We compare our optimization
results with baseline offloading schemes. The parameters used
for GA [18] and PSO [19] are shown in Table IV and V,
respectively. These parameters are chosen empirically after a
couple of experiments. The fitness function is defined as the
objective function in (9).
TABLE III: Parameters values in simulations
Parameters
Value
Number of UEs
10,50,100,500,1000
Number of tasks per UE
1,2,4
Max number of tasks
4000
Number of servers
4
Number of CPU in each server
1
CPU Speed
2.2 Ghz
Datarate
50Mbps
noise power
100dbm
transmit Power
200 mW
TABLE IV: Parameters for GA
Parameter
Value/Type
Population Size
50 individuals in each generation
Max Generations
200
Mutation Rate
0.01
Mutation Type
@mutationgaussian
Crossover Type
@crossoverscattered
TABLE V: Parameters for PSO
Parameter
Value/Type
Swarm Size
50
Cognitive Coefficient
1.49
Social Coefficient
1.49
Max Generation
200
B. Experimental Results
In this section, we present the convergence of algorithms
and numerical results for communication latency, computa-
tional latency, and dropped task ratio for FCFS, STF, PSO,
GA, and MILP. We analyze how the simulated algorithms are
affected by the quantity of UEs and tasks for each UE. The
performance of each optimization strategy on both urgent and
non-urgent tasks is analyzed as well.
1) Convergence: In Fig. 3, we plot the objective function
values during iterations for different numbers of tasks per
UE. In Fig. 3a, MILP shows efficient convergence towards an
optimal solution, as seen by the rapid and consistent reduction


--- Page 9 ---
(a) One task per UE
(b) Two tasks per UE
(c) Four tasks per UE
Fig. 3: Convergence to the objective function’s optimal value
in the value of the objective function in (9) across different
tasks per UE. This trend demonstrates the algorithm’s ability
to rapidly identify and pursue the most desirable result, the
lowest computational latency, and the lowest dropped task
ratio. MILP can be used to minimize latency effectively if the
offloading problem is defined as a set of linear equations and
inequalities. The objective function value of the GA shows a
gradual reduction, with rather steady plateaus interspersed with
abrupt dips. This pattern is indicative of the GA’s evolutionary
search process, where a population of solutions is evolved
over time. Improvements occur as a result of the selection,
crossover, and mutation operators. The GA has progressive
enhancements, but it does not achieve as minimal a value
as the MILP-based solution, which makes it less efficient
in our case. The convergence pattern of GA is identified
by a slower decrease in the value of the objective function,
which is associated with the increased computational latency
and dropped task ratio for GA. It indicates that although
GA may finally discover suitable solutions, but with lower
computational efficiency, requiring more iterations to reach
stability.
The PSO algorithm has a better objective function value
than GA but underperforms when compared to MILP.In sum-
mary, the graph indicates that MILP outperforms the other
algorithms according to not only the value of the objective
function but also its faster convergence. Therefore, MILP has
better efficiency for the optimization problem when taking into
account the objective function in (9).
In Fig. 3b, the MILP-based solution constantly shows rapid
and robust convergence, highlighting its efficacy in solving
the given issue. Both GA and PSO show different levels
of improvement, with PSO initially outperforming GA but
ultimately underperforming when compared to MILP in terms
of the objective function in this specific scenario. In Fig. 3c
MILP demonstrates the best performance by rapidly obtaining
the lowest objective function values and consistently maintain-
ing them, indicating robust and stable convergence towards
an optimal solution. PSO starts with smaller initial objective
function values than the GA, due to more effective particle
positioning (solutions) in the search space or a better initial
velocity distribution, allowing particles to explore promising
regions early on [42]. PSO fails to maintain or enhance its
performance as iterations progress, resulting in a less optimal
value than MILP. PSO relies on particle cooperation and
information exchange, therefore, if particles converge early or
get locked in local optima, continued development is difficult
[42]. The GA improves slower and more inconsistently than
MILP. GA uses random processes like mutation and crossover
to develop new solutions, which causes this oscillation [43].
These random processes can yield superior offspring that
significantly decrease the objective function value or less fit
solutions that temporarily increase or freeze it. GA’s perfor-
mance shows a lack of consistency, characterized by a broad
pattern of improvement, albeit at a slower and more fluctuating
pace compared to MILP.
In all three parts of Fig. 3 under three different tasks per
UE, the MILP consistently begins with the lowest objective
function value. It quickly experiences a sharp decrease and
reaches a low and stable value early on in the iterations. This
suggests that MILP rapidly identifies a solution that is close
to optimal and consistently maintains it, demonstrating robust
convergence characteristics.
2) Communication Latency: Communication latency is re-
lated to task size, data rate, and the frequency of the CPU
for offloaded tasks. Fig. 4a illustrates a scenario where each
UE is assigned only one task. It clearly demonstrates a clear
pattern of communication latency growth as the number of
UEs increases. FCFS and STF lead to the highest latency when
compared to their counterparts. MILP consistently exhibits the
lowest average communication latency among different UE
numbers. This indicates that MILP is particularly efficient in
identifying optimal or nearly optimal solutions to the task
offloading problem, since it can linearly represent the problem
and systematically explore the feasible region of solution
space.
In comparison, the GA demonstrates the greatest mean
communication latency across all optimization algorithms. The
GA, which emulates biological evolution using probabilistic
transition rules, is typically less efficient than MILP. The
iterative methodology employed to develop solutions may


--- Page 10 ---
(a) One task per UE
(b) Two task per UE
(c) Four task per UE
Fig. 4: Comm. latency for different task counts per UE
encounter difficulty in identifying high-quality solutions within
a constrained number of generations, particularly when the
number of tasks escalates. This can result in less than ideal
task allocations, leading to increased latency.
The performance of PSO falls between the performances
of MILP and GA. PSO, a heuristic similar to GA, has the
advantage of converging to improved solutions faster. This
is because the movement of its particles is controlled by
both their individual best-known location and the globally
best-known position. The dual influence of exploration and
exploitation in PSO enables it to effectively navigate the
search space, resulting in faster convergence towards optimal
solutions compared to GA. Nevertheless, PSO is susceptible
to being stuck in local optima, hence hindering its ability to
attain the low latency observed under the MILP.
As shown in Fig. 4b, two tasks per UE, and Fig. 4c, four
tasks per UE, MILP results in the lowest communication
latency. The GA demonstrates the highest latency, making it
less inefficient compared to MILP and PSO in this particular
scenario. In contrast, the MILP approach exhibits minimal
latency, indicating a more efficient distribution of tasks. The
PSO technique results in moderate latency values, indicating
different levels of effectiveness in handling communication
(a) One task per UE
(b) Two task per UE
(c) Four task per UE
Fig. 5: Computational latency for different task counts per UE
overhead. In the multiple-task per UE scenarios, i.e., two
and four tasks per UE, the limitations of FCFS and STF
become more evident. Under the FCFS scheduling algorithm,
an increase in the number of tasks results in longer queues
and, thus, greater latency. STF exhibits superior scalability
compared to FCFS as the number of tasks increases. The en-
hanced scalability of STF can be attributed to its prioritization
of shorter tasks, resulting in a decrease in the average time a
task remains in the system. Although STF successfully reduces
latency compared to FCFS by prioritizing tasks, it still faces
a substantial latency increase in comparison to GA, PSO, and
MILP due to longer tasks’ high waiting times behind shorter
tasks.
3) Computational Latency: We present the average com-
putational latency for different numbers of tasks per UE in
Fig. 5a which demonstrates that FCFS has its highest latency
compared to all other scenarios. When a large task is received
immediately prior to a large number of small tasks, the shorter
tasks will encounter a latency in their execution as they await
the completion of the long task, leading to an increase in
their waiting time. Conversely, the STF scheduling algorithm
prioritizes shorter tasks. When considering task scheduling, it
is seen that the arrival of a large task does not hinder the


--- Page 11 ---
(a) One task per UE
(b) Two task per UE
(c) Four task per UE
Fig. 6: Dropped task ratio for different task counts per UE
execution of smaller tasks. This leads to a drop in the total
waiting time and subsequently reduces computational latency.
The evolutionary technique, albeit robust, is less compu-
tationally efficient for this specific task offloading problem,
as evidenced by the highest computational latency of GA.
PSO leads to higher latency compared to MILP and lower
latency when compared to GA. PSO provides a heuristic-based
solution that outperforms GA but falls short of achieving the
optimality of MILP. As shown in Fig. 3, the PSO algorithm
demonstrates a more consistent and steady decline in the value
of the objective function when compared to the GA, suggesting
a more effective and efficient exploration process. This aligns
with the moderate computational latency commonly associated
with PSO, presenting it as a compromising solution in terms of
optimization speed and computational efficiency. The reason
for PSO’s decreased latency compared to GA can be attributed
to its efficient convergence towards optimal solutions. This is
achieved through PSO’s ability to quickly converge towards
feasible solutions due to its informed search space exploration,
guided by both individual and collective particle achievements.
We depict computational latency for two tasks per UE in
Fig. 5b and four tasks per UE in Fig. 5c. The computational
latency increases with the number of tasks per UE. Overall, the
convergence graph confirms the fast convergence of MILP in
Fig. 7: Urgent UEs vs normal UEs latency
Fig. 8: MILP efficiency (%) in terms of latency and dropped
task ratio in comparison to other algorithms for 1000 tasks.
task offloading, since it quickly achieves the lowest values for
the objective function, indicating minimum computational la-
tency. PSO, although it operates at a slower pace, outperforms
GA by consistently making progress towards achieving lower
values. The slower fall of GA is attributed to its significant
computing latency, which results in MILP being the most
efficient, GA being the least efficient, and PSO performing
in between its counterparts.
4) Dropped Task Ratio: As shown in Fig. 6a With an
increase in the number of UEs, the dropped task ratio tends to
increase under all methods, indicating a higher probability of
task offloading failures as the system becomes more heavily
congested. As shown in Fig. 6a, the MILP-based solution
exhibits the smallest increase in dropped tasks compared to
others. It consistently keeps the dropped task ratio at zero,
regardless of the number of UEs. The superior performance
indicates that MILP’s optimization skills efficiently minimize
the number of dropped tasks.
Both GA and PSO in Fig. 6a underperform the MILP-based
method, with GA showing a slightly higher dropped task ratio
compared to PSO. Both algorithms exhibit a more significant
increase in the number of dropped tasks compared to MILP as
the number of UEs increases. This indicates that while these
heuristic-based approaches can adjust to the task offloading
problem, they may not consistently identify the most optimal
task allocation, resulting in a higher chance of task dropping.
According to Fig. 6a, the dropped task ratios for FCFS


--- Page 12 ---
TABLE VI: Urgent tasks of UEs VS non-urgent tasks of UEs computational latency for different algorithms
Task Type
UE Count
One Task per UE
Two Tasks per UE
Four Tasks per UE
GA
PSO
MILP
GA
PSO
MILP
GA
PSO
MILP
Urgent
10
0.0323
0.0199
0.0059
0.0599
0.0345
0.0216
0.09347
0.0767
0.0417
50
0.1709
0.0996
0.0604
0.2051
0.1865
0.0867
0.4401
0.3920
0.1899
100
0.2051
0.1865
0.0867
0.4401
0.3901
0.1893
0.9021
0.5867
0.3742
500
1.003
0.7694
0.4021
1.0785
0.8396
0.6158
2.2458
1.8562
1.4456
1000
1.0561
0.8595
0.6074
2.2373
1.8333
1.4656
4.5724
3.1375
2.6199
Non-urgent
10
0.1476
0.0998
0.0402
0.1844
0.1179
0.0836
0.4488
0.2322
0.1151
50
0.5533
0.3283
0.1981
0.6695
0.3941
0.2471
1.2213
0.8796
0.64809
100
0.6725
0.4042
0.2571
1.2371
0.8669
0.6314
2.0631
1.4632
1.0781
500
2.3887
1.6431
1.2124
3.2196
2.5281
1.7336
5.8195
4.0852
2.9984
1000
3.1999
2.5434
1.7158
5.8254
4.0682
4.0856
10.0601
6.8827
5.3663
TABLE VII: Total Run Time Comparison
# of
Tasks
Total Run Time
MILP
PSO
GA
FCFS
STF
10
8.10s
8.39s
8.71s
0.12ms
0.09ms
20
8.45s
8.82s
9.01s
0.21ms
0.17ms
40
8.80s
9.41s
10.51s
0.36ms
0.29ms
50
10.95s
13.65s
17.39s
0.48ms
0.38ms
100
3.09min
4.64min
5.84min
0.86ms
0.71ms
200
5.03min
5.95min
7.63min
1.81ms
1.48ms
400
10.57min
12.93min
14.04min
3.96ms
3.08ms
500
14.39min
15.95min
18.20min
5.92ms
4.79ms
1000
21.84min
25.48min
28.43min
13.68ms
11.97ms
2000
38.65min
47.84min
52.92min
29.65ms
26.84ms
4000
85.80min
95.06min
114.23min
65.34ms
54.58ms
are higher than STF, showing a significant increase as the
number of UEs increases due to the FCFS’s processing of
tasks in the order of their arrival. In a system with a heavy
workload, this might result in inefficiencies, such as lengthy
tasks dominating the queue. This can force future tasks to wait
for a longer time and raise the chances of them being dropped
if they cannot be completed within their specified deadline.
By prioritizing smaller tasks, the STF algorithm can generally
handle a greater number of tasks within a specific time frame,
thereby decreasing the chances of tasks being dropped. STF
may accelerate the completion of smaller tasks, allowing for
a faster allocation of resources, resulting in a lower dropped
task ratio. However, STF is biased in favor of shorter tasks,
which can lead to inefficiencies when managing a mixture
of small and large tasks during periods of heavy workload,
resulting in a high dropped task ratio. A similar phenomenon
is observed in Fig. 6b and Fig. 6c, where MILP is the most
resilient algorithm. On the other hand, heuristic methods such
as GA and PSO show intermediary performance, while simpler
scheduling approaches like FCFS and STF face challenges in
handling heavier demands.
In Fig. 8, efficiency of other algorithms in terms of latency
and dropped task ratio compared to MILP is shown. As
depicted in Fig. 8, PSO is in second place and more efficient
than other algorithms. We calculate the efficiency of each
algorithm based on (28):
EffMILP = Algorithm Value −MILP Value
Algorithm Value
(28)
5) Task Urgency: The Table VI and Fig. 7 display a
comparison of the performance of three optimization algo-
rithms across two types of tasks (urgent and non-urgent) with
different numbers of UEs and tasks per UE (one, two, and
four tasks per UE). As the number of tasks per UE increases,
all algorithms experience an increase in computational latency,
regardless of whether the tasks are classified as urgent or non-
urgent. The MILP-based solution under all settings achieves
better performance than the GA and PSO methods for all
UE counts and tasks per UE. It consistently results in the
lowest latencies, indicating its ability to obtain the optimal
output results compared to its heuristic or meta-heuristic
counterparts in our scenario. Generally, GA has the highest
values, suggesting the least efficient performance compared
to the other two algorithms. The performance of PSO falls
between that of GA and MILP. PSO generally outperforms
GA, but it does not reach the same level of efficiency as MILP.
This pattern remains consistent across various UE counts and
different numbers of tasks.
Table VI shows a more significant increase for urgent UEs
compared to non-urgent ones, particularly as the UE count
increases. This implies that the urgency of tasks makes the
optimization mathematically harder, hence making the efficient
management of tasks more difficult. As the number of UEs
increases from 10 to 1000, the difference in performance
between the algorithms becomes more evident, especially
between the MILP algorithm and the heuristic algorithms (GA
and PSO). This suggests that MILP has superior scalability as
the workload increases, enabling more efficient management
of tasks as the system becomes more heavily loaded.
In Fig. 9, we depict urgent and non-urgent latency and
dropped task ratios for 100 and 1000 tasks. As shown in Fig. 9,
FCFS and STF always have a higher latency and dropped task
ratio, while MILP, PSO, and GA have the lowest compared to
baseline schemes. For 100 tasks (Fig. 9a) our model achieves
a zero dropped task ratio; however, as the number of tasks
increases to 1000 (Fig. 9b, the dropped task ratio increases
with latency for non-urgent tasks. The dropped task ratio for


--- Page 13 ---
(a) 100 non-urgent tasks
(b) 1000 non-urgent tasks
(c) 100 urgent tasks
(d) 1000 urgent tasks
Fig. 9: Latency and dropped task ratio comparisons
urgent tasks (Fig.9c and Fig. 9d is always zero for MILP,
PSO, and GA, with the lowest latency compared to FCFS and
STF. In [14], they analyze computational latency and improve
it by an average of 50% for prioritized users compared to
the round robin scheduling algorithm. In our scenario for 100
urgent users, we improve latency in MILP-based by 77% ,
PSO by 68% and GA by 55% compared to FCFS.
The table VII compares total run time (on 4080ti GPU),
for each algorithm individually across varying task numbers.
For small tasks (10-50), all methods are efficient, with MILP
Fig. 10: Total Run time for different number of tasks
being the fastest. As tasks increase to moderate levels (100-
500), MILP maintains lower run times compared to PSO
and GA. For large tasks (1000-4000), MILP’s efficiency is
more pronounced, consistently outperforming PSO and GA.
Overall, MILP shows the best performance, making it suitable
for larger task sets. Iterative or stochastic algorithms require
multiple iterations to explore the solution space and converge
toward an optimal solution. However, the deterministic ap-
proaches like STF and FCFS follow a predefined rule or
sequence to make decisions, resulting in quickly processing
tasks without the overhead of exploring multiple solutions.
Although they have low computational cost, their results are
inefficient compared to optimization algorithms. Additionally,
we plot the results in Fig.10 to show them more clear.
When comparing MILP, PSO, and GA based on computa-
tional complexity, MILP worst-case complexity grows expo-
nentially and is typically expressed as O(2p·poly(n)), where p
is the number of integer variables, and poly(n) represents the
time to solve the linear relaxation at each branch [44]. The
complexity of GA is typically determined by the population
size (P), the number of generations (G), and the complexity of
evaluating the fitness function for each individual (E), which
is usually expressed as O(G·P ·E). For PSO, the complexity
depends on the number of particles (P), iterations (I), and the
complexity of evaluating the fitness function (E), which is of-
ten expressed as O(I ·P ·E) [45]. Despite MILP’s exponential
complexity, it often runs faster in practice due to its structured
techniques like branch-and-bound, which systematically prune
the search space. As shown in convergence figure, MILP
also converges faster and guarantees an optimal solution for
the problem. In contrast, GA and PSO use stochastic search
processes, requiring many evaluations and iterations, which
lead to longer runtimes as they iteratively explore the solution
space. MILP’s deterministic approach ensures exact solutions,
whereas GA and PSO typically yield approximate solutions.
V. CONCLUSION
In the context of 5G-MEC, the main challenges related to
task offloading are centred around effectively handling the
requirement for minimal latency and dropped task ratio, in
order to guarantee efficient and scalable system performance.
To achieve scalability in the presence of these requirements,
it is necessary to implement solutions that optimize task


--- Page 14 ---
scheduling to effectively manage the large volume of data.
We have proposed an approach for task offloading by taking
into account computational and communication latency, as
well as the dropped task ratio. This approach provides a
comprehensive perspective on system efficiency in a realistic
and scalable 5G-MEC scenario. The optimization algorithms,
MILP, PSO, and GA, have demonstrated superior performance
compared to baseline. Under the MILP-based approach, the
latency has been decreased by approximately 60% in com-
parison to GA and by 55% in comparison to PSO. The
MILP-based approach has reduced the dropped task ratio by
approximately 40% compared to GA and by approximately
20% compared to PSO. The performance results demonstrate
significant efficacy in enhancing service performance within
the 5G-MEC framework.
Our ongoing future work includes incorporating communi-
cation and computational energy into these approaches. Fur-
thermore, we are examining multiple scheduling optimization
alternatives to enhance the overall efficiency by efficiently
utilizing the computational resources at hand and solving
challenges in managing increasing demand. Task partitioning
to reduce the server workload and latency is also in our agenda.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by funding from the Inno-
vation for Defence Excellence and Security (IDEaS) program
from the Department of National Defence (DND), and in part
by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada (NSERC) CREATE TRAVERSAL Program.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Nencioni, R. G. Garroppo, and R. F. Olimid, “5g multi-access edge
computing: A survey on security, dependability, and performance,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 63 496–63 533, 2023.
[2] J. Wu, C. Fan, G. Li, Z. Xu, Z. Jin, Y. Zheng et al., “A new heuristic
computation offloading method based on cache-assisted model,” Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 2022, 2022.
[3] C. Feng, P. Han, X. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Liu, and L. Guo, “Computation
offloading in mobile edge computing networks: A survey,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 202, p. 103366, 2022.
[4] A. Acheampong, Y. Zhang, X. Xu, and D. A. Kumah, “A review of
the current task offloading algorithms, strategies and approach in edge
computing systems,” Computer Modeling in Engineering & Sciences,
134 (1), pp. 35–88, 2023.
[5] P. Ranaweera, A. Jurcut, and M. Liyanage, “Mec-enabled 5g use
cases: a survey on security vulnerabilities and countermeasures,” ACM
Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 1–37, 2021.
[6] I. A. Elgendy, W.-Z. Zhang, Y. Zeng, H. He, Y.-C. Tian, and Y. Yang,
“Efficient and secure multi-user multi-task computation offloading for
mobile-edge computing in mobile iot networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2410–2422, 2020.
[7] E. Mustafa, J. Shuja, S. K. uz Zaman, A. I. Jehangiri, S. Din, F. Rehman,
S. Mustafa, T. Maqsood, and A. N. Khan, “Joint wireless power transfer
and task offloading in mobile edge computing: a survey,” Cluster
Computing, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 2429–2448, 2022.
[8] Q.-V. Pham, F. Fang, V. N. Ha, M. J. Piran, M. Le, L. B. Le, W.-J.
Hwang, and Z. Ding, “A survey of multi-access edge computing in 5g
and beyond: Fundamentals, technology integration, and state-of-the-art,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 116 974–117 017, 2020.
[9] A. Islam, A. Debnath, M. Ghose, and S. Chakraborty, “A survey on
task offloading in multi-access edge computing,” Journal of Systems
Architecture, vol. 118, p. 102225, 2021.
[10] R. Singh, R. Sukapuram, and S. Chakraborty, “A survey of mobility-
aware multi-access edge computing: Challenges, use cases and future
directions,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 140, p. 103044, 2023.
[11] S. Alali and A. Assalem, “Metaheuristics method for computation
offloading in mobile edge computing: Survey,” Journal of Advanced
Research in Applied Sciences and Engineering Technology, vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 43–73, 2023.
[12] L. Hou, M. A. Gregory, and S. Li, “A survey of multi-access edge com-
puting and vehicular networking,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 123 436–
123 451, 2022.
[13] J. Yang, A. A. Shah, and D. Pezaros, “A survey of energy optimization
approaches for computational task offloading and resource allocation in
mec networks,” Electronics, vol. 12, no. 17, p. 3548, 2023.
[14] M. O. Farooq, “Priority-based servicing of offloaded tasks in mobile
edge computing,” in 2021 IEEE 7th World Forum on Internet of Things
(WF-IoT).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 581–585.
[15] P. F. Moshiri, M. Simsek, and B. Kantarci, “On the interplay between
network metrics and performance of mobile edge offloading,” in ICC
2024 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp.
4018–4023.
[16] S. Li, H. Ge, X. Chen, L. Liu, H. Gong, and R. Tang, “Computation
offloading strategy for improved particle swarm optimization in mobile
edge computing,” in 2021 IEEE 6th International Conference on Cloud
Computing and Big Data Analytics (ICCCBDA). IEEE, 2021, pp. 375–
381.
[17] C.-K. Hsu, “A dueling dqn-based computational offloading method in
mec-enabled iiot network,” The Computer Journal, p. bxac133, 2022.
[18] A. Zhu and Y. Wen, “Computing offloading strategy using improved
genetic algorithm in mobile edge computing system,” Journal of Grid
Computing, vol. 19, no. 3, p. 38, 2021.
[19] S. Ma, S. Song, L. Yang, J. Zhao, F. Yang, and L. Zhai, “Dependent tasks
offloading based on particle swarm optimization algorithm in multi-
access edge computing,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 112, p. 107790,
2021.
[20] Y. Zeng and D. Liu, “Computation offloading based on improved spar-
row search algorithm in edge computing scenario,” in 2022 International
Conference on Computing, Communication, Perception and Quantum
Technology (CCPQT), 2022, pp. 231–236.
[21] W. K. Seah, C.-H. Lee, Y.-D. Lin, and Y.-C. Lai, “Combined commu-
nication and computing resource scheduling in sliced 5g multi-access
edge computing systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 3144–3154, 2022.
[22] X. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Liu, F. Huang, T. Huang, and Y. Wu, “Collaborative
task offloading and service caching strategy for mobile edge computing,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 18, p. 6760, 2022.
[23] S. Feng, Y. Chen, Q. Zhai, M. Huang, and F. Shu, “Optimizing
computation offloading strategy in mobile edge computing based on
swarm intelligence algorithms,” EURASIP Journal on Advances in
Signal Processing, vol. 2021, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2021.
[24] W. Cheng, X. Liu, X. Wang, and G. Nie, “Task offloading and resource
allocation for industrial internet of things: A double-dueling deep q-
network approach,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 103 111–103 120, 2022.
[25] H. A. Alameddine, S. Sharafeddine, S. Sebbah, S. Ayoubi, and C. Assi,
“Dynamic task offloading and scheduling for low-latency iot services
in multi-access edge computing,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 668–682, 2019.
[26] M. Feng, M. Krunz, and W. Zhang, “Joint task partitioning and user as-
sociation for latency minimization in mobile edge computing networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 8, pp. 8108–
8121, 2021.
[27] M. Gao, W. Cui, D. Gao, R. Shen, J. Li, and Y. Zhou, “Deep neural
network task partitioning and offloading for mobile edge computing,” in
2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2019,
pp. 1–6.
[28] P. A. Apostolopoulos, E. E. Tsiropoulou, and S. Papavassiliou, “Risk-
aware data offloading in multi-server multi-access edge computing
environment,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. PP, pp. 1–
14, 04 2020.
[29] W. Li, X. Sun, B. Wan, H. Liu, J. Fang, and Z. Wen, “A hybrid ga-pso
strategy for computing task offloading towards mes scenarios,” PeerJ
Comput Sci, vol. 9, p. e1273, 2023.
[30] M. Y. Akhlaqi and Z. B. M. Hanapi, “Task offloading paradigm in
mobile edge computing-current issues, adopted approaches, and future
directions,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications, vol. 212,
p. 103568, 2023.
[31] Z. Zabihi, A. M. Eftekhari Moghadam, and M. H. Rezvani, “Rein-
forcement learning methods for computation offloading: A systematic
review,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2023.
[32] D. Hortelano, I. de Miguel, R. J. D. Barroso, J. C. Aguado, N. Merayo,
L. Ruiz, A. Asensio, X. Masip-Bruin, P. Fern´andez, R. M. Lorenzo et al.,


--- Page 15 ---
“A comprehensive survey on reinforcement-learning-based computation
offloading techniques in edge computing systems,” Journal of Network
and Computer Applications, vol. 216, p. 103669, 2023.
[33] H. Hua, Y. Li, T. Wang, N. Dong, W. Li, and J. Cao, “Edge computing
with artificial intelligence: A machine learning perspective,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 55, no. 9, jan 2023.
[34] J. Yun, Y. Goh, W. Yoo, and J.-M. Chung, “5g multi-rat urllc and embb
dynamic task offloading with mec resource allocation using distributed
deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 9,
no. 20, pp. 20 733–20 749, 2022.
[35] A. Ali, M. M. Iqbal, H. Jamil, F. Qayyum, S. Jabbar, O. Cheikhrouhou,
M. Baz, and F. Jamil, “An efficient dynamic-decision based task
scheduler for task offloading optimization and energy management in
mobile cloud computing,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 13, 2021.
[36] G. Yin, R. Chen, and Y. Zhang, “Effective task offloading heuristics
for minimizing energy consumption in edge computing,” in 2022 IEEE
International Conferences on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE
Green Computing & Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber,
Physical & Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData)
and IEEE Congress on Cybermatics (Cybermatics), 2022, pp. 243–249.
[37] L. Tan, Z. Kuang, L. Zhao, and A. Liu, “Energy-efficient joint task
offloading and resource allocation in ofdma-based collaborative edge
computing,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. PP,
pp. 1–1, 09 2021.
[38] Y. Huo, Q. Liu, Q. Gao, Y. Wu, and T. Jing, “Joint task offloading
and resource allocation for secure ofdma-based mobile edge computing
systems,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 153, p. 103342, 2024.
[39] W. Chen, Y. Zhu, J. Liu, and Y. Chen, “Enhancing mobile edge
computing with efficient load balancing using load estimation in ultra-
dense network,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 9, p. 3135, 2021.
[40] M. Gao, R. Shen, L. Shi, W. Qi, J. Li, and Y. Li, “Task partitioning
and offloading in dnn-task enabled mobile edge computing networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 2435–2445,
2023.
[41] M. A. Onsu, M. Simsek, and B. Kantarci, “Anomalous behaviour
detection via event-based metric with sequential tracking in a v2x envi-
ronment,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference: Communication
QoS, Reliability and Modeling, 2023.
[42] G. Xu and G. Yu, “Reprint of: On convergence analysis of particle
swarm optimization algorithm,” Journal of Computational and Applied
Mathematics, vol. 340, pp. 709–717, 2018.
[43] N. Hammerman and R. Goldberg, “Algorithms to improve the conver-
gence of a genetic algorithm with a finite state machine genome,” in
Practical Handbook of Genetic Algorithms.
CRC press, 2019, pp.
119–238.
[44] B. Rosenhahn, “Optimization of sparsity-constrained neural networks
as a mixed integer linear program: Nn2milp,” Journal of Optimization
Theory and Applications, vol. 199, no. 3, pp. 931–954, 2023.
[45] K. Lachhwani, “A comprehensive review analysis on pso and ga
techniques for mathematical programming problems,” in Proceedings
of International Conference on Computational Intelligence: ICCI 2021.
Springer, 2022, pp. 461–476.
