--- Page 1 ---
Rigid Body Path Planning using Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
Mingxin Yu1 and Chuchu Fan1
Abstract— Navigating rigid body objects through crowded
environments can be challenging, especially when narrow
passages are presented. Existing sampling-based planners and
optimization-based methods like mixed integer linear program-
ming (MILP) formulations, suffer from limited scalability with
respect to either the size of the workspace or the number of
obstacles. In order to address the scalability issue, we propose
a three-stage algorithm that first generates a graph of convex
polytopes in the workspace free of collision, then poses a large
set of small MILPs to generate viable paths between polytopes,
and finally queries a pair of start and end configurations for
a feasible path online. The graph of convex polytopes serves
as a decomposition of the free workspace and the number of
decision variables in each MILP is limited by restricting the
subproblem within two or three free polytopes rather than the
entire free region. Our simulation results demonstrate shorter
online computation time compared to baseline methods and
scales better with the size of the environment and tunnel width
than sampling-based planners in both 2D and 3D environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Piano Mover’s Problem [1] asks whether one can
find a sequence of rigid body motions from a given ini-
tial position to a desired final position, subject to certain
geometric constraints during the motion. The difficulty in
planning for point objects comes from the dimension of the
objects, which prevents the feasibility of naively tracking
the motion of a point, especially when narrow corridors
are presented in the environment and an associated higher-
dimension configuration space of SE(2) or SE(3) rather
than R2 or R3. This problem has inspired many motion
planning works [2–5], mainly streamed as sampling-based
and optimization-based methods.
Sampling-based
methods
like
probabilistic
roadmap
(PRM) [2] are widely adopted because of their simplicity.
The approaches employ discrete collision detection, which
is straightforward and efficient but highly dependent on the
chosen resolution. Setting improper parameters can lead to
missed obstacles, resulting in invalid paths. On the other side,
solving an obstacle avoidance problem can be formulated as
optimization problems for optimality and safety guarantee,
such as trajectory optimization using Mixed-Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) [3, 6] or Graphs of Convex Sets
(GCS) [7]. They offer a more robust solution by directly in-
corporating collision avoidance into the formulations. These
methods, unlike sampling-based methods, ensure paths being
collision-free by design, thus bypassing the dependency of
resolution in collision detection.
1 The authors are with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
{yumx35, chuchu}@mit.edu
Fig. 1: The figure demonstrates an example solved with our MILP-based
method, navigating a non-convex, V-shaped object through a complex
environment from the start configuration to the goal configuration, both
marked red. In the figure, the obstacles are shown in pink, while the green
depicts the regions swept by the object, demonstrating the effectiveness and
precision of our approach in challenging environments.
Despite their advantages, current optimization formula-
tions come with their own set of challenges. Solving MILPs,
for example, is an NP-hard problem and can be computa-
tionally intensive as the environment complexity increases.
The time to directly solve a MILP for a feasible path grows
exponentially with the number of waypoints, which is pro-
portional to the required maneuvers in an environment. This
scalability issue makes brute-force MILP-based methods
difficult to apply. On the other hand, the effectiveness of GCS
depends on precise initial seeding to capture narrow passages
within the configuration space, which brings feasibility chal-
lenges to GCS methods. To address these inefficiencies, our
approach simplifies the problem by decomposing a single
large MILP into manageable, fixed-size smaller MILPs. Ad-
ditionally, by focusing directly on the workspace rather than
the configuration space, our method mitigates the challenges
associated with identifying critical narrow passages, thereby
enhancing efficiency and scalability in path planning.
In this work, our pipeline is structured into three key
stages: Workspace decomposition - we first construct a graph
of convex set Gc covering the free workspace. This stage
is performed offline and the graph is reusable for multiple
queries across different objects. We exploit the lower dimen-
sionality of the workspace compared to the configuration
space to obtain a higher coverage ratio and fewer narrow
tunnels, which are typically challenging to identify and cover.
Path segment validation - we then construct a graph Gd in
configuration space, which is also offline. Here, the nodes
arXiv:2409.11520v1  [cs.RO]  17 Sep 2024


--- Page 2 ---
Query
Graph 
𝐺!
Online
Offline (Object Specific)
Graph 
𝐺"
Offline (Shared)
(𝑣!, 𝑣")
Vertices
Candidate Edges
Rotation 𝑅
Translation p on
Verified by MILP
start
goal
𝑣!
𝑣"
𝑣#
𝑣$
𝑣!
𝑣"
𝑣%
𝑣&
𝑣'
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 2: An overview of our pipeline. (a) Workspace decomposition: Decomposition of the free workspace into a graph of convex polytopes Gc. The
polytopes serve as graph vertices and are interconnected if they overlap (Section III-A). (b-d) Path segment validation: Construction of Gd(Section III-B),
where each vertex is a set of interconnected free configurations - illustrated as the set of green points enclosed by the green ring. The motions between
vertices (blue edges) are generated by solving MILPs (Section III-B). (e) Online query: the start and end configurations are connected to graph Gd and
the planned path is retrieved (Section III-C).
represent bottleneck configurations identified by Gc and
the edges are viable paths validated through MILPs. This
graph allows multiple queries for different start and goal
configurations. At the online stage, we connect the start and
goal configuration into Gd and retrieve the solution path.
Our experiment results show that this method significantly
reduces online time consumption across various objects and
environments, in both 2D and 3D settings.
This work presents several key contributions: (1) By oper-
ating directly within the workspace, our method effectively
mitigates the challenges associated with covering narrow
tunnels in the free space, compared to configuration space-
based approaches. (2) We simplify the path planning process
by breaking down a large, complex optimization problem
into a series of smaller MILPs. Each smaller problem focuses
on finding a valid path segment within a region, significantly
enhancing the scalability of our approach. (3) We conduct
comprehensive experiments in both 2D and 3D environ-
ments, comparing against GCS and sampling-based methods.
Our results demonstrate scalability with the environment,
higher feasibility, and shorter computation time.
II. RELATED WORKS
Graph-based methods. Graph-based methods are particu-
larly suitable for scenarios requiring multiple queries within
the same environment. Once the graph is constructed, it
can be reused to find multiple paths. One category builds
the graph of discrete configurations, like sampling-based
methods PRM [2] and lattice planners [5]. PRM randomly
samples states in C-space as nodes in the graph. Nodes are
connected based on the feasibility of direct paths. Some vari-
ants of PRM also consider utilizing workspace information
to guide sampling in configuration space [8, 9], therefore
accelerating the exploration. Lattice planners are commonly
used in nonholonomic vehicle parking scenarios and leverage
high levels of parallelization [5, 10]. They use a regular grid
in the configuration space to define graph nodes [11]. And the
edges are computed offline [12], representing motions that
adhere to specific constraints. However, one inherent limita-
tion of lattice planners is their scaling with grid resolution.
Employing regular lattices across the entire configuration
space can be computationally expensive and inefficient. In
contrast, our method reduces the size of the graph by only
utilizing a regular grid on a set of manifolds within the
configuration space, where the metric is strictly zero.
Another category of graph-based planners relies on space
decomposition, where the graph explicitly represents the free
space. Based on constrained Delaunay triangulation [13],
previous works perform well in 2D environments for point
objects [3, 14] either through search or by solving MILPs.
Some works have addressed the problem for higher DoF
robots by incorporating potential field after decomposition
for collision avoidance [15] in less-cluttered 3D environ-
ments. While these approaches provide a foundation for solv-
ing the problem, they may struggle with highly constrained
environments or complex object geometries. GCS line of
works [7, 16, 17] adopts a different approach by attempting
to cover the free space with a set of convex polytopes,
thereby retrieving paths through optimization. This method
is capable of working in both workspace and configuration
space, thus accommodating any shape and scaling to more
than 10 dimensions.
Exact collision detection Most path-planning algorithms
work with discrete collision detection, due to their easy im-
plementation, broad applicability, and fast execution [2, 18].
This method checks a path in C-Space by creating samples
along the path and when all these samples are checked to be
collision-free, the entire path is assumed to be collision-free.
While efficient, its accuracy depends on the sampling resolu-
tion, risking missed collisions with coarse samples or delays
with overly fine-grained samples. To enhance reliability, one
method is free bubble [19], recursively bisecting the samples
on the path to guarantee collision-free [20] by calculating the
maximum allowable movement without collision. Another
method is continuous collision checking [21, 22], which
performs well for rigid body motions by directly checking
the collisions of the reachable set with the obstacles. But
they suffer from the speed. We integrate both methods in the
algorithm, aiming for both soundness and efficiency.


--- Page 3 ---
III. PIPELINE OVERVIEW
In this paper, we consider the path planning problem of a
rigid body object O. The workspace W, the physical space
where the object lies, can be R2 or R3 depending on the
particular application at hand. And the configuration space
for O is SE(2) and SE(3), respectively. A configuration is
represented as q = (p, R) with a position vector p ∈R2 or
R3 and a rotation matrix R ∈SO(2) or SO(3). The pipeline
of our method is shown in Fig. 2. We outline major stages of
our method in this section, before going deep into verifying
path segments with MILP in Section IV.
A. Workspace decomposition - Construct Coarse Graph Gc
At this stage, we aim to approximately decompose the free
workspace Wfree into a set of convex polytopes P and build
a graph Gc on P as shown in Algorithm 1. The graph Gc is
shared across various objects within the same environment.
Following [23], we first construct a visibility graph Gv :=
(Vv, Ev) where Vv is uniformly sampled from W with points
inside obstacles excluded, and Ev is added by checking for
collisions along the line segments connecting each pair of
points within some distance using Proposition 1. During each
iteration, the subroutine SAMPLEVISIBILITYEDGE samples
ns points on the edges in Ev that are not yet covered by the
polytopes in P. The ns points are then used as initial points
for IRIS [16], after which the newly computed polytopes are
added into P. The iteration terminates when the coverage
ratio of P over Ev exceeds threshold α > 0. Subsequently, an
undirected graph Gc := (Vc, Ec) is constructed with vertices
Vc = P, and with an edge (Pi1, Pi2) ∈Ec for every pair of
intersected polytopes Pi1 and Pi2.
B. Path Segment Validation - Construct Dense Graph Gd
Graph Gc is a GCS, and an optimal solution of the
path planning problem for a point object can be found
via [17]. However, its direct applicability is limited when
considering non-point objects. The limitation arises because
an intersection between polytopes - a valid pathway for point
objects - does not inherently guarantee feasible traversal for
objects with non-negligible dimensions and orientations.
To address this challenge, we introduce another undirected
graph Gd := (Vd, Ed) that describes the connectivity between
adjacent polytopes for a specific object O, detailed in Algo-
rithm 2. Our key insight is that, for an object O to move
Algorithm 1 Construct a graph of convex polytopes Gc
Require: list of obstacles Oobs, number of samples for
visibility graph nv, number of samples per iteration ns,
coverage threshold α.
1: P ←∅
2: Gv ←SAMPLEVISIBILITYGRAPH(Oobs, nv)
3: while CHECKCOVERAGE(Ev, P) < α do
4:
S ←SAMPLEVISIBILITYEDGE(Ev, P, ns)
5:
P ←P ∪IRIS(S)
6: end while
7: Gc ←CONSTRUCTGRAPH(P)
8: return Gc
from Pi to Pj, its center c must traverse the boundary ∂Pij
of the intersection Pij := Pi ∩Pj.
Vertices Vd. The vertices Vd in Gd are generated through
subroutine SAMPLE&GROUP. The process begins with dis-
cretizing ∂Pij into regular grids.
a) Discretization in 2D environments. For 2D, the bound-
ary ∂Pij is a closed ring, which can be parameterized linearly
from λ = 0 to λ = 1, with the points for λ = 0 and λ = 1
being identical. Translations along this boundary are selected
with a fixed interval δλ > 0. Rotations are discretized into
nR > 0 possible values, with angles (θ1, · · · , θnR) being
(1 · 2π/nR, 2 · 2π/nR, · · · , nR · 2π/nR). These correspond
to rotation matrices (R1, · · · , RnR). Together, the translation
parameter λ and the set of rotations θ create a 2D grid of
possible configurations, as shown in Fig. 2.
b) Discretization in 3D environments. In 3D scenarios,
the boundary ∂Pij consists of several facets, each treated
as a disjoint boundary without considering the connections
between them. On each facet, the translations are constructed
using a regular rectangle grid, and the rotations are a selected
set of rotation matrices (R1, · · · , RnR). Together, the trans-
lations and rotations create a 3D grid on a facet.
After discretization, we collect the set of free configu-
rations Cij on all grids, where a free configuration refers
to the object being completely contained inside Pi ∪Pj.
We then try to group free configurations on the same grid,
forming of several disjoint subgraphs {Gp,ij,n}nij
n=1, as shown
in Fig. 2. Within each subgraph, any two configurations can
be interconnected via a collision-free path. This process is
detailed in the supplementary materials1. Subsequently, the
set of vertices Vp,ij,n ⊂Cij of n-th subgraph Gp,ij,n on ∂Pij
becomes a node vij,n = Vp,ij,n ∈Vd to serve as potential
waypoints in detailed path planning.
Edges Ed. We assess all possible connections among Vd
to establish Ed. For any two vertices vij,n1 and vik,n2,
an edge is considered if the proposed traversal between
vertices is verified as feasible by VERIFYTRAVERSAL. The
edge (vij,n1, vik,n2) represents the feasibility of moving from
1See: https://sites.google.com/view/realm-rigidmilp
Algorithm 2 Construct a graph of convex polytopes Gd
Require: list of obstacles Oobs, graph Gc, number of inter-
mediate waypoints N.
1: Vd ←∅, Ed ←∅
2: for (Pi, Pj) ∈Ec do
3:
vij,1, · · · , vij,nij ←SAMPLE&GROUP(∂Pij, Oobs)
4:
Vd ←Vd ∪{vij,1, · · · , vij,nij}
5: end for
6: CandidateEdgeSet = {(vij,n1, vik,n2)|vij,n1, vik,n2
∈
Vd, vij,n1 ̸= vik,n2}
7: for (vij,n1, vik,n2) ∈CandidateEdgeSet do
8:
if VERIFYTRAVERSAL(vij,n1, vik,n2, Gc, N) then
9:
Ed ←Ed ∪{(vij,n1, vik,n2)}
10:
end if
11: end for
12: return Vd, Ed


--- Page 4 ---
polytope Pj to Pk via Pi.
C. Online Query
Graph Gd serves as an offline pre-computed roadmap,
enabling rapid online path planning from a start configuration
qstart to an end configuration qend. We introduce new vertices
vstart = {qstart} and vend = {qend} into Gd, connecting
them using the same VERIFYTRAVERSAL subroutine. The
resulting path consists of alternating segments: inter-vertex
motions and intra-vertex motions. The path query first tries
to extract a sequence of vertices from vstart to vend on Gd.
Inter-vertex motions are retrieved from the connecting edges.
For each vertex vij,n to be visited, the intra-vertex motions
are obtained from the corresponding subgraph Gp,ij,n, to
connect entry and exit configurations. All motion retrieval is
performed online using Dijkstra’s algorithm.
IV. VERIFYING PATH SEGMENTS
A significant challenge arises in verifying the motion
between waypoints due to the complex geometry of the
objects. Previously, this is commonly addressed by bloating
the obstacles to account for the size of objects, thereby
transforming the problem into planning within this bloated
environment as with a point object [14]. However, this
method can be overly restrictive, especially for objects whose
shapes deviate significantly from circular or spherical forms.
In this section, we will tackle the challenge using MILP
to verify path segments for polytope objects. We assume the
rigid-body object O to be simply connected (no holes) and its
geometric center to lie inside the O. We denote the vertices
of O are {vO,i}.
A. MILP Formulation
As discussed in Section III-B, the traversal between ver-
tices (vij,n1, vik,n2) in Gd is not straightforward. Therefore,
we formulate the subroutine VERIFYTRAVERSAL as an
MILP, which is to verify whether there exists a piece-wise
linear path from a configuration in vij,n1 to another one in
vik,n2 with N intermediate waypoints.
For the sake of simplicity, we’ll denote vij,n1 as u and
vik,n2 as w in the discussion of MILP, while denoting the
set of polytopes {Pi, Pj, Pk} ⊂Ec as Pc. The list of free
configurations in u or w are denoted as (qu,1, · · · , qu,nu)
and (qw,1, · · · , qw,nw). Let qt be the waypoints in the path,
including the start and end configurations, indexed by t ∈
{0, · · · , N +1}. Each waypoint qt consists of a translational
part pt and a rotational part Rt. The translational part in a
2D scenario is given by pt = (xt, yt), and in 3D, it extends
to pt = (xt, yt, zt).
Model. The objective is to minimize the total 1-norm of the
translational displacement along the path. The entire MILP
model is formulated in Eq. (1):
min
{pt}t,{Rt}t,B
N
X
t=0
∥pt+1 −pt∥1,
(1a)
s.t. Eqs. (2), (3), (4)and (5).
(1b)
Here B is the set of all binary variables we’ll introduce. The
objective in Eq. (1a) can be easily transformed to standard
linear expressions with additional variables, which we will
not detail here.
Basic constraints. The rotational part Rt is encoded as a
one-hot vector βR,t using binary variables. This is achieved
through the constraints
Rt =
nR
X
i=1
βR,t,iRi,
∀t = 0, · · · , N + 1
(2a)
1 = βT
R,t1,
∀t = 0, · · · , N + 1
(2b)
Each element in R is a possible rotation matrix, as specified
in
Section III-B. The index where bR,t = 1 indicates the
selection of the corresponding rotation at waypoint t.
Between two consecutive waypoints, we enforce the object
to either translate or rotate, a decision encoded by binary
variable βor,t in Eq. (3). This constraint addresses the chal-
lenges associated with encoding collision-free conditions in
MILPs. By restricting the motion to either translation or
rotation at each step, this simplified model becomes compu-
tationally tractable. Specifically, in 3D scenarios, we further
limit the object to translational motion only, equivalent to
setting βor,t = 1.
∥pt+1 −pt∥1 ≤M · βor,t,
∀t = 0, · · · , N
(3a)
∥βR,t+1 −βR,t∥1 ≤M(1 −βor,t),
∀t = 0, · · · , N
(3b)
βor,t = 1, (only present in 3D)
∀t = 0, · · · , N
(3c)
The constraints for start and end configuration are that
the first and last waypoints are in u and w correspondingly.
We introduce two additional one-hot vectors βstart and βend,
which are used to select specific configurations from the sets
u and w, shown in Eq. (4).
p0 =
nu
X
i=1
βstart,ipu,i,
pN+1 =
nw
X
i=1
βend,ipw,i,
(4a)
R0 =
nu
X
i=1
βstart,iRu,i,
RN+1 =
nw
X
i=1
βend,iRw,i,
(4b)
nu
X
i=1
βstart,i = 1,
nw
X
i=1
βend,i = 1
(4c)
B. Collision-Avoidance Constraint
The remaining constraint in the MILP is collision avoid-
ance. While the start (q0) and end (qN+1) configurations
are already checked to be collision-free, ensuring continuous
collision avoidance throughout the motion path is critical.
Here, the collision avoidance constraint is encoded by en-
forcing that the each reachable set between two consecutive
waypoints (qt, qt+1) (t = 0, · · · , N) be completely contained
within the union of all relevant collision-free polytopes,
S Pc. Specifically, this is achieved by checking all the
boundaries of the reachable sets being inside S Pc.


--- Page 5 ---
Translation
Rotation
𝐴
𝐵
𝐴′
𝐵′
𝐶
𝐶′
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝐴′
𝐵′
𝐶′
𝑀
𝐴
𝐴′
𝑀
𝐴∗
Δ𝜃/2
Δ𝜃/2
Fig. 3: The figure shows the reachable set of 2D objects for translation and
rotation scenarios, respectively. On the right, we illustrate the approximation
of the green sectors to yellow polytopes.
1) Compute boundary of reachable set: In 2D, the reach-
able set is computed as Fig. 3. For translation, the boundary
contains the blue edges of O at configurations qt and qt+1,
and orange lines connecting a same vertex at two waypoints.
For rotation, the difference is that the lines connecting a same
vertex at two waypoints are arcs. While the arcs can not
be expressed in linear expression, we overapproximate the
arc with two line segments, with ∥MA∗∥cos(∆θmax/2) =
∥MA∥. ∆θmax is the maximum rotation angle allowed in
one step, selected as π/3. In 3D, only translation is allowed
inside MILP. The rotation is only allowed inside each Vd
vertices, which is not solved by MILP. The reachable set is
the union of the polytopes swept by each face of O, which
is also a polytope. Therefore, to check the collisions of the
faces of the reachable set, we only need to check the superset
- the union of the triangle mesh faces of O at qt and qt+1
and the parallelogram swept by each edge of O.
2) Collision detection between surface and polytope:
Compared with existing models of collision avoidance
in Fig. 4, we propose a new encoding based on the following
corollaries. We just need to check each edge on the boundary
of the reachable set to satisfy Proposition 1.
More Strict 
Less Strict 
Fig. 4: Models of collision avoidance around obstacles (gray). The free space
is decomposed into convex polytopes (blue and yellow). Green lines indicate
predicted collision-free paths and red lines indicate detected collisions. Left:
Less strict encoding that only checks endpoints of subdivided line segments.
The dashed red line demonstrates that endpoint-only checking is insufficient
as it cuts through an obstacle. Right [6]: This overly restrictive model allows
only paths like the dotted line where both endpoints lie within the same free
region, rejecting the simpler, viable solid line. Middle (ours): Strict encoding
based on Proposition 1. This approach prevents the dashed line from cutting
through obstacles by incorporating additional constraints beyond endpoint
checking, while including more paths between regions, like the solid line.
Proposition 1 (Line segment inside two convex polytopes).
Given two convex polytopes Pi = {x|Aix ≤bi}, i = 1, 2,
and a line segment l with two endpoints (xa, xb), l is
contained inside the union of P1 and P2 if one of following
conditions holds:
1) xa and xb are within a same polytope Pi,
2) xa and xb are within different polytopes, but there
exists a point x satisfying x ∈(P1 ∩P2).
Proof. For condition (1), the convexity of Pi ensures that all
points on l, being a line segment between xa and xb, are also
contained within Pi. If condition (2) holds, line segments
(xa, x) and (x, xb) both satisfy condition (1). Hence, the
entire line segment l remains within P1
S P2.
We further extend the Proposition 1 from checking line
segments to triangles and convex quadrilaterals. By enforcing
all edges of these shapes satisfying Proposition 1, we prove
that the shapes are contained within the union of two given
convex polytopes. The corollaries and proofs are provided in
the supplementary materials 2. So we just need to check the
line segments within the sets Sline based on Proposition 1:
1) the line segments connecting the object’s geometric
center and vertices at waypoints qt and qt+1
2) the edges of O at waypoints qt and qt+1
3) the line segments connecting a same vertex of O
between waypoints qt and qt+1.
Accurately verifying condition 2) of Proposition 1 involves
a product of two sets of variables - the positions of xa, xb
and the proportion (x, xa) occupies. This product cannot be
encoded into a mixed integer linear programming. Instead,
we divide the line segments into 10 equal parts and only
check the 11 endpoints in practice. So the MILP constraints
can be written as, ∀es = (ps,start, ps,end) ∈Sline:
Ai(ηps,start + (1 −η)ps,end) ≤bi + M(1 −βs,i,η),
∀Pi ∈Pc, ∀η ∈{0, 0.1, · · · , 1}
(5a)
X
i
βs,i,η ≥1,
∀η ∈{0, 0.1, · · · , 1}
(5b)
βs,cond1,i ≤βs,i,0,
βs,cond1,i ≤βs,i,1
(5c)
X
η
(βs,i,η + βs,j,η −1) ≥1 −M(1 −βs,cond2,ij),
∀Pi, Pj ∈Pc, Pi ̸= Pj
(5d)
X
i
βs,cond1,i +
X
(i,j)
βs,cond2,ij ≥1
(5e)
where βs,i,η, βs,cond1,i, βs,cond2,ij are binary variables for line
segment es. βs,i,η = 1 indicates that interpolated points are
inside polytope Pi. Similarly, βs,cond1,i or βs,cond2,ij being
1 means the corresponding condition is satisfied. Eqs. (5a)
and (5b) encodes the preconditions, while Eqs. (5c) and (5d)
encodes the two conditions in Proposition 1, respectively.
C. Discussion
While our approach decomposes the original planning
problem and solves each subproblem optimally, it does not
guarantee global optimality for the entire path. However,
our algorithm is capable of finding multiple solutions or
modalities, which can then serve as initial solutions for
further refinements. It is important to acknowledge that in
the 3D case, our method currently only allows translation
2See: https://sites.google.com/view/realm-rigidmilp


--- Page 6 ---
(a) 2d-Corner.
(b) 2d-bugtrap.
(c) 2d-maze.
(d) SCOTS. [24]
(e) 2d-peg.
(f) 3d-easy.
(g) 3d-narrow.
(h) 3d-peg.
Fig. 5: Visualization of planning results in 2D (obstacles: pink) and 3D scenarios. The start and end configurations are plotted with red, while waypoints
and their corresponding reachable sets are shown in green. In 2D scenarios, we also illustrate the graph Gc with vertices (Vc) as blue polytopes and edges
(Ec) as blue lines connecting red dots, which represent the centers of vertex polytopes. Figs. 5e and 5h show the planning results of L-shape non-convex
objects, while the rest show the results of convex objects.
within the MILP formulation to simplify the computation of
the reachable set. We recognize that this simplification may
exclude some potential solutions. To address this limitation,
future work will focus on extending the approximation
techniques used in the 2D case to the 3D domain.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We empirically validate our method in this section. We
initially set the number of intermediate waypoints, N, to 0.
If no solution can be found with N = 0, we increase N
to 1. Additionally, rotations are discretized into 12 distinct
rotations for 2D environments and 24 for 3D environments,
respectively. All experiments were launched on a server with
1 AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3990X 64-Core Processor. We
adopt Gurobi 10.0.0 [25] as the MILP solver and handle the
graphs Gc, Gd with NetworkX [26].
Benchmarks. We collect 8 benchmark environments, visu-
alized in Fig. 5. We consider two types of objects: convex
and non-convex. In 2D environments, the convex object is
selected as a stick of length 1.2 and width 0.1, while the non-
convex object is an L-shape with longer side 1.2, shorter side
0.8 and width 0.1. In 3D environments, the convex object is
a pad of size 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.1, and the non-convex object is
L-shaped, composed of two pads of size 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.1 and
1.0 × 0.1 × 0.4.
Baselines. We compare our method with the following multi-
query motion planning algorithms, PRM [2], WCO [8] and
GCS [27]. PRM and WCO, sampling-based methods, are
evaluated across 5 trials for each problem set with an
offline phase of 15 seconds allocated to develop a roadmap
before each trial. GCS constructs a graph of convex set
in configuration space [23], followed by optimizing for an
optimal path with piece-wise linear curves [27]. To ensure a
fair comparison in generating an IRIS cover for both GCS
and our method, though their application in different spaces,
we select the same set of hyperparameters. Specifically, we
set nv = 512, α = 0.95 and select ns = 5 for our method.
TABLE I: Comparison of our method and baselines on benchmarks.
(a) Results for convex objects (A stick in 2D scenarios and a pad for 3D).
Online Time ↓(ms)
Waypoint Number ↓
scenario
ours
GCS
PRM
WCO ours GCS PRM WCO
2d-corner
2.8
607.8
105.3
115.3
8
6
20
17
2d-bugtrap
15.1
INF
116.4
23.8
21
INF
40
23
2d-maze
57.1
7.2e5
111.9
211.2
29
21
42
24
SCOTS
55.0
INF
508.3
360.4
85
INF
97
76
2d-peg
22.1
INF
122.6
87.5
13
INF
31
27
3d-easy
63.8
1.2e5
129.3
244.4
10
9
10
24
3d-narrow
212.4 2.0e5 1045.0 267.0
14
32
12
25
3d-peg
48.1
INF
287.1
162.1
20
INF
6
21
(b) Results for non-convex objects (L-shape for all scenarios).
Online Time ↓(ms)
Waypoint Number ↓
scenario
ours
GCS
PRM
WCO ours GCS PRM WCO
2d-corner
2.8
4.1e4
105.9
258.3
9
11
19
21
2d-bugtrap
11.5
INF
113.8
25.4
18
INF
40
29
2d-maze
54.8
2.6e4
110.4
60.1
29
25
43
39
SCOTS
47.8
INF
3822.2 473.8
97
INF
98
72
2d-peg
12.8
INF
115.8
106.6
13
INF
28
17
3d-easy
66.7
2.1e5
269.3
106.3
10
5
7
21
3d-narrow
257.5
INF
593.7
336.5
16
INF
11
23
3d-peg
52.1
INF
824.7
224.3
16
INF
11
23
A. Planning Results
Metrics. In evaluating the performance of the methods, we
assess two key metrics. First, we measure the online time
required to compute a path when a new start and goal
configuration pair is specified. Secondly, we evaluate the
number of waypoints in the solution path. This metric
serves as an indicator of the path’s complexity and efficiency
in navigating from start to goal. A lower number of way-
points generally suggests a smoother execution in practice.


--- Page 7 ---
Result We compare with baselines and show the results
in Table I. We also visualized the solution paths in Fig. 5.
a) Online Time.: Our method consistently achieved the
shortest online computation times, typically under 100 ms
across most test scenarios. This efficiency contrasts with the
GCS, which struggles to find feasible solutions in several
environments. This is particularly evident in configurations
involving narrow tunnels not covered by the C-IRIS strategy,
which is explored further in Section V-C.
The online time for our method involves retrieving the path
from Gd and connecting the start and end configurations to
the graph. In practice, we set the number of intermediate
waypoints N = 0, allowing us to leverage matrix operations
for quick verification instead of solving MILPs for faster
online computation. In contrast, the online stage for GCS
involves solving an optimization problem. For PRM and
WCO, it includes discrete collision checking to connect start
and end configurations to a dense graph, much larger than
ours.
b) Waypoint Comparison.: GCS, which optimizes for
path optimality, generally produces smoother paths when
it can find a solution, leading to fewer waypoints. In 2D
environments, our method typically finds paths with fewer
waypoints compared to sampling-based methods, indicating
a more efficient pathfinding strategy. But the situation differs
in 3D. This is because we over-restrict the free configurations
on the boundaries in 3D scenarios, so the solution space
is much smaller for our method and our method tends to
generate more complex and twisted paths.
c) Impact of Object Shapes.: Our method allows the Gc
to be reused for different object shapes. With the dimensions
of the object being similar, our method and sampling-based
methods are able to maintain a consistent online time for dif-
ferent objects. Conversely, GCS performance is significantly
impacted by changes in object shape, altering the geometry
of the free configuration space and affecting feasibility and
computation times across various environments.
B. Comparison with Sampling-based Algorithms
Sampling-based methods, such as PRM and WCO, face
challenges when scaling to larger environments. One critical
hyperparameter affecting their performance is the resolution
of collision checking. To assess the adaptability of these
methods, we tested their efficiency with varying distances
between checked states, specifically at 0.25x, 0.1x, and 0.05x
of the object’s length, as detailed in Table II.
Our experiments revealed that both PRM and WCO
struggle to maintain performance as the environment scales.
In contrast, the offline computation time for our method
consistently remains around 15 seconds across all test cases,
attributable to the minimal changes in the structure of Gc and
Gd besides scaling. Similarly, the online execution time re-
mains relatively consistent across scenarios. This is because
the MILP approach in our method performs exact continuous
collision checking with infinite resolution, enabling it to
handle larger environments more effectively. Moreover, we
observed that WCO significantly outperforms PRM when
scaling, demonstrating the benefit of utilizing workspace
connectivity information. By leveraging this information,
WCO can more efficiently explore the space and find feasible
paths in larger and narrower environments compared to PRM.
TABLE III: Metrics of offline stages for our method and GCS.
Offline Time ↓(s)
# IRIS regions ↓
# MILP ↓
scenario
Gc
Gd
GCS
ours
GCS
ours
corner
1.1
0.5
23.7
2
24
6
bugtrap
4.1
10.7
21.6
7
42
79
maze
6.1
130.3
251.4
19
131
1624
SCOTS
4.0
45.7
79.3
27
78
355
2d-peg
5.2
18.8
26.5
8
59
170
3d-easy
5.3
15.8
27.8
4
55
42
3d-narrow
7.7
115.5
96.9
8
95
471
3d-peg
16.4
10.1
166.9
4
164
15
C. Comparison with GCS
The major difference between our method and GCS
lies in space decomposition: our method is workspace-based
while GCS works in C-space. The dimensionality of C-space
is usually higher than that of the workspace, accompanied
by inherent geometrical and topological differences between
these two spaces. In the demonstrated scenario Fig. 6, where
the objective is for a stick to navigate out of a trap through
a narrow gap. The collision-free C-space consists of two
large regions, connected by three thin tunnels. Despite dense
sampling revealing the tunnels, GCS, with 42 polytopes,
failed to detect any narrow passage, thus incapable of finding
a feasible solution for the problem. On the contrary, our
method identifies the critical pathways and achieves a near-
complete coverage in the workspace. This distinction indi-
cates a challenge in C-space representation, pathways that
occupy a small volume in the workspace can correspond
to an even smaller fraction of the free space in C-space,
considering the increased dimensionality. This observation
TABLE II: Comparison of our method with sampling-based methods for an L-shaped object navigating a bugtrap environment Fig. 5b. Online time is
evaluated in both large and narrow environments. In large settings, the width mid-right corridor remains constant while the dimensions of the entire
environment are doubled. In narrow settings, the corridor width is reduced to 60% of its original size. In L & N settings, the corridor width is reduced
and the dimensions of the environment are doubled. The online time limit for PRM is 40s.
Time (ms)
ours
PRM-0.25x
WCO-0.25x
PRM-0.1x
WCO-0.1x
PRM-0.05x
WCO-0.05x
original
11.6
113±0.5
25.4±8.1
109±1.4
30.7±15.4
127±22.5
38.5±19.1
large
13.4
521±823
39.6 ± 19.3
4.2e3±2.2e3
51.2 ± 25.0
1.5e4±1.2e4
69.3 ± 33.7
narrow
13.0
1.4e3±2.5e3
40.8 ± 16.3
5.8e3±4.1e3
47.2 ± 19.8
1.2e4±1.0e4
56.6 ± 24.2
L & N
17.4
2.2e4±1.5e4
279.3 ± 208.4
3.7e4±5.6e3
384.5 ± 291.5
3.9e4±4.2e2
487.5 ± 364.6


--- Page 8 ---
𝑥
𝑦
𝜃
𝑥
𝑦
𝜃
Fig. 6: A 2D motion planning problem consists of a stick getting out of a
trap and passing through a narrow gap, where our method is able to achieve
almost 100% coverage in workspace Fig. 5b. The C-space is a subset of
SE(2), with two translation axes and a periodic axis corresponding to the
rotation. We visualize the collision-free C-space by sampling (left) and the
C-IRIS cover acquired from GCS (right).
underscores the necessity of carefully designing a sampling
strategy to ensure reliability.
We also conduct a comprehensive comparison of time con-
sumption and problem size for the offline stage. The offline
stage for our method can be roughly divided into two: the
construction of Gc (Section III-A) and Gd (Section III-B).
The problem size for Gc is the number of IRIS regions (|Vc|)
and its computation only needs to be conducted once across
different objects in the same environment. But the graph in
GCS needs to be recomputed when either the environment
or the object changes. It can be observed that the number
of IRIS regions we need to grow is significantly lower than
GCS while remaining high feasibility. Moving to Gd, the
problem size is determined by the number of MILP required.
Despite our method necessitating a substantial number of
MILPs, the MILPs are designed to be of small sizes, and
batch processing is highly preferred. In the experiment, we
assign 2 threads for each MILP. The offline computation time
for Gd scales linearly to the number of MILP. Conversely for
GCS, the number of variables is proportional to the number
of IRIS regions, which makes the online time extremely long
for GCS when the number of IRIS regions is large.
Across the majority of test cases, our method demonstrated
reduced offline computation times while maintaining feasi-
bility. However, it’s important to note the inherent advantage
of GCS in its design for globally optimal solutions. While our
method focuses on achieving faster computation and higher
feasibility, this comes at the sacrifice of optimality.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we introduced a path-planning approach for
rigid body objects using MILP with better scalability and ef-
ficiency. By structuring our method into three distinct stages
— workspace decomposition, path segment validation, and
online query for rapid path retrieval, we have demonstrated
improved planning efficiency in multi-query scenarios via
comprehensive experiments against baselines.
REFERENCES
[1] J. T. Schwartz and M. Sharir, “On the “piano movers’” problem I.
The case of a two-dimensional rigid polygonal body moving amidst
polygonal barriers,” Communications on pure and applied mathemat-
ics, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 345–398, 1983.
[2] L. E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.-C. Latombe, and M. H. Overmars, “Prob-
abilistic roadmaps for path planning in high-dimensional configuration
spaces,” IEEE transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 566–580, 1996.
[3] M. Vitus, V. Pradeep, G. Hoffmann, S. Waslander, and C. Tomlin,
“Tunnel-milp: Path planning with sequential convex polytopes,” in
AIAA guidance, navigation and control conference and exhibit, p.
7132.
[4] A. Dobson and K. E. Bekris, “Sparse roadmap spanners for asymp-
totically near-optimal motion planning,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 18–47, 2014.
[5] D. Nister, J. Soundararajan, Y. Wang, and H. Sane, “Nonholonomic
Motion Planning as Efficient as Piano Mover’s,” 2023.
[6] M. d. S. Arantes, C. F. M. Toledo, B. C. Williams, and M. Ono,
“Collision-Free Encoding for Chance-Constrained Nonconvex Path
Planning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 433–448,
2019.
[7] A. Amice, H. Dai, P. Werner, A. Zhang, and R. Tedrake, “Finding
and optimizing certified, collision-free regions in configuration space
for robot manipulators,” in International Workshop on the Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics.
Springer, 2022, pp. 328–348.
[8] H. Kurniawati and D. Hsu, “Workspace-based connectivity oracle:
An adaptive sampling strategy for prm planning,” in Algorithmic
Foundation of Robotics VII: Selected Contributions of the Seventh
International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics.
Springer, 2008, pp. 35–51.
[9] E. Plaku, L. E. Kavraki, and M. Y. Vardi, “Motion Planning With
Dynamics by a Synergistic Combination of Layers of Planning,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 469–482, 2010.
[10] M. McNaughton, Parallel algorithms for real-time motion planning.
Carnegie Mellon University, 2011.
[11] A. Kelly, A. Stentz, O. Amidi, M. Bode, D. Bradley, A. Diaz-Calderon,
M. Happold, H. Herman, R. Mandelbaum, T. Pilarski et al., “Toward
reliable off road autonomous vehicles operating in challenging envi-
ronments,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 25,
no. 5-6, pp. 449–483, 2006.
[12] M. Pivtoraiko, R. A. Knepper, and A. Kelly, “Differentially constrained
mobile robot motion planning in state lattices,” Journal of Field
Robotics, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 308–333, 2009.
[13] L. P. Chew, “Constrained delaunay triangulations,” in Proceedings of
the third annual symposium on Computational geometry, 1987, pp.
215–222.
[14] D. Demyen and M. Buro, “Efficient triangulation-based pathfinding,”
in AAAI, vol. 6, 2006, pp. 942–947.
[15] O. Brock and L. Kavraki, “Decomposition-based motion planning: a
framework for real-time motion planning in high-dimensional con-
figuration spaces,” in Proceedings 2001 ICRA. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, 2001, pp. 1469–1474
vol.2.
[16] R. Deits and R. Tedrake, “Computing large convex regions of
obstacle-free space through semidefinite programming,” in Algorithmic
Foundations of Robotics XI: Selected Contributions of the Eleventh
International Workshop on the Algorithmic Foundations of Robotics.
Springer, 2015, pp. 109–124.
[17] T. Marcucci, J. Umenberger, P. Parrilo, and R. Tedrake, “Shortest paths
in graphs of convex sets,” SIAM Journal on Optimization, vol. 34,
no. 1, pp. 507–532, 2024.
[18] S. M. LaValle and J. J. Kuffner Jr, “Randomized kinodynamic plan-
ning,” The international journal of robotics research, vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 378–400, 2001.
[19] S. Quinlan, Real-time modification of collision-free paths.
Stanford
University, 1995.
[20] F. Schwarzer, M. Saha, and J.-C. Latombe, “Adaptive dynamic col-
lision checking for single and multiple articulated robots in complex
environments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 21, no. 3, pp.
338–353, 2005.
[21] S. Redon, A. Kheddar, and S. Coquillart, “An algebraic solution to
the problem of collision detection for rigid polyhedral objects,” in
Proceedings 2000 ICRA. Millennium Conference. IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation. Symposia Proceedings (Cat.
No.00CH37065), vol. 4, 2000, pp. 3733–3738 vol.4.
[22] X. Zhang, S. Redon, M. Lee, and Y. J. Kim, “Continuous collision
detection for articulated models using taylor models and temporal
culling,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 15–es, 2007.
[23] P. Werner, A. Amice, T. Marcucci, D. Rus, and R. Tedrake, “Approx-
imating robot configuration spaces with few convex sets using clique
covers of visibility graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02875, 2023.
[24] M. Rungger and M. Zamani, “SCOTS: A Tool for the Synthesis
of Symbolic Controllers,” in Proceedings of the 19th international
conference on hybrid systems: Computation and control, 2016, pp.
99–104.


--- Page 9 ---
[25] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual,”
2023.
[26] A. A. Hagberg, D. A. Schult, and P. J. Swart, “Exploring Network
Structure, Dynamics, and Function using NetworkX,” in Proceedings
of the 7th Python in Science Conference, G. Varoquaux, T. Vaught,
and J. Millman, Eds., Pasadena, CA USA, 2008, pp. 11 – 15.
[27] T. Marcucci, M. Petersen, D. von Wrangel, and R. Tedrake, “Motion
planning around obstacles with convex optimization,” Science robotics,
vol. 8, no. 84, p. eadf7843, 2023.


--- Page 10 ---
APPENDIX
A. Constructing Vertices Vd
In constructing the vertices Vd, we group free configu-
rations on the grid to form disjoint subgraphs {Gp,ij,n}nij
n=1.
The simplest approach is to connect free configurations
which are adjacent on the discretization grid (for example
in 2d, the discretization grid is a 2-dimensional plane of dis-
cretized translation position and discretized rotation angle).
However, simply connecting adjacent free configurations
may lead to collisions for non-point objects. To address
this, we enlarge the polytope object O during collision
checking. This ensures that movements between adjacent
configurations remain collision-free.
2D Scenario. For each discrete configuration on this grid, we
conduct collision checks for a bloated object O′. Each edge
on object is O bloated by distance max(lλ, lθ) where lλ is
the maximum distance between two consecutive translation
points and lθ is the maximum distance a point on O could
possibly travel between consecutive rotations, calculated by
maxi 2∥vO,i∥2 sin(π/nR).
3D Scenario. We over-approximate the object by a ball of
radius maxi |vO,i|2 for this collision checking. This ball ac-
commodates arbitrary rotations for configurations that share
the same translation. For configurations on the same facet
that share the same rotation, connectivity does not require
verification due to the convexity of Pi and Pj. This is
justified as follows: Object O is divided into two parts by the
facet of the reachable set, one part resides in Pi and the other
inside Pj. This division remains fixed for configurations on
the same facet under the same rotation. Given that both Pi
and Pj are convex, any swept region of each part of O
remains confined within its respective convex polytope.
B. Proofs of Corollaries
We will provide proofs of two corollaries presented in the
paper here.
Corollary 1.1 (Triangle). Given two convex polytopes Pi =
{x|Aix ≤bi}, i = 1, 2, and a triangle T, T is contained
inside the union of P1 and P2 if all edges of T satisfy at
least one of the conditions in Proposition 1.
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝑀
𝑁
Fig. 7: Left: all the vertices are contained in the same green polytope. Right:
one vertex (C) is not contained in the same polytope as vertices A, B.
Proof. We first consider the case when all the vertices of
triangle T are contained in exactly one of Pi, there are two
possible cases as demonstrated in Fig. 7:
1) All vertices of triangle T are contained within the same
convex polytope, here referred to as the green polytope.
Since convex polytopes maintain the property that any
point on the line segment between any two points
within the polytope also lies within the polytope, it
follows that the entire area of triangle T is contained
within the green polytope.
2) One vertex C is located in a different polytope from
vertices A, B (right). Given that the edge BC satisfies
Proposition 1, there exists a point M on BC such
that M ∈P1 ∩P2. Similarly, for edge AC, there
exists a point N on AC that also belongs to P1 ∩P2.
The triangle T, i.e. △ABC can be divided into three
triangles: △ABM, △AMN, △MNC. Since each tri-
angle’s vertices are entirely contained within at least
one polytope and each polytope is convex, each of
these smaller triangles is contained within a polytope.
Hence, the entire triangle T is contained within the
union of P1 and P2.
When extending the conditions to allow vertices of triangle
T to be contained in more than one of Pi, it is equivalent
to considering an enlargement of the polytopes P1 and P2.
Therefore, the proposition that triangle T is contained within
the union of the polytopes still holds.
Corollary 1.2 (Convex quadrilateral). Given two convex
polytopes Pi = {x|Aix ≤bi}, i = 1, 2, and a convex
quadrilateral P0, P0 is contained inside the union of P1 and
P2 if all edges of P0 satisfy at least one of the conditions in
Proposition 1.
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝑀
𝑁
𝐷
𝐷
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝑀
𝑁
𝐷
𝐴
𝐵
𝐶
𝐷
Fig. 8: Upper left: all the vertices are contained in the same green polytope.
Upper right: vertex C is not contained in the same polytope as the other
vertices (A, B, D) Lower left: two adjacent vertices (C, D) are contained in
a different polytope as A, B. Lower right: vertices along the same diagonal
(AC and BD) are contained in a same polytope.
Proof. Similar to the proof of triangles, we first consider
the case when all the vertices of convex quadrilateral P0 are
contained in exactly one of Pi, there are four possible cases
as demonstrated in Fig. 8:
1) All vertices of convex quadrilateral P0 are contained
within the same convex polytope, here referred to as
the green polytope. Since convex polytopes maintain


--- Page 11 ---
the property that any point on the line segment between
any two points within the polytope also lies within
the polytope, it follows that the entire area of convex
quadrilateral P0is contained within the green polytope.
2) One vertex C is located in a different polytope from
vertices A, B, D. Given that the edge BC satisfies
Proposition 1, there exists a point M on BC such that
M ∈P1 ∩P2. Similarly, for edge CD, there exists
a point N on CD that also belongs to P1 ∩P2. The
convex quadrilateral P0, i.e. △ABC can be divided
into two polytopes: polytope ABMND and △MNC.
Since each small polytope’s vertices are entirely con-
tained within at least one Pi and each Pi is convex,
each of these smaller polytopes is contained within a
polytope. Hence, the entire convex quadrilateral P0 is
contained within the union of P1 and P2.
3) Two adjacent vertices C, D are contained in a different
polytope as A, B. Similarly, there exists a point M
on BC and a point N on AD such that M, N ∈
P1 ∩P2. The convex quadrilateral P0, i.e. △ABC can
be divided into two polytopes: quadrilateral ABMN
and quadrilateral MNDC. Since each small poly-
tope’s vertices are entirely contained within at least
one Pi and each Pi is convex, each of these smaller
polytopes is contained within a polytope. Hence, the
entire convex quadrilateral P0 is contained within the
union of P1 and P2.
4) Vertices along the same diagonal (AC and BD) are
contained in a same polytope. We divide the quadrilat-
eral ABCD into two triangles △ABD and △BCD.
The two vertices of edge BD are contained in the
same convex polytope, so both two small triangles
satisfy Corollary 1.1. Hence, the entire convex quadri-
lateral P0 is contained within the union of P1 and P2.
When extending the conditions to allow vertices of convex
quadrilateral P0 to be contained in more than one of Pi, it is
equivalent to considering an enlargement of the polytopes P1
and P2. Therefore, the proposition that convex quadrilateral
P0 is contained within the union of the polytopes still holds.
C. Additional Experiment Results
We first provide additional experiment results in Fig. 9 of
unplotted planning shapes in the paper.
We further include more examples in 3D to discuss our
method, shown in Fig. 10. For our method in 2D, our solution
set will expand if we a) add more convex covers in the
workspace, b) increase the waypoint number inside MILP
N or c) increase the fineness of discretization on the surface
∂Pij. Moreover, if all the vertice-to-center line segments lie
inside the planned object, our method will plan for the exact
geometry of the object and can eliminate the missing set
of solutions eventually. In 3D, our current method solves
increasingly challenging problems by adding more convex
polytopes into the free workspace, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
This results in more nodes being included in the planning
graph Gd, allowing for more maneuvers in the planned
path and enabling the solution of both narrow-passage and
more general problems. We acknowledge that our current 3D
method excludes a subset of solutions where most convex
covers are so narrow that the object cannot fully rotate
within the free space, and only a small set of orientations
are admissible.
D. Discussion on Complexity of Discretization
The fineness of discretization significantly impacts the size
of the solution set. If it’s too fine, then the MILP problem
will be too large. If the discretization is too coarse, we
may exclude a large portion of solution set. So we’d like to
include a discussion on the complexity of the discretization
for our method.
In our 2D experiments, we used the following discretiza-
tion parameters:
• The rotation θ is discretized as Nθ
= 12 values,
allowing rotation as small as 30◦.
• The translation discretization on ∂Pij is Nt = 60 points
with equal intervals along the line ring.
• The discretization in collision avoidance is that each
line segment to be checked is divide into Nc = 10
equal parts.
The complexity of the discretization is:
• The discretization of θ and translation will affect the
construction of patches on ∂Pij, thus affecting the total
number of MILP to be solved. Not considering the
grouping operation, the number of MILP will grow at
the rate of O(Nθ · Nt).
• Inside each MILP, the discretization parameter Nc in
collision avoidance only affects the number of con-
straints at the rate of O(Nc) but has no effect on
the number of variables. The discretization of θ and
translation will affect the number of variables at the rate
of O(Nθ + Nt) without without affecting the number
of constraints.


--- Page 12 ---
(a) 2d-Corner.
(b) 2d-bugtrap.
(c) 2d-maze.
(d) SCOTS. [24]
(e) 2d-peg in hole.
(f) 3d piano w.
(g) 3d-narrow.
(h) 3d-peg-in-hole.
Fig. 9: Visualization of planning results in 2D (obstacles: pink) and 3D scenarios. The start and end configurations are ploted with red, while waypoints
and their corresponding reachable sets are shown in green. In 2D scenarios, we also illustrate the graph Gc with vertices (Vc) as blue polytopes and edges
(Ec) as blue lines connecting red dots, which represent the centers of vertex polytopes. Figs. 9e and 9h show the planning results of convex objects, while
the rest show the results of L-shape non-convex objects.
(a) 1 obstacle - solution
(b) 2 obstacles - solution
(c) 4 obstacles - solution
(d) 1 obstacle - decomposition
(e) 2 obstacles - decomposition
(f) 4 obstacles - decomposition
Fig. 10: Three planning problems in 3D with an increasing number of obstacles. New obstacles are added to block the solution path from the previous
problem. Our method solves more challenging problems incrementally by adding more polytope covers within the free space, allowing for more maneuvers
in the solution paths. While the object is restricted to translational movements in 3D, this simplification enables straightforward collision-avoidance encoding
while still permitting the solution of general problems. (a-c) show the solutions to the problem, and (d-f) show the convex polytope covers (blue) inside
the free workspace, with a red dot indicating the center of each polytope.
