--- Page 1 ---
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for
Joint Police Patrol and Dispatch
Matthew Repasky∗, He Wang, and Yao Xie
H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology
Abstract
Police patrol units need to split their time between performing preventive patrol and being dispatched
to serve emergency incidents. In the existing literature, patrol and dispatch decisions are often studied
separately. We consider joint optimization of these two decisions to improve police operations efficiency
and reduce response time to emergency calls. Methodology/results: We propose a novel method for jointly
optimizing multi-agent patrol and dispatch to learn policies yielding rapid response times. Our method
treats each patroller as an independent Q-learner (agent) with a shared deep Q-network that represents
the state-action values.
The dispatching decisions are chosen using mixed-integer programming and
value function approximation from combinatorial action spaces. We demonstrate that this heterogeneous
multi-agent reinforcement learning approach is capable of learning joint policies that outperform those
optimized for patrol or dispatch alone. Managerial Implications: Policies jointly optimized for patrol
and dispatch can lead to more effective service while targeting demonstrably flexible objectives, such as
those encouraging efficiency and equity in response.
1
Introduction
The timeliness of police response to emergency calls plays a critical role in maintaining public safety and
preventing crimes. However, recent data showed that police response times in major U.S. cities are getting
longer, partly due to staffing shortages (Kaste 2023). In this paper, we study how to improve police patrol
operations and reduce emergency call response times by multi-agent reinforcement learning, where each
patrol unit (e.g., a police patrol car) is treated as an agent.
Coordinating the patrol of multiple agents in a shared environment has been a task of interest in oper-
ations research and machine learning for many years. Approaches ranging from extensions of the traveling
salesman problem (Chevaleyre 2004) to deep reinforcement learning (RL) for multi-agent robot patrol (Jana
et al. 2022) have been applied. Many challenges are associated with multi-agent patrol, including large action
spaces that grow exponentially with the number of patrollers, coordination/cooperation of agents, and state
representation. Some prior works evaluate patrol policies using criteria that capture “coverage,” such that
all locations are visited frequently (Almeida et al. 2004). Instead, in this work, we evaluate patrol policies
with respect to a separate but related task: multi-agent dispatch.
The police dispatching problem has traditionally been considered using multi-server priority queues
(Green 1984).
The task of a dispatcher is to select a patroller to dispatch to the scene of an incident.
Recent efforts have considered the effects of dispatch policies given positioning and/or routing of patrollers
in some space (e.g., a grid or a graph) (Guedes et al. 2015, Dunnett et al. 2019). Oftentimes, the response
times to incidents must meet some key performance indicators (Stanford et al. 2014), which has also been
considered in the context of dispatch (Zhang et al. 2016).
The positioning of patrollers is key to effective dispatch, yet most dispatch works consider heuristic
patrol policies. Early works considering multi-agent patrol (without dispatch) coordinated individual agent
patrol decisions using heuristics such as neighboring node idleness (Machado et al. 2003). Others considered
extensions of the single-patroller traveling salesman problem to multiple agents (Chevaleyre 2004). Multi-
agent reinforcement learning (MARL) for multi-agent patrolling has also been considered for many years
∗Email: mwrepasky@gatech.edu
1
arXiv:2409.02246v1  [cs.LG]  3 Sep 2024


--- Page 2 ---
(Santana et al. 2004); e.g., node idleness can be minimized by independent learners with cooperative rewards.
Early RL approaches considered individual patrollers who only had information about their local environment
but could communicate with others about intended actions. More recently, multi-agent patrol policies have
been learned using Bayesian learning (Portugal et al. 2013) and deep RL (Jana et al. 2022). A common
theme is distributed policy optimization with varying degrees of communication between agents, where the
goal is to optimize with respect to idleness or frequency of visits to each location.
In addition to a growing need for efficient police operations in light of staffing shortages and limited
resources in recent years (The Associated Press 2023, Charalambous 2023, Hermann 2023), fairness and
equity in operations such as patrol and dispatch is an area of increased interest, and the benefits of such
considerations are plentiful. For instance, Dickson et al. (2022) shows that police officers who are perceived
to be fair are more likely to observe respect and legitimacy with their community. Moreover, opinions within
the US justice system echo the sentiment that fairness in law enforcement is crucial for public cooperation
and support (Waldschmidt 2018). The importance of this issue is highlighted by many police departments
across the US, often posting statements and procedures regarding fairness in their operations (Parker Po-
lice Department 2024, Notre Dame Police Department 2024, Walker 2023). Algorithmic considerations of
fairness in police operations typically focus on providing equity in service to multiple groups (Wheeler 2020,
Liberatore et al. 2023).
To our knowledge, ours is the first work to optimize policies for patrol and dispatch jointly. Our contri-
butions are as follows.
• Jointly-optimized policies for patrol and dispatch: Prior dispatch optimization strategies typ-
ically assume heuristic patrol policies.
Similarly, prior multi-agent patrolling works do not jointly
optimize separate decision tasks such as dispatch. We outline a procedure to optimize policies for
patrol and dispatch jointly, outperforming benchmark policies optimized for patrol or dispatch alone
in addition to heuristic policies such as priority queue dispatch. We demonstrate that the superior per-
formance of our method is robust to a range of simulated environments of varying sizes and dynamics
and with different objectives.
Figure 1: The joint task of patrol and dispatch involves decisions such as that demonstrated above. It is
unclear whether it is best to move one patroller across beat boundaries to manage an incident, leaving its
beat un-managed, or to require the patroller responsible for that beat to travel a long distance to the scene.
2


--- Page 3 ---
• Novel optimization approach: We use distributed MARL with parameter sharing to exploit similar-
ities between patrollers while jointly optimizing a dispatcher agent whose action space has combinatorial
cardinality. We extend recent works in combinatorial RL to systems with stochastic transitions. We
incorporate them into our MARL framework via a coordinate-descent-style alternating optimization
of patrol and dispatch policies.
• Fairness and real service systems: We demonstrate that our approach is flexible to various reward
definitions, such as those that encourage equitable policies. Policies that explicitly encode equity in
the reward definition yield more balanced responses to groups of different sizes. We also apply our
approach to scenarios based on real calls-for-service data.
1.1
Related works
RL is a machine learning approach for training an agent to make sequential decisions in a stochastic envi-
ronment (Sutton and Barto 2018, Bertsekas 2019). Deep RL uses neural networks, such as deep Q networks
(DQNs), to learn policies (Mnih et al. 2015). Making decisions for multiple agents is a central issue in
MARL, as the number of possible actions is exponential in the number of agents. Independent Q-learning
(IQL) (Tan 1993) addresses this by decomposing the problem into multiple single-agent RL problems. Each
agent operates in the same environment, but there are no guarantees regarding cooperation and interference;
nonetheless, the naive extension of DQNs to the IQL framework has been successful in some cases (Gupta
et al. 2017, Tampuu et al. 2017). To address cooperation and efficiency in distributed MARL, parameter
sharing in deep RL has been employed (Gupta et al. 2017, Chu and Ye 2017, Terry et al. 2020, Christianos
et al. 2021, Chen et al. 2021, Yu et al. 2022). Greater degrees of parameter sharing are often most effective
between agents with similar value spaces and reward functions.
Multi-agent patrol has been investigated from the perspective of operations research (Chevaleyre 2004),
Bayesian learning (Portugal et al. 2013), and (deep) MARL (Santana et al. 2004, Jana et al. 2022). Many
of these works pose the problem as a discrete-time, discrete-location graph traversal (Almeida et al. 2004,
Portugal and Rocha 2010, Portugal et al. 2013). Past works recognize the inherent complexity of making a
centralized decision to patrol many agents and decompose the problem via distributed optimization (San-
tana et al. 2004, Farinelli et al. 2017). Similarly, our approach to learning multi-agent patrol policies is
distributed while addressing issues arising from the decentralized decision-making for multiple cooperative
agents. Additionally, we consider this problem in conjunction with a separate but connected dispatch task,
which is not thoroughly addressed in prior work.
Dispatch of multiple patrollers and resources is typically considered from the queueing or ranking systems
perspective. Zhang et al. (2016) investigate such a setting using static and dynamic priority queues, con-
necting to the queuing literature in developing dispatch policies and indicating the static queues yield better
performance. For instance, Guedes et al. (2015) construct a ranking system based on quantitative incident
characteristics, such as arrival time, priority, and distance to the nearest patroller. Similarly, Dunnett et al.
(2019) formulates the dispatch decision process by constructing multiple queues, considering incident cate-
gories and severity, amongst other factors such as routing of units. Crucially, prior works regarding dispatch
in service systems neglect to optimize multi-agent patrol policies, typically assuming basic heuristics.
A typical notion of fairness in machine learning applications suggests that the outcome of an algorithm
should be independent of the group to which it is applied (Barocas et al. 2017). In the context of service
operations such as police patrol and dispatch, such groups can be defined by socioeconomic or racial status.
For example, fairness has been studied in the police districting problem to improve efficiency while mitigating
racial disparity in defining patrol districts (Liberatore et al. 2022, 2023). Parallel works have worked to
alleviate disproportionate minority contact that can arise due to hot spot policing (Wheeler 2020). Such
works find that simply neglecting to take sensitive features (e.g., race or location) into account is ineffective
at achieving fairnesss (Eckhouse et al. 2019). Therefore, these attributes are taken into account in decision-
making problems to encode fairness explicitly, often leading to a minimal tradeoff in efficiency.
3


--- Page 4 ---
2
Background
This section provides the necessary background information regarding reinforcement learning (RL) and
multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) as applied to service systems such as police patrol and dispatch.
2.1
Single-Agent Reinforcement Learning
An infinite-horizon discounted Markov Decision Process (MDP) can be represented by a tuple ⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩
with state space S, action space A, transition dynamics P : S×A →∆(S), reward function R : S×A×S →R,
and discount γ ∈[0, 1). The goal of RL (Bertsekas 2019) is to learn a policy π : S →A maximizing cumulative
discounted reward, captured by the value function V π : S →R:
V π(s0) = E

X
t≥0
γtR (st, π(st), st+1)

,
beginning in state s0 and following at ∼π(st), where st is the state in period t. A policy that maximizes
the value function V π(s0) above is called an optimal policy and is denoted by π⋆. Let V ⋆be the optimal
value function.
It is often more convenient to consider the state-action value (Q-value) in RL:
Qπ(s0, a0) = E

R(s0, a0, s1) +
X
t≥1
γtR (st, π(st), st+1)

.
The state value V π(s) and the state-action value Qπ(s, a) are connected by V π(s) = Qπ(s, π(s)).
Let
Q⋆be the optimal Q-value.
The optimal policy π⋆takes greedy actions with respect to Q⋆: π⋆(s) =
arg maxa∈A Q⋆(s, a). Since V ⋆= maxa Q⋆(s, a), the Bellman optimality equation reveals:
Q⋆(s, a) = E [R(s, a, s′) + γV ⋆(s′)] .
2.1.1
Deep Q-Learning.
Q-learning is a model-free RL technique to learn the optimal state-action value function by exploiting the
Bellman optimality condition (Watkins 1989). Qπ, approximated by a function parameterized by θ, can be
learned given transitions (st, at, st+1, rt) ∈D, where rt := R(st, at, st+1) and D sampled from the MDP.
Parameter θ can then be learned by minimizing the least-squares value iteration (LSVI) objective (Bradtke
and Barto 1996):
ˆθ = argmin
θ


X
(st,at,st+1,rt)∈Dℓ⊂D

rt + γ max
a Q
˜θ(st+1, a) −Qθ(st, at)
2

,
A deep Q-network (DQN) (Mnih et al. 2015) Qθ : Rd →R|A| is often used as the approximator, taking
s ∈S ⊂Rd and outputting Qθ(s, a) values for each action. Target networks parameterized by ˜θ, a copy of
θ cloned every L updates, are often used to stabilize optimization.
2.1.2
Value Function Approximation.
One might instead want to approximate V π(s) given policy π. Assume tuples (st, ˜rt) ∈E are observed,
where ˜rt := P
t′≥t γt′−tR(st′, π(st′), st′+1) is the discounted sum of reward following state st under policy π.
Value V π(s) can be approximated by a function V ϕ parameterized by ϕ to minimize the following objective:
ˆϕ = argmin
ϕ


X
(st,˜rt)∈E
 V ϕ(st) −˜rt
2

.
4


--- Page 5 ---
2.1.3
Reinforcement Learning with Combinatorial Action Space
If |A| is too large to enumerate (e.g., selection amongst combinatorially-many sets of pairings), Q-learning
is not applicable since it must enumerate all action values. Let xij = 1 if i is paired to j, with xij = 0
otherwise. Define dij the reward for this pairing. Since the optimal action maximizes the current reward
plus the next state value (Delarue et al. 2020):
π(s) = argmax
{xij}
X
i
X
j
dijxij + V π(s′),
subject to problem-specific constraints. If s′ can be computed given the action and V π is approximated as
in Section 2.1.2, actions are selected by solving a mixed-integer program (MIP).
2.2
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
Given agents i = 1, . . . , N, centralized MARL formulates decision-making as an MDP (Gupta et al. 2017);
one agent learns a policy π mapping states to a joint action in A1 ×· · ·×AN. IQL addresses the exponential
growth of this joint action space by learning N functions Qθi (Tan 1993). Agent i operates within the single-
agent MDP represented by the tuple ⟨S, Ai, Pi, Ri, γi⟩. When the agents are similar, parameter sharing can
accelerate learning, acting as an intermediate between centralized MARL and IQL (Gupta et al. 2017).
MARL can also be described using a Markov game (MG) (Littman 1994) formulation, defined by a
tuple ⟨N, S, {Si}N
i=1, {Ai}N
i=1, P, {Ri}N
i=1, γ⟩, including a universal state space S, “perspectives” {Si}N
i=1, joint
action space A = A1×· · ·×AN, transition dynamics P : S×A →∆(S), reward functions Ri : S×A×S →R,
and discount γ.
The goal is to maximize the expected discounted sum of future reward for each agent
˜V π
i (s0) = E
hP
t≥0 γtRi (st, π(st), st+1)
i
, where s0 ∈S is an initial universal state and π = (π1, . . . , πN) is a
joint policy. Similarly:
˜Qπ
i (s0, a0) = E

Ri(s0, a0, s1) +
X
t≥1
γtRi (st, π(st), st+1)

.
(1)
Each ˜V π
i
is meant to be maximized with respect to all other policies, such that
πi = argmax
π′
i
˜V π′
i
where π′ = (π1, . . . , π′
i, . . . , πN).
IQL can be employed to optimize each πi. Moreover, if {Si}N
i=1, {Ai}N
i=1, and {Ri}N
i=1 are similar among all
agents, parameter sharing can be employed to learn the policies.
2.3
Police Operations
Police jurisdictions are typically hierarchically divided. For example, the Atlanta Police Department (APD)
divides the city of Atlanta into six zones, each of which is divided into beats (Atlanta Police Department
2023). One patroller is usually assigned to each beat. When calls-for-service arrive at the dispatcher, an
officer in the same zone as the incident is dispatched to the scene; a patroller can be dispatched to a call
outside their assigned beat. This joint problem of beat-based patrol and dispatch is further discussed and
formalized in Section 3.
3
Problem Formulation
Consider patrollers i = 1, . . . , N making decisions in time t = 1, 2, . . . . Joint patrol and dispatch is formalized
as an MDP with a central agent and then is decomposed into an MG of N + 1 agents.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Figure 2: Example of a graph with two beats indicated by color. The dotted edges indicate that patrollers
can travel between beats only when responding to calls.
3.1
The Patrol Problem
Patrollers navigate a connected, undirected graph G = (V, E) (Almeida et al. 2004) with nodes/locations
V connected by edges E which are traversed in a single iteration; each v ∈V is connected to itself. Each
patroller i is assigned to a node subset (beat) Vi, an example is visualized in Figure 2. The patrol problem
involves travel decisions for each patroller. For patrollers not busy responding to incidents (Sections 3.2 and
3.3), a patrol policy directs each patroller to a neighboring node in Vi.
3.2
The Dispatch Problem
Incidents of categories k = 1, . . . , K arrive with rates λk following distributions qk(v) supported on V ,
requiring tscene ∼Exp(βk) on-scene time to manage. The dispatch problem involves matching free patrollers
(not currently dispatched) to idle incidents (not yet been assigned). A dispatch policy selects among all
possible groups of pairings, including leaving incidents idle or patrollers free. A dispatched patroller travels
along the shortest path towards the incident, whose number of edges is equivalent to the travel time ttravel
in iterations. If a patroller arrives at iteration t, it is finished managing the incident starting at iteration
t + tscene.
3.3
Joint Patrol & Dispatch
The service time for patroller i to manage incident j is tservice(i, j) = tidle(j) + ttravel(i, j) + tscene(j), where
tidle(j) is the time spent in the queue before dispatch. When patroller i is dispatched, it must travel toward
the incident or remain at the scene. When outside its beat, it must return once free. Define the response
time, reflecting the time incident j waited before patroller i arrived:
tresponse(i, j) = tidle(j) + ttravel(i, j).
(2)
Joint patrol and dispatch can be formulated as an MDP to learn joint policy π.
3.3.1
Joint State Space.
Given patroller positions v1, . . . , vN ∈V and busy statuses u1, . . . , uN ∈N (travel and on-scene time), define
v := [(v1, u1), . . . , (vN, uN)]. At dispatch, patrollers observe the random on-scene service time. Given loca-
tions of M idle incidents w1, . . . , wM ∈V and idle times p1, . . . , pM ∈N, define w := [(w1, p1), . . . , (wM, pM)].
The queue has a fixed idle-incident capacity M; when full and a new incident arrives, the longest-waiting
incident is replaced. The joint state space is S =

s = [v ⊕w]T 	
, where ⊕refers to vector concatenation.
6


--- Page 7 ---
3.3.2
Joint Action Space.
For a free patroller, patrol action set A(patrol)
i
(vi,t, ui,t) contains movements to neighboring vertices in Vi. A
busy patroller moves towards an incident or stays at the scene, moving back towards its beats afterward.
After patrol actions, a dispatch action is selected from the dispatch action set A(dispatch)(v′
t, w′
t). Note, v′
t
and w′
t refer to the updated vt and wt according to the patrol actions and the incident arrivals. The joint
action space is
A(vt, wt) = A(patrol)
1
(v1,t, u1,t) × · · · × A(patrol)
N
(vN,t, uN,t) × A(dispatch)(v′
t, w′
t).
The patrol action space has exponential cardinality in N, and the dispatch action space has combinatorial
cardinality.
3.3.3
Response-Based Reward & Objective.
The reward function is the negative sum of response times and a penalty for incidents removed from a
capacitated queue:
R(t) = −


X
j dispatched in iteration t
tresponse(i, j) +
X
j removed in iteration t
α · tidle(j)

.
(3)
Penalty weight α is a hyper-parameter (α = 2 in this work). Given s0 ∈S,
π⋆(s0) = argmax
π∈Π
E

X
t≥0
γtR(t)

st ∼P (st−1, π(st−1)) ∀t > 0

.
3.3.4
Markov Game Decomposition.
Patrol and dispatch can be decomposed into an MG with N + 1 agents defined by tuple:
⟨N + 1, S,
n
S(patrol)
i
oN
i=1 ∪S(dispatch),
n
A(patrol)
i
oN
i=1 ∪A(dispatch), P, R, γ⟩.
Patrol agent i corresponds to A(patrol)
i
(vi,t, ui,t) and the dispatch agent corresponds to A(dispatch)(v′
t, w′
t).
Similar but distinct state spaces {S(patrol)
i
}N
i=1 are defined so that each patrol agent observes its own perspec-
tive, swapping the location and busy status to the first index: v(i) := [(vi, ui), . . . , (vi−1, ui−1), (v1, u1), (vi+1, ui+1), . . . , (vN, uN
This yields S(patrol)
i
=

s = [v(i) ⊕w]T 	
. The dispatch agent observes joint state space S(dispatch) = S. Re-
ward R(t) (3) is shared. The goal is to learn patrol policies π(patrol)
i
and dispatch policy π(dispatch) to minimize
the response time while avoiding incidents being removed from the queue.
4
Methodology
Parameter sharing in deep Q-learning is applied to learn patrol policies for each patroller (Section 4.1), and
incidents are assigned to patrollers using a MIP and value function approximation (Section 4.2). These are
combined to learn joint policies for patrol and dispatch (Section 4.3).
4.1
MARL with Parameter Sharing for Patrolling
The MG patrol policies (Section 3.3.4) are learned using MARL. Recall, in Section 3, the state spaces
{S(patrol)
i
}N
i=1 are defined to contain the positions and statuses of all patrollers and incidents on the graph,
while the action spaces {A(patrol)
i
}N
i=1 contain movements along the graph edges. Furthermore, all patrol
agents share a reward R. Based upon prior MARL works indicating that similar agents benefit from pa-
rameter sharing (Gupta et al. 2017), this similarity in the state spaces, action spaces, and shared reward
suggests that parameter sharing can be applied.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Figure 3: Loss of the dispatch and patrol value networks over the course of alternating joint optimization in
the high call volume setting (Section 5.1).
Moreover, since the state spaces and action spaces are nearly identical, we employ an extreme version
of parameter sharing in learning the patrol policies. That is, a single neural network Qθ (parameterized by
θ) learns a state-action value function for all agents. Our assumption is that the universal approximation
power of a “large enough” neural network has the capacity to jointly learn all patrol policies, which is
validated by the performance of the learned patrol policies in the experiments of Section 5. We find that
DQNs of relatively few layers can learn these policies.
Patrol policies thus select actions according to
πθ
i (si) = argmax
a
Qθ(si, a). Mini-batches of transitions (si,t, ai,t, rt, si,t+1) from each agent’s perspective are
collected via ϵ-greedy simulation to update Qθ using LSVI updates.
4.2
Policy Iteration for Dispatching
A variation of the MIP action selection strategy outlined in Section 2.1.3 is employed for dispatch. Let
xij = 1 if patroller i is assigned to incident j, otherwise let xij = 0. The first term of reward (3) can
be computed given xij: P
i,j tresponse(i, j) · xij. Unlike Delarue et al. (2020), we cannot directly compute
the entire reward, nor can we obtain the transition state deterministically due to incident queue “overflow”
resulting from stochastic call arrival dynamics. This factor, and the difference in patroller positions due to
the patrol policy, affects the state transition.
Given V (dispatch) (or an approximation V ϕ), the next-state value can be approximated. Define the value
delta for patroller i as
δV (dispatch)
i
(s) := E
h
V (dispatch)(patroller i assigned) −V (dispatch)(patroller i not assigned)
i
(4)
and for incident j as
δV (dispatch)
j
(s) := E
h
V (dispatch)(incident j assigned) −V (dispatch)(incident j not assigned)
i
,
(5)
where the expectation is taken under the transition dynamics P conditioned upon the policies for patrol and
dispatch. These represent beginning in state s and considering the expected change in value for assigning
patroller i to some idle incident, with no other assignments made. Given approximators δV ϕ1
i
for δV (dispatch)
i
8


--- Page 9 ---
Table 1: Response time distribution characteristics (over 100 simulations of 5000 iterations) for the settings
of Section 5.1. Quantities in parenthesis are standard deviations. Notation q = Q refers to the Q-quantile.
High Call Volume
Low Call Volume
Policy
Avg.
Response
Avg.
Overflows
q = 0.75
Response
q = 0.95
Response
Avg.
Response
Avg.
Overflows
q = 0.75
Response
q = 0.95
Response
Heuristic
10.0(5.90)
13118.6
14
21
7.07(4.81)
6.63(3.82)
9
16
Patrol
9.57(5.83)
12420.4
13
20
6.24(4.47)
4.61(3.26)
8
15
Dispatch
8.13(5.43)
77.513.8
11
19
7.16(4.10)
53.5(10.0)
10
15
Joint
8.09(5.33)
79.814.6
11
18
5.95(4.18)
3.69(2.69)
8
14
and δV ϕ2
j
for δV (dispatch)
j
, dispatch is formulated as the MIP:
πϕ(s) =
argmin
x
N
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
tresponse(i, j) ·

xij −δV ϕ1
i
(s) −δV ϕ2
j
(s)

s.t.
M
X
j=1
xij ≤I{patroller i is free}
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N}
N
X
i=1
xij ≤I{incident j is idle}
∀j ∈{1, . . . , M}
xij ∈{0, 1}
∀i ∈{1, . . . , N}, j ∈{1, . . . , M},
where I{event} is an indicator for {event}. Notably, given δV ϕ1
i
and δV ϕ2
j
, this can be computed determinis-
tically given xij and the initial state s.
δV ϕ1
i
and δV ϕ2
j
can be learned by first approximating V (dispatch) using V ϕ (Section 2.1.2). Using V ϕ,
mappings are generated from states to expectations (4)-(5). Approximators δV ϕ1
i
and δV ϕ2
j
are trained to
map states to value deltas. We utilize a policy iteration scheme as in Delarue et al. (2020); we iterate between
updating V ϕ and updating δV ϕ1
i
and δV ϕ2
j
using V ϕ. In practice, one network is learned for patrollers, δV ϕ1,
and one network for incidents, δV ϕ2, which have output dimension equal to the number of patrollers and
the size of the incident queue, respectively.
4.3
Joint Patrol & Dispatch Policy
The joint policy for patrol and dispatch combines the separate patrol and dispatch policies by optimizing
their parameters alternatively. As described in Section 4.3.1, the parameters of the patrol policies are frozen
when learning those of the dispatch policy, and vice versa. This alternating procedure is empirically found
to converge to effective policies that outperform those optimized for patrol or dispatch alone (see Figure 3
and Section 5).
Given jointly-optimized policies for patrol and dispatch, the policy is deployed as follows: patroller i
observes a state and moves according to πθ
i . Incidents are sampled, and the dispatch agent matches patrollers
to incidents according to πϕ. R(t) and joint state st+1 are finally computed. The dispatcher observes the
state as influenced by the patrol policy in the first phase, with reward and subsequent state observed by the
patrollers being influenced by the dispatch policy. The assumption that the coordination of the patrollers
and the dispatcher is enhanced by a joint optimization is validated by the improved performance of the
jointly-optimized policies in our experiments.
4.3.1
Joint Policy Optimization
We alternatively optimize the parameters defining the patrol and dispatch policies. One phase involves Q-
learning of the shared patroller Qθ, while the other phase involves updates to the incident value networks
9


--- Page 10 ---
V ϕ, δV ϕ1
i
, and δV ϕ2
j
, repeating to convergence. For outer loop iterations, a number of inner loop updates
are made to the dispatcher, followed by a number of inner loop updates to the patrollers. The steps of the
ninner,ϕ inner loop updates to the dispatcher are:
(1) collect transitions from on-policy simulation,
(2) conduct nepoch,ϕ epochs of training for V ϕ,
(3) generate “delta transitions” for each delta network using V ϕ, and
(4) conduct nepoch,ϕ1 = nepoch,ϕ2 epochs of training on each network δV ϕ1 and δV ϕ2.
The steps of the ninner,θ inner loop updates to the patrollers are:
(1) collect transitions from ϵ-greedy on-policy simulation and
(2) conduct nepoch,θ epochs of training for Qθ.
This is repeated for nouter outer loop iterations. We find that performance gains from learning dispatch
policies are greater than patrol policies, so we begin optimization with a “warm-start” to the dispatch
policy consisting of nwarm dispatch inner loop iterations. For the experiments of Section 5, all networks are
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) using rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation. Dispatch inner loops train
using ndispatch number of transitions (per inner loop iteration), while patrol inner loops train using npatrol
transitions. All transitions are split into an 80%/20% train/validation split. The discount factor γ = 0.9 in
all settings.
5
Experiments
The experiments compare joint optimization of patrol and dispatch to policies optimized for patrolling or
dispatch alone. In Section 5.1, the goal is to minimize the reward as defined in (3). Then, in Section 5.2, the
reward is altered to demonstrate learning of more equitable policies. Finally, a real data example is outlined
in Section 5.3 based on a region in the City of Atlanta. See Appendix A for a discussion of model selection
in each experiment.
Baselines & Comparison.
The three baselines include patrol-only optimization, dispatch-only optimiza-
tion, and a fully heuristic policy. For policies without optimized patrol, patrollers move randomly in their
assigned regions. For policies without optimized dispatch, dispatch follows a first come, first serve priority
queue whereby incident class 2 precedes incident class 1, and the closest free patroller is sent to the scene.
To compare policies, we evaluate incident response over nepisode episodes, each consisting of 5,000 iterations
of on-policy simulation. The characteristics of the response time distributions are compared in addition to
the number of incident queue overflows per episode.
5.1
Efficient Response Experiments
Simulated Settings.
Consider two simulated settings on the same graph consisting of two 7 × 7 beats
adjacent on one edge. Two categories of incident arrive with rates λ1 and λ2, uniform distributions q1 and
q2, and average service times β1 = 1 and β2 = 3. The incident queue size is 3. In the High Call Volume
setting, λ1 = 0.15 and λ2 = 0.075. In the Low Call Volume setting, λ1 = 0.075 and λ2 = 0.05.
Modeling & Optimization.
Joint optimization is conducted using nouter = 4 with ninner,ϕ = 5 and
ninner,θ = 5 and beginning with nwarm = 20. Each dispatch inner loop trains for nepochs,ϕ = nepochs,ϕ1 =
nepochs,ϕ2 = 25 epochs each for V ϕ, δV ϕ1, and δV ϕ2. This is conducted over ndispatch = 1, 000 simulated
transitions per iteration with batch size 100 and learning rate 10−3. Each patrol inner loop fixes ϵ = 1
(fully random patrol) and trains for nepochs,θ = 1 epochs for Qθ, which is conducted over npatrol = 1.25
million simulated transitions with batch size 50 and learning rate 10−5. V ϕ, δV ϕ1, and δV ϕ2 are MLPs
of 1 hidden layer with 128 nodes, while Qθ is an MLP of 2 hidden layers with 512 nodes each. Validation
10


--- Page 11 ---
Figure 4: Response time distributions (a) for all incidents and (b)-(c) for each incident category in the high
call volume setting of Section 5.1.
Figure 5: Response time distributions (a) for all incidents and (b)-(c) for each incident category in the low
call volume setting of Section 5.1.
loss is visualized in Figure 3 for the high call volume setting. The dispatch dynamic is very noisy but still
leads to an effective policy. The patrol-only optimization uses ninner,θ = 20 updates to a patrol Qθ network.
The dispatch-only optimization uses ninner,ϕ = 50 updates to dispatch networks.
All other patrol- and
dispatch-only optimization parameters are identical to those of the joint optimization.
Results.
Response time distributions are generated using nepisodes = 100. The high call volume experiment
results are visualized in Table 1 and Figure 4. The jointly-optimized policy has the fastest response and loses
few incidents. This and the dispatch-only optimized policy have similar response distributions. Response
times are visualized by category in Figure 4(b)-(c); the jointly-optimized policy is best in category 1 with
diminished performance in category 2. This could indicate that dispatch optimization yields policies that
prefer incidents that take less time to manage (since β1 < β2), resulting in lower average response times.
Table 1 and Figure 5 show the low call volume results. The jointly-optimized policy responds more quickly,
and all policies lose a similarly small number of calls except for the dispatch-only optimized policy. In this
case, the jointly-optimized policy has a similar response time to both categories.
5.2
Equity-based Reward
Simulated Setting.
Figure 6(a) visualizes a graph of 119 nodes divided into two beats of 58 and 61 nodes.
One incident category arrives with rate λ = 0.2 and has average service time β = 3. In Figure 6(b) and (c),
it is revealed that the non-uniform incident distribution induces two groups. The smaller of these groups,
Group 1, consists of 20 nodes and has incident probability ten times that of the larger group, Group 2,
which consists of 99 nodes.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Figure 6: The graph setting of Section 5.2, which is divided into two beats in (a), as well as two groups in
(b) and (c) which experience different rates of incident arrival.
Table 2: Response time distribution characteristics for Section 5.2. “Group Difference” refers to the difference
in average response time between Group 2 and Group 1, and “Coverage Ratio” refers to the ratio of the
number of iterations spent in Group 2 to Group 1.
Group 1 (Small)
Group 2 (Large)
Overall
Policy
Avg.
Response
Avg.
Overflows
q = 0.75
Response
q = 0.95
Response
Avg.
Response
Avg.
Overflows
q = 0.75
Response
q = 0.95
Response
Avg.
Response
Group
Difference
Coverage
Ratio
Heuristic
9.07(5.10)
63.5(11.3)
12
19
12.0(5.66)
30.8(7.03)
16
22
10.0(5.47)
2.96
0.91
ρlarge = 0.5
8.95(6.16)
63.4(11.7)
11
21
11.7(6.20)
29.9(6.21)
15
24
9.86(6.31)
2.75
1.40
ρlarge = 1.0
8.11(5.46)
49.3(10.8)
10
18
11.8(7.50)
38.8(8.37)
15
26
9.28(6.42)
3.66
0.93
Fairness.
An equity-based reward can be constructed to yield different penalties for each group:
˜R(t) = −


X
j dispatched in iteration t
ρjtresponse(i, j) +
X
j removed in iteration t
ρjα · tidle(j)

,
(6)
where ρj is the weight of the penalty incurred for the group in which j occurred. Additional metrics can
be introduced to quantify fairness. The distribution of response times can be compared between the two
groups; connecting to the independent notion of fairness (Barocas et al. 2017), response efficiency should be
independent of the group. Similarly, a fair policy could be expected to cover each group for a fraction of
iterations equal to the portion of the graph the group represents.
Modeling & Optimization.
The networks V ϕ, δV ϕ1, δV ϕ2, and Qθ are structured and optimized exactly
as in Section 5.1. Jointly-optimized policies trained using equitable reward (6) with different weights are
compared. Specifically, the weight of the small group is fixed at ρsmall = 1, and the weight of the large group
is ρlarge ∈{0.5, 1.0} representing weighted and unweighted policies, respectively.
Results.
Response characteristics are compared using nepisodes = 100. The results are visualized in Table 2
and Figure 7. A discrepancy in average response time between the two groups is observed in all settings, but
this is particularly pronounced in the “unfair” optimized setting (ρlarge = 1.0). This discrepancy is about an
iteration smaller for the “fair” (ρlarge = 0.5), which is also an improvement over the heuristic. Moreover, the
fair policy improves upon the overall response time of the heuristic policy while achieving a better balance
in response. Coverage is compared using nepisodes = 25 simulations, and the results are compared in the
final column of Table 2. The unfair and heuristic policies do a poor job of balancing coverage, while the
fair policy does much better to cover the larger group. Appendix A outlines model selection for this section;
12


--- Page 13 ---
Figure 7: Response time distributions (a) for all groups and (b)-(c) for each group in the equity-based setting
of Section 5.2.
Figure 8: A region of Southwest Atlanta is partitioned into rectangular patches in (a), which are translated
into a graph structure composed of 3 beats pictured in (b). In (c), the spatial distribution of incidents
estimated from the calls-for-service data is visualized.
Table 3: Response time distribution characteristics for the setting based on the real data from the city of
Atlanta described in Section 5.3.
Policy
Avg.
Response
Avg.
Overflows
q = 0.75
Response
q = 0.95
Response
Real
11.7(5.62)
11017.8
16
22
Heuristic
11.4(5.73)
10420.5
15
21
Patrol
11.3(5.74)
10718.5
15
21
Dispatch
9.50(6.91)
9919.2
12
22
Joint
9.39(6.66)
9217.2
12
22
Figure 11 reveals that the unfair (ρlarge = 1.0) policy has a large discrepancy in average response throughout
training, which is not the case for the fair policy. Both policies can experience similar coverage ratios, but
this can come at a cost to a balanced or effective response.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Figure 9: In (a), response time distributions are visualized for the application to the setting based on the
city of Atlanta described in Section 5.3. Similarly, (b) displays the distributions of incidents lost per episode.
5.3
Southwest Atlanta Beats
Environment Setting.
The graph environment in this experiment is based upon a 3-beat region in
Southwest Atlanta, which is discretized into 154 rectangular partitions representing nodes on the spatial
graph. See Figure 8(a); the patches are selected based on APD patroller trajectory data discretized into 1-
minute intervals. The patches are constructed such that observed trajectories take approximately 1 iteration
(i.e., 1 minute) to travel between adjacent patches. In Figure 8(b), the resultant graph is shown, which is
divided into three beats with one patroller per beat. Finally, as shown in Figure 8(c), incidents are spatially
distributed according to a distribution estimated given the ∼90k APD calls-for-service from January 1, 2009
to January 8, 2012. The temporal intensity λ = 0.25 per iteration and service time β = 5 iterations.
Real Policy.
An additional baseline is developed for this setting based on limited APD patroller trajectory
data. That is, divided into 1-minute time intervals, APD patroller trajectories over a 2-day interval are
tracked along the graph structure. Transitions to adjacent nodes are counted, and the resultant policy ranks
potential actions according to the frequency with which each edge was traversed in the real trajectory data.
This is denoted the “Real Policy,” and can reflect some information about how the police patrol in practice.
This policy also uses a first come, first serve queue for dispatch.
Modeling & Optimization.
Joint optimization is conducted using nouter = 8 with ninner,ϕ = 10 and
ninner,θ = 5 with 0 warm-start iterations.
The dispatch networks are trained using ndispatch = 10, 000
simulated transitions per inner loop iteration, while all other optimization parameters for patrol and dispatch
are identical to those described in Section 5.1. For comparison, patrol-only optimization uses ninner,θ = 40
and dispatch-only optimization uses ninner,ϕ = 80. As before, the patrol- and dispatch-only optimization
parameters are identical to those of the joint optimization.
Results.
In Figure 9 and Table 3, the response time distributions for each policy are represented over
nepisodes = 100 episodes. While the jointly-optimized policy has the fastest response on average, the overall
response time distribution characteristics are similar to those of the dispatch-only optimized policy. However,
as shown in Figure 9(b), the jointly-optimized policy loses substantially fewer incidents per episode than the
other policies, indicating that it is the most effective overall policy. Moreover, the jointly-optimized policy
leads to faster response and fewer incidents lost than the realistic policy. This suggests that (joint) policy
optimization can lead to substantial improvements when applied to real-world environments.
14


--- Page 15 ---
6
Conclusion
We have outlined a novel procedure for the joint optimization policies for patrol and dispatch using MARL.
The patrol policies are learned using deep Q-learning with parameter sharing, and the dispatch policies are
learned using a policy iteration scheme based on MIP action selection. These policies are combined in a joint
optimization procedure that follows a coordinate-descent-style scheme, iteratively updating patrol policies
given fixed dispatch policy and vice versa. Within this framework, we extend previous works addressing
combinatorial action selection in RL via an MIP approach, where our novel procedure facilitates action
selection in settings with stochastic state transitions. We comprehensively demonstrate that policies learned
using this joint optimization approach outperform those optimized for patrol or dispatch alone, in addition
to heuristics such as random patrol and priority-queue-based dispatch.
The experiments of Section 5.1 reveal that the joint optimization procedure is robust to settings with a
range of incident arrival dynamics. In the high call volume setting, the jointly-optimized policy performs
similarly to the dispatch-only optimized policy. In the low call volume setting, the jointly-optimized policy
performs similarly to the patrol-only optimized policy. The jointly-optimized policy is the only policy to
perform effectively in both settings. In Section 5.2, a modified reward is used to obtain more fair policies
than those trained “greedily”. The results reveal that our procedure is flexible to the reward definition and
can generate policies that yield more balanced responses and coverage across groups. While there is still
much room for improvement according to the equity-based metrics, this represents a promising direction
for further research within the framework of joint policy optimization. Finally, Section 5.3 suggests that
the outlined method applies to real-world scenarios by applying joint policy optimization to a setting based
on Southwest Atlanta. A comparison to a realistic policy based on real patroller trajectory data reveals
significant improvements in response time distribution characteristics due to policy optimization; particularly,
jointly-optimized policies for patrol and dispatch are most effective.
Future work can incorporate additional incident-level information in the decision-making process. For
instance, the experiment of Section 5.2 indicates that the encoding of group attributes in the reward can
lead to a more equitable response. As with prior works considering fairness in police patrol and dispatch,
incidents can also include information regarding socioeconomic and racial status, going beyond the geographic
location-based fairness demonstrated in this work. Algorithmically, future research can also focus on the
incorporation of fairness into the learning procedure itself, drawing inspiration from prior work on fairness in
learning for contextual bandits (Joseph et al. 2016) and RL (Jabbari et al. 2017). Such studies require that
certain equity constraints are satisfied throughout the learning process, which could be relevant to online
learning of policies for patrol and dispatch.
Acknowledgement
This work is partially supported by an NSF CAREER CCF-1650913, NSF DMS-2134037, CMMI-2015787,
CMMI-2112533, DMS-1938106, DMS-1830210, and the Coca-Cola Foundation.
References
Almeida A, Ramalho G, Santana H, Tedesco P, Menezes T, Corruble V, Chevaleyre Y (2004) Recent advances on
multi-agent patrolling. Advances in Artificial Intelligence–SBIA 2004: 17th Brazilian Symposium on Artificial
Intelligence, Sao Luis, Maranhao, Brazil, September 29-Ocotber 1, 2004. Proceedings 17, 474–483 (Springer).
Atlanta Police Department (2023) APD Zones. Accessed Mar. 27, 2023 [Online], URL https://www.atlantapd.org/
community/apd-zones.
Barocas S, Hardt M, Narayanan A (2017) Fairness in machine learning. Nips tutorial 1:2017.
Bertsekas D (2019) Reinforcement learning and optimal control (Athena Scientific).
Bradtke SJ, Barto AG (1996) Linear least-squares algorithms for temporal difference learning. Machine learning
22(1-3):33–57.
Charalambous
P
(2023)
’vicious
cycle’:
Inside
the
police
recruiting
crunch
with
resignations
on
the
rise.
ABC
News
URL
https://abcnews.go.com/US/
police-departments-face-vicious-cycle-challenges-retaining-recruiting/story?id=98363458.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Chen D, Li Z, Wang Y, Jiang L, Wang Y (2021) Deep multi-agent reinforcement learning for highway on-ramp
merging in mixed traffic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.05701 .
Chevaleyre Y (2004) Theoretical analysis of the multi-agent patrolling problem. Proceedings. IEEE/WIC/ACM In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Agent Technology, 2004.(IAT 2004)., 302–308 (IEEE).
Christianos F, Papoudakis G, Rahman MA, Albrecht SV (2021) Scaling multi-agent reinforcement learning with
selective parameter sharing. International Conference on Machine Learning, 1989–1998 (PMLR).
Chu X, Ye H (2017) Parameter sharing deep deterministic policy gradient for cooperative multi-agent reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.00336 .
Delarue A, Anderson R, Tjandraatmadja C (2020) Reinforcement learning with combinatorial actions: An application
to vehicle routing. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:609–620.
Dickson ES, Gordon SC, Huber GA (2022) Identifying legitimacy: Experimental evidence on compliance with au-
thority. Science Advances 8(7):eabj7377.
Dunnett S, Leigh J, Jackson L (2019) Optimising police dispatch for incident response in real time. Journal of the
Operational Research Society 70(2):269–279.
Eckhouse L, Lum K, Conti-Cook C, Ciccolini J (2019) Layers of bias: A unified approach for understanding problems
with risk assessment. Criminal Justice and Behavior 46(2):185–209.
Farinelli A, Iocchi L, Nardi D (2017) Distributed on-line dynamic task assignment for multi-robot patrolling. Au-
tonomous Robots 41:1321–1345.
Green L (1984) A multiple dispatch queueing model of police patrol operations. Management science 30(6):653–664.
Guedes R, Furtado V, Pequeno T (2015) Multi-objective evolutionary algorithms and multiagent models for optimiz-
ing police dispatch. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 37–42
(IEEE).
Gupta JK, Egorov M, Kochenderfer M (2017) Cooperative multi-agent control using deep reinforcement learning.
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: AAMAS 2017 Workshops, Best Papers, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil, May
8-12, 2017, Revised Selected Papers 16, 66–83 (Springer).
Hermann P (2023) D.c. police staffing reaches half-century low as homicides rise. The Washington Post URL https:
//www.washingtonpost.com/dc-md-va/2023/04/15/dc-police-staffing-crime/.
Jabbari S, Joseph M, Kearns M, Morgenstern J, Roth A (2017) Fairness in reinforcement learning. International
conference on machine learning, 1617–1626 (PMLR).
Jana M, Vachhani L, Sinha A (2022) A deep reinforcement learning approach for multi-agent mobile robot patrolling.
International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications 6(4):724–745.
Joseph M, Kearns M, Morgenstern JH, Roth A (2016) Fairness in learning: Classic and contextual bandits. Advances
in neural information processing systems 29.
Kaste M (2023) Why data from 15 cities shows police response times are taking longer (accessed April 30,
2024). Https://www.npr.org/2023/01/17/1149455678/why-data-from-15-cities-show-police-response-times-are-
taking-longer.
Liberatore F, Camacho-Collados M, Quijano-S´anchez L (2022) Equity in the police districting problem: balancing
territorial and racial fairness in patrolling operations. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 38(3):1–25.
Liberatore F, Camacho-Collados M, Quijano-S´anchez L (2023) Towards social fairness in smart policing: Leveraging
territorial, racial, and workload fairness in the police districting problem. Socio-Economic Planning Sciences
87:101556.
Littman ML (1994) Markov games as a framework for multi-agent reinforcement learning. Machine learning proceed-
ings 1994, 157–163 (Elsevier).
Machado A, Ramalho G, Zucker JD, Drogoul A (2003) Multi-agent patrolling: An empirical analysis of alternative
architectures. Multi-Agent-Based Simulation II: Third International Workshop, MABS 2002 Bologna, Italy,
July 15–16, 2002 Revised Papers, 155–170 (Springer).
Mnih V, Kavukcuoglu K, Silver D, Rusu AA, Veness J, Bellemare MG, Graves A, Riedmiller M, Fidjeland AK,
Ostrovski G, et al. (2015) Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature 518(7540):529–533.
Notre Dame Police Department (2024) Equity in policing. URL https://police.nd.edu/equity-in-policing/.
Parker Police Department (2024) Equitable and fair policing practices. URL http://parkerpd.org/2041/
Equitable-and-Fair-Policing.
Portugal D, Couceiro MS, Rocha RP (2013) Applying bayesian learning to multi-robot patrol. 2013 IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue Robotics (SSRR), 1–6 (IEEE).
16


--- Page 17 ---
Portugal D, Rocha R (2010) Msp algorithm: multi-robot patrolling based on territory allocation using balanced graph
partitioning. Proceedings of the 2010 ACM symposium on applied computing, 1271–1276.
Santana H, Ramalho G, Corruble V, Ratitch B (2004) Multi-agent patrolling with reinforcement learning. Autonomous
Agents and Multiagent Systems, International Joint Conference on, volume 4, 1122–1129 (IEEE Computer
Society).
Stanford DA, Taylor P, Ziedins I (2014) Waiting time distributions in the accumulating priority queue. Queueing
Systems 77:297–330.
Sutton RS, Barto AG (2018) Reinforcement learning: An introduction (MIT press).
Tampuu A, Matiisen T, Kodelja D, Kuzovkin I, Korjus K, Aru J, Aru J, Vicente R (2017) Multiagent cooperation
and competition with deep reinforcement learning. PloS one 12(4):e0172395.
Tan M (1993) Multi-agent reinforcement learning: Independent vs. cooperative agents. Proceedings of the tenth
international conference on machine learning, 330–337.
Terry JK, Grammel N, Son S, Black B (2020) Parameter sharing for heterogeneous agents in multi-agent reinforcement
learning. arXiv e-prints arXiv–2005.
The Associated Press (2023) The u.s. is experiencing a police hiring crisis. NBC News URL https://www.nbcnews.
com/news/us-news/us-experiencing-police-hiring-crisis-rcna103600.
Waldschmidt
R
(2018)
Perspective:
Fairness
in
law
enforcement.
URL
https://leb.fbi.gov/articles/
perspective/perspective-fairness-in-law-enforcement.
Walker J (2023) The importance of equity in policing our community. URL https://today.uconn.edu/2023/04/
the-importance-of-equity-in-policing-our-community/#.
Watkins CJCH (1989) Learning from delayed rewards. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.
Wheeler AP (2020) Allocating police resources while limiting racial inequality. Justice quarterly 37(5):842–868.
Yu J, Vincent JA, Schwager M (2022) Dinno: Distributed neural network optimization for multi-robot collaborative
learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7(2):1896–1903.
Zhang H, Jackson L, Tako A, Liu J (2016) A simulation of a police patrol service system with multi-grade time-varying
incident arrivals. Proceedings of the Operational Research Society Simulation Workshop 2016.
17


--- Page 18 ---
A
Model Selection
A.1
Model Selection in Section 5.1
In the experiments of Section 5.1, the desired policy is that which responds to incidents most efficiently. As
such, the average response time is tracked over nepisodes = 100 of on-policy validation simulation over the
course of optimization for each of the three optimized policies in each setting. This is depicted for the high
call volume setting in Figure 10(a), which demonstrates that the policies corresponding to the minimum
average response time are the jointly-optimized policy after iteration 22, the patrol-only optimized policy
after iteration 15, and the dispatch-only optimized policy after iteration 9. Similarly, in the low call volume
setting depicted in Figure 10(b), the selected policies are the jointly-optimized policy after iteration 35, the
patrol-only optimized policy after iteration 19, and the dispatch-only optimized policy after iteration 7.
A.2
Model Selection in Section 5.2
In the experiment of Section 5.2, the goal is to find a policy that minimizes the difference in average response
time between the two groups while balancing coverage. The characteristics of the “unfair” (ρlarge = 1.0)
policy over the course of training are depicted in Figure 11(a), where coverage is computed using nepisodes =
25 on-policy validation simulations in each iteration, and response time characteristics are computed over
nepisodes = 100 simulations (the same is true of the “fair” policy in Figure 11(b)). With the goal of this section
in mind, the unfairly selected policy corresponds to iteration 66, which has a minimal average difference in
response time and comparable coverage to the heuristic policy. The fair policy is chosen similarly - the goal is
to balance fair response and fair coverage while still yielding an “effective policy”. With this in mind, while
iteration 23 corresponds to the most balanced average response in the top panel of Figure 11(b), the policy
is not “effective” since there is a very large number of incident queue overflows (bottom panel). Therefore,
the fair (ρlarge = 0.5) policy used in Section 5.2 corresponds to the optimized policy after iteration 36, which
improves upon the balancing of average response time (second panel) while maintaining few overflows of the
incident queue (bottom panel) and yielding a better coverage ratio (top panel).
A.3
Model Selection in Section 5.3
Just as in Section 5.1 and Appendix A.1, in the experiment of Section 5.3, the policy is selected to minimize
the average response time. Therefore, this metric is tracked over nepisodes = 100 on-policy simulated episodes
throughout the optimization of each policy. This is visualized in Figure 12, indicating that the optimal
policies are those after iteration 110 for the jointly-optimized policy, after iteration 33 for the patrol-only
optimized policy, and after iteration 77 for the dispatch-only optimized policy.
18


--- Page 19 ---
Figure 10: In the experiments of Section 5.1, the goal is to generate a policy that efficiently responds to
incidents. The average response time is tracked over the course of training using nepisodes = 100 validation
simulations per iteration, and the policy with the lowest average response time is selected.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Figure 11: In the experiments of Section 5.2, the goal is to balance response time and coverage across groups.
These metrics are tracked through training for the “unfair” policy in (a) and the “fair” policy in (b). In
each case, the optimized networks are selected to balance these two metrics (first and second rows), subject
to constraints on the effectiveness of the policies (third and fourth rows).
20


--- Page 21 ---
Figure 12: As with the first set of experiments, in the experiment of Section 5.3, the average response time is
computed using nepisodes = 100 validation simulations per iteration of training. The fastest-average-response
policy is selected, subject to a constraint that the average number of overflows is less than 1.25 times that
of the heuristic policy.
21
