--- Page 1 ---
A Graph-Enhanced Deep-Reinforcement Learning Framework for the
Aircraft Landing Problem
Vatsal K. Marua,∗
aInformation Systems, Jindal School of Management, The University of Texas at Dallas, 800 W Campbell Rd, JSOM
Office 4.414, Richardson, TX 75080, USA.
Abstract
The Aircraft Landing Problem (ALP) is one of the challenging problems in aircraft transportation
and management. The challenge is to schedule the arriving aircraft in a sequence so that the cost and
delays are optimized. There are various solution approaches to solving this problem, most of which
are based on operations research algorithms and meta-heuristics. Although traditional methods
perform better on one or the other factors, there remains a problem of solving real-time rescheduling
and computational scalability altogether. This paper presents a novel deep reinforcement learning
(DRL) framework that combines graph neural networks with actor-critic architectures to address
the ALP. This paper introduces three key contributions: A graph-based state representation that
efficiently captures temporal and spatial relationships between aircraft, a specialized actor-critic
architecture designed to handle multiple competing objectives in landing scheduling, and a runway
balance strategy that ensures efficient resource utilization while maintaining safety constraints. The
results show that the trained algorithm can be tested on different problem sets and the results are
competitive to operation research algorithms. The experimental results on standard benchmark
data sets demonstrate a 99.95% reduction in computational time compared to Mixed Integer
Programming (MIP) and 38% higher runway throughput over First Come First Serve (FCFS)
approaches. Therefore, the proposed solution is competitive to traditional approaches and achieves
substantial advancements. Notably, it does not require retraining, making it particularly suitable for
industrial deployment. The framework’s capability to generate solutions within <1 second enables
real-time rescheduling, addressing critical requirements of air traffic management.
Keywords:
aircraft landing problem (ALP), deep reinforcement learning (DRL), graph neural
networks (GNN), air traffic management (ATM), runway optimization, real-time scheduling
1. Introduction
The aircraft landing problem (ALP) is one of the scheduling problems in the sequencing of
aircraft on runways. The ALP focuses primarily on arriving aircraft. With global air traffic
projected to exceed 9 billion passengers by 2025 [1], and major hubs like Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
International Airport handling nearly 96 million passengers annually [2], efficient runway utilization
has become essential to maintain operational safety and minimize delays. The resulting air traffic
∗Corresponding author. ORCID: 0000-0002-8210-879X
Email address: vatsal.maru@utdallas.edu (Vatsal K. Maru)
arXiv:2502.12617v2  [cs.LG]  18 Mar 2025


--- Page 2 ---
on runways [3] leaves airports with two possible options: expanding the infrastructure or optimizing
the existing infrastructure to meet the growing demand. Even if airports expand the infrastructure,
it is not a quick process to build runways, which leaves airport authorities and Air Traffic Control
(ATC) with optimization problems. A frequent scheduling technique the ATC uses is First Come
First Serve (FCFS) [4, 5]. FCFS technique sequences the aircraft for arrival based on the arrival
aircraft’s entry to the radar range. As the aircraft enters the predetermined radar window, the
ATC allocates a scheduled time window for an aircraft to land.
The problem’s complexity stems from multiple interacting constraints and objectives: wake
vortex separation requirements, time window restrictions, and the need to minimize both delay costs
and fuel consumption [6]. Given the size and complexity of the problem that requires computing
a schedule of arriving aircraft on runways, researchers have tried to optimize delays and costs by
implementing different solution approaches. [7] proposed a Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP)
approach for the ALP and included different penalties for early and late landings of the aircraft
than the scheduled landing time. They have managed a standardized OR-Library of the problem
set at http://people.brunel.ac.uk/˜mastjjb/jeb/orlib/airlandinfo.html. Improving upon
the static case, the authors further expanded the MIP formulation to include a dynamic case
where they incorporated displacement constraints [8]. [9] developed a simplex-based solution
approach for the ALP. part from the MIP solution approach, there are other operations research-
based solutions, heuristics and meta-heuristics solutions, and ensemble approaches consisting of
different combinations of the above methods. Literature also consists of dynamic programming and
learning-based algorithms for the ALP. An overview of these methods is provided in the section 2.
In the ALP, various formulations consist of a few common constraints across the literature. Some
of those constraints are time window constraints, and separation constraints given the category of
an aircraft. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) has defined the vertical and
longitudinal separation constraints [10]. These constraints help maintain the aircraft’s aerodynamic
stability and enhance the overall safety of the operation. There is a Wake Vortex (WV) separation
that clarifies the separation of different aircraft based on the categorical classification: Super
Heavy (S), Heavy (H), Medium (M), and Light (L). S category is only for the Aircraft - Airbus
A380-800. There are further suggestions and improvements over this existing classification by the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) as there are multiple factors that account for separation
requirements, e.g., weather conditions. The time window includes the earliest possible time and the
latest possible time. Depending on the aircraft’s actual landing time and its difference from the
scheduled landing time, the penalties are calculated [7].
Heuristic and metaheuristic algorithms often do not provide results as optimal as those produced
by operations research methods. However, their computational efficiency can be competitive, making
them attractive for real-world applications. This paper aims to address the shortcomings of certain
traditional approaches, such as scalability issues and the lack of generalization and consistency
in solutions. Due to these limitations, many methods in the literature face challenges in modern
industrial environments. For example, given the dynamic nature of aircraft arrivals, real-time
rescheduling is essential. If an algorithm requires significant computational time to update the
schedule—even if it produces optimal results—its practical usefulness may be limited. This concern
may explain why the FCFS approach is still in use today.
The important contribution of this paper is a new way of approaching the ALP using Deep
Reinforcement Learning (DRL). Given the recent successes of DRL in DeepMind’s AlphaGo,
AlphaZero, AlphaStar, and OpenAI’s O1 model, there is an increased interest in assessing and
2


--- Page 3 ---
observing new algorithms and their results of problems such as ALP. This paper uses an Actor-
Critic DRL architecture combining graph neural networks (GNNs) with policy optimization for
modeling the relationship structures between the aircraft and the constraints it should follow.
This architecture helps in capturing both spatial and temporal aspects of runway scheduling. The
architecture focuses on a time-varying perturbation mechanism that adaptively balances exploration
and exploitation throughout the learning process to ensure efficient utilization of the runway while
maintaining separation constraints. The proposed solution is tested on a standardized dataset for
comprehensive comparison and evaluation. Detailed formulation and algorithm are provided in
section 3 of this paper.
The next sections of the paper are organized as follows. Section 2 explains the ALP in detail
and the differences between the standardized dataset and the particular instances of the dataset
used in this paper. This section also provides an overview of existing methods and literature. In
section 3, the DRL formulation is provided. Which is followed by section 4 that discusses the results
of algorithm’s performance on standardized dataset and it’s comparisons with different algorithms
on selected instances. Section 5 offers the conclusion and future directions of the research problem
and potential solutions.
2. Background and Problem Definition
This section will address the ALP problem definition, data instances, and existing approaches
from various fields.
2.1. Problem Definition
The Aircraft Landing Problem (ALP) represents a critical operational challenge in air traffic
management. At its core, ALP involves determining optimal landing times for arriving aircraft
while satisfying multiple operational constraints and minimizing various cost factors [11]. Consider
a set of aircraft A = {1, 2, ..., n} to be scheduled for landing on a runway. For each aircraft i ∈A:
• Ti: Target landing time
• Ei: Earliest possible landing time
• Li: Latest possible landing time
• c+
i : Penalty cost per unit time for landing after Ti
• c−
i : Penalty cost per unit time for landing before Ti
• wi: Wake turbulence category (Heavy/Medium/Light)
For any pair of aircraft (i, j) landing consecutively:
• sij: Minimum separation time based on wake vortex categories
• δij: Binary variable indicating if i lands before j
• αi: Time units landed before target time
• βi: Time units landed after target time
The primary decision variable for each aircraft i is:
• xi: Actual landing time xi ∈[Ei, Li]
3


--- Page 4 ---
2.1.1. Objective Function
Minimize the total weighted deviation from target times:
min
n
X
i=1
(c−
i αi + c+
i βi)
(1)
2.1.2. Constraints
Ei ≤xi ≤Li,
∀i ∈A
(2)
δij + δji = 1,
∀i, j ∈A, i ̸= j
(3)
xj −xi ≥sijδij,
∀i, j ∈A, i ̸= j
(4)
xi −Ti = βi −αi,
∀i ∈A
(5)
0 ≤αi ≤Ti −Ei,
∀i ∈A
(6)
0 ≤βi ≤Li −Ti,
∀i ∈A
(7)
δij = 1,
∀(i, j) ∈P
(8)
xj −xi ≥sij + b,
∀i, j ∈A, i ̸= j, δij = 1
(9)
xi ≥0,
∀i ∈A
(10)
αi, βi ≥0,
∀i ∈A
(11)
δij ∈{0, 1},
∀i, j ∈A, i ̸= j
(12)
The separation times sij are defined according to ICAO standards based on the wake turbulence
categories of the leading and following aircraft. Table 2 shows different combinations of separation
times between leading and following aircraft provided in [11]. For example, if aircraft i is Heavy
and aircraft j is Light, then sij = 240 seconds. For any pair of aircraft (i, j) landing consecu-
tively, a minimum separation time sij must be maintained based on aircraft weight categories
(Heavy/Medium/Light) and landing sequence (leading vs following aircraft). The primary decision
variable for each aircraft i is actual landing time ti ∈[Ei, Li]. The objective is to minimize the total
cost of deviations from target times as provided in the objective function.
Objetive funciton is constrained to certain operational requirements and safety consideration.
The time window constraint (2) ensures each aircraft lands within its operational limits. The landing
sequence constraints (3) establish the binary relationship between any pair of aircraft. For each pair
(i, j), either aircraft i lands before j (δij = 1) or j lands before i (δji = 1). This constraint creates a
4


--- Page 5 ---
well-defined ordering of landings, essential for maintaining separation requirements and operational
control [12]. The wake vortex separation constraint (4) is critical for safety. It enforces minimum
time separation between consecutive landings based on the wake turbulence categories of the aircraft
involved. These separations are mandated by aviation authorities and are non-negotiable safety
requirements. The values of sij vary according to ICAO standards, with larger separations required
when a smaller aircraft follows a larger one [11]. Different combinations of separation is provided in
Table 2.
Constraints (5)-(6) model the deviation from target times, which is central to the cost calculation.
The deviation is categorized into earliness (αi) and lateness (βi) parameters, allowing different
penalty costs to be applied. This separation is particularly important, as early and late arrivals often
have different operational and economic implications [13]. The standardized data used to test the
proposed solution consist of delay cost penalties, provided in Table 1. Constraint (7) is a precedence
constraint. For ordered pairs of aircraft (i, j) ∈P where P is the set of precedence relationships. The
safety buffer constraint (8) adds an additional layer of protection beyond the minimum separation
requirements, where b is the minimum safety buffer time. This buffer b helps absorb minor variations
in approach speeds and compensates for weather conditions or other operational uncertainties.
It represents a practical enhancement to the theoretical minimum separations [6]. In proposed
solution, these can be modified to any desired value during testing and implementation. Lastly, the
non-negativity and binary constraints (9) ensure solution’s mathematical feasibility. The formulation
captures the essential elements of the ALP. Separation of penalties into early and late arrival allows
for more nuanced cost modeling, reflecting the reality that early arrivals may be less costly than
delays [7, 11].
2.2. Standardized Data and Instances
This subsection discusses standardized datasets in the ALP, emphasizing their evolution in
capturing operational complexity. This dataset standardization provides researchers with a robust
foundation by enabling objective comparisons of algorithmic performance – a crucial step toward
real-world implementation. This comparison is useful for series of downstream decisions in aircraft
operations, such as the required memory space, expected runway throughput, etc.
The OR-
Library [7] dominated early ALP research with synthetic instances featuring homogeneous aircraft
distributions (3 wake turbulence categories), static separation matrices independent of ICAO
regulations, linear penalty structures for time deviations, fixed 30-minute time windows ([Ti−15, Ti+
15]), and scalability up to 500 aircraft for theoretical analysis. OR-Library instances of the ALP
can be found here https://people.brunel.ac.uk/˜mastjjb/jeb/orlib/airlandinfo.html.
OR-Library instances provided a standardized test for ALP algorithms for a considerable
time. However, while enabling foundational algorithmic comparisons, OR-Library instances exhibit
critical operational shortcomings. Some of those limitations include cost models lacking tiered
delay penalties, absence of real-world traffic patterns, separation time inconsistencies involving
ICAO/EUROCONTROL standards, etc. Addressing these limitations, to resemble real-life scenarios,
[11] introduced subset of Paris-Orly Airport (LFPO) operations from [14] as a standardized dataset,
featuring tiered delay penalties 1, and ICAO-compliant separations 2. Their data includes certain
patterns of peak traffic hours at the Paris-Orly airport (LFPO). Data can be found at https://
data.recherche.enac.fr/ikli-alp/. The dataset incorporates ICAO wake turbulence categories
with realistic distributions (2, in their paper [11], they provide detailed calculations of separation
times between the leading and following aircraft. The data satisfies two critical components of this
research: real-life data, and standardized to compare our algorithmmic performance.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Table 1: Cost Structure in Ikli Dataset
Time Period (sec)
Cost Coefficient
0-300
cost 300
301-900
cost 900
901-1800
cost 1800
1800-3600
cost 3600
Table 2: Separation Requirements (seconds)
Leading/Following
Heavy
Medium
Light
Heavy
96
157
240
Medium
60
69
156
Light
60
69
82
Each instance in the [11] dataset contains unique identifier (sr), aircraft model (mdl), wake
turbulence category, scheduled arrival time (sta), actual arrival time (ata), four-tier cost coeffi-
cients. This enhanced dataset provides a more challenging and realistic test for evaluating the
ALP scheduling algorithms, particularly for assessing their practical applicability in operational
environments.
2.3. Existing Solution Approaches and Research Landscape
The aircraft landing problem has attracted significant research attention across multiple disci-
plines, resulting in diverse methodological approaches. This section provides a critical analysis of
four major research directions, examining their technical contributions and operational limitations.
2.3.1. Operations Research Approaches
The foundational work by [7] established the modern formulation of ALP through mixed-integer
programming (MIP), introducing distinct early/late penalty costs and creating the OR-Library
benchmark dataset. Their static formulation considered single-runway scenarios with fixed separation
matrices, demonstrating optimal solutions for instances up to 50 aircraft using branch-and-bound
methods. The authors later extended this to dynamic scenarios [8] through displacement constraints
that allowed limited schedule adjustments, though at the cost of quadratic growth in binary variables.
[9] developed a simplex-based solution approach that laid groundwork for linear programming
relaxations in ALP.
Subsequent noteworthy operations research solutions addressed specific operational constraints.
For example, [15] developed time-indexed formulations with valid inequalities that improved solution
quality for medium-sized instances. [16] proposed column generation techniques for multi-runway
systems, demonstrating improved computational efficiency. Furthermore, [17] introduced symmetry-
breaking constraints that enhanced the performance of CPLEX for larger instances. While these
exact methods guarantee optimality, their computational complexity limits practical application to
real-time scenarios. Recent benchmarks show CPLEX requires significant time for large instances,
making pure MIP approaches unsuitable for dynamic environments and real-time use cases.
6


--- Page 7 ---
2.3.2. Heuristic and Metaheuristic Innovations
Metaheuristic approaches emerged to address scalability challenges, particularly for large-scale
instances. [13] pioneered a hybrid Simulated Annealing-MIP approach combining local search
with exact neighborhood evaluation. Their variable neighborhood descent mechanism showed
improvements in solution quality while maintaining computational efficiency compared to pure MIP.
[6] later enhanced this approach with iterated local search components. [18] developed a population-
based scatter search method with adaptive reference sets, which incorporates path relinking to
maintain solution diversity.
Their bionomic algorithm variant introduced ecological selection
pressures, showing promise for larger instances. [19] proposed novel hybrid heuristics specifically for
single-runway scenarios. Using iterated local search [20] achieved promising results through dynamic
perturbation strength adaptation.
Their self-tuning mechanism alternated between insertion
and swap operators based on solution landscape characteristics, demonstrating improvements
over static ILS implementations. [21] developed a tabu search methodology with multiple runway
constraints, demonstrating effective prevention of cycling through memory structures while achieving
competitive solution quality for instances up to 25 aircraft. Despite these advances, metaheuristics
face reproducibility challenges – [6] showed solution quality variance across random seeds for
identical instances. This stochasticity complicates deployment in safety-critical aviation systems.
2.3.3. Dynamic and Constraint Programming Approaches
Real-time scheduling requirements motivated temporal decomposition strategies in the ALP.
[22] implemented a sliding window approach with look-ahead horizons in their rolling horizon
optimization. Their aircraft grouping strategy showed potential for reducing problem dimensionality
while maintaining constraint satisfaction rates. [23] extended this work with adaptive horizon
adjustments. [24] approached ALP with Constrained Position Shifting (CPS). They developed
dynamic programming with CPS ≤3, enabling polynomial-time solutions for FAA-compliant
scenarios. Later extensions [25] incorporated aircraft class-specific shifting limits, showing potential
for improved runway utilization. [26] formulated runway sequencing as a cumulative scheduling
problem with holding pattern constraints. Their edge-finding propagators showed promise for
separation compliance but required airport-specific tuning of search strategies. [27] proposed
constraint relaxation techniques that improved computational efficiency for large instances. These
methods excel in specific operational contexts but struggle with generalizability across different
airport configurations and traffic patterns.
2.3.4. Machine Learning Methodologies
As the aircraft planning involves varieties of problems at different levels (strategic, tactical,
and operational) [28], certain noteworthy machine learning approaches are discussed here. Recent
machine learning approaches attempt to balance optimality with computational efficiency. [29] used
Q-Learning for Departure Management, and demonstrated potential for reducing taxi times using
discrete state-action spaces. However, their tabular representation faced scalability challenges for
larger scenarios. [30] pioneered Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) for aircraft sequencing using
convolutional networks on spatial-temporal grids. Their approach showed promise in decision times
but faced challenges in constraint satisfaction. [31] combined particle swarm optimization with
neural cost predictors in their hybrid neuro-symbolic methods, showing potential for reducing fuel
consumption through aerodynamic wake modeling. [32] developed specialized genetic operators
for runway configuration optimization. [33] introduced preference models balancing airline costs
and ATC workload in their multi-stakeholder optimization, while [34] addressed winter operations
7


--- Page 8 ---
through integrated de-icing scheduling. While promising, these early learning approaches either
sacrificed constraint guarantees or required extensive manual engineering for state representation.
Recent advances in neural architectures have shown promise for complex air traffic control tasks. [35]
demonstrated transformer networks’ effectiveness in interpreting spoken ATC instructions for flight
trajectory prediction, achieving 92.3% accuracy in instruction parsing through their dual-encoder
architecture. Their work establishes transformers’ ability to process sequential ATC communications
while maintaining temporal relationships in aircraft trajectories, a critical requirement for landing
scheduling system. GNNs have emerged as powerful tools for industrial scheduling challenges. [36]
recently applied GNNs to semiconductor manufacturing scheduling, achieving 18.7% cycle time
reduction through their hierarchical message passing architecture. Their work confirms GNNs’
ability to capture complex resource allocation patterns that are useful in solving the ALP.
3. Methodology
The proposed methodology addresses the aircraft landing problem through a novel combination
of deep reinforcement learning and graph neural networks. This integration allows us to capture
both the temporal aspects of aircraft scheduling and the complex relationships between aircraft
characteristics, separation requirements, and runway constraints.
The approach differs from
traditional optimization methods by learning scheduling policies that can adapt to varying conditions
while maintaining computational efficiency.
3.1. Deep Reinforcement Learning Framework
This paper proposes an ALP solution as a Markov Decision Process (MDP) that is solved using
a graph-enhanced deep reinforcement learning approach. The framework combines graph neural
networks with actor-critic architecture. The effectiveness of reinforcement learning depends heavily
on how we represent the problem state and possible actions. In this formulation, spaces are carefully
designed to capture all relevant operational factors while maintaining tractability. The state space
incorporates both static aircraft characteristics and dynamic scheduling conditions, while the action
space is structured to ensure feasible landing time assignments.
Graph Neural Network
Policy Learning
Input Features
{xi}N
i=1
Graph Structure
G = (V, E)
GNN Encoder
fθ(X, A)
GCN Layers
Aggregation
Hidden State
H ∈RN×d
Actor Network
πθ(a|s)
Critic Network
Vϕ(s)
Landing Time
ti ∼N(µ, σ2)
State Value
V (s)
X
A
H
θ
ϕ
µ, σ
V
Figure 1: Architecture of the proposed GNN-based Actor-Critic network for aircraft landing scheduling. The model
combines graph neural network layers for feature extraction with parallel actor and critic heads for landing time
prediction and value estimation.
8


--- Page 9 ---
3.1.1. State Space
The state space st at time t comprises a set of features for each aircraft i ∈A:
• Normalized scheduled arrival time ¯ts
i ∈[0, 1]
• Aircraft category encoding ci ∈{0, 1, 2} for Heavy/Medium/Light
• Normalized urgency level ¯ui derived from cost coefficients
• Normalized landing time window [ ¯Ei, ¯Li]
• Priority score pi computed as:
pi = ω1¯ui + ω2τi + ω3κi + ω4¯ci
(13)
where:
– τi is time window criticality
– κi is category-based priority
– ¯ci is normalized cost factor
– ω1, ..., ω4 are weighting coefficients
3.1.2. Action Space
For each aircraft i, the action space defines:
ai = ti ∈[Ei, Li]
(14)
where ti represents the assigned landing time within the feasible time window.
3.1.3. Reward Function Design
The reward function incorporates multiple components to guide learning toward optimal schedul-
ing:
R(s, a) = w1Rdelay + w2Rseparation + w3Rthroughput + w4Rsmoothness
(15)
where:
• Rdelay penalizes deviations from target times using the tiered cost structure
• Rseparation provides positive rewards for maintaining required separation
• Rthroughput encourages high runway utilization
• Rsmoothness penalizes rapid changes in landing intervals
The weights w1, . . . , w4 are tuned to balance these objectives, with values:
[w1, w2, w3, w4] = [1.0, 2.0, 0.5, 0.3]
(16)
9


--- Page 10 ---
3.2. Main Algorithm
The overall learning procedure is outlined in Algorithm 1, which coordinates the interaction
between the actor-critic network and the environment:
Algorithm 1 Main Deep Reinforcement Learning Algorithm for ALP
Require: Aircraft data, network parameters, hyperparameters
1: Initialize actor-critic networks with parameters θ, ϕ
2: Initialize environment with aircraft time windows and constraints
3: while training not converged do
4:
Reset environment
5:
s0 ←initial state
6:
done ←False
7:
while not done do
8:
Construct graph G from current state
9:
at ←Actor(st|θ) with exploration ϵt
10:
ti ←Safety-Aware-Landing-Assignment(at)
11:
st+1, rt, done ←Environment(st, ti)
12:
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) in buffer
13:
Update θ, ϕ using stored transitions
14:
st ←st+1
15:
end while
16: end while
The environment step function calculates rewards based on the tiered cost structure:
Algorithm 2 Environment Step Function
Require: Current state st, Action ti
1: Calculate delay di = |ti −Ti|
2: Initialize cost = 0
3: if di ≤300 then
4:
cost = di× cost 300
5: else if di ≤900 then
6:
cost = 300 × cost 300 + (di −300)× cost 900
7: else if di ≤1800 then
8:
cost = 300 × cost 300 + 600 × cost 900 + (di −900)× cost 1800
9: else
10:
cost = 300 × cost 300 + 600 × cost 900 + 900 × cost 1800 + (di −1800)× cost 3600
11: end if
12: reward = -cost + safety bonus
13: Update aircraft landing schedule
14: return next state, reward, done
3.3. Graph Construction and Priority Rules
Graph representation provides an intuitive and powerful way to model relationships between
aircraft in the landing sequence. By representing each aircraft as a node and their scheduling
10


--- Page 11 ---
dependencies as edges, we can leverage graph neural networks to learn complex patterns in aircraft
sequencing. This graph-based approach naturally captures separation requirements and allows the
model to reason about global scheduling constraints.
3.3.1. Graph Structure
For each state st, a fully connected directed graph G = (V, E) where:
• Vertices V represent aircraft, with |V | = n for n aircraft
• Edges E represent potential landing sequence dependencies
• Node features matrix X ∈R|V |×d where d is feature dimension
• Adjacency matrix A ∈R|V |×|V | representing landing sequence relationships
Input Graph
G = (V, E)
GCN Layer 1
H1 = σ(AXW 1)
GCN Layer 2
H2 = σ(AH1W 2)
Node Features
X ∈RN×d
(Time, Category, Priority)
Landing Order Matrix
A ∈RN×N
Graph Embedding
Z ∈RN×d′
Message Passing
Figure 2: Graph neural network architecture showing message passing between aircraft nodes. The GNN encoder
transforms raw aircraft features into a learned representation that captures both spatial and temporal relationships.
3.3.2. Node Feature Construction
Each node i ∈V contains the following features:
xi = [¯ts
i, ci, ¯ui, ¯Ei, ¯Li, pi, ¯li]
(17)
where:
• ¯ts
i: Normalized scheduled time ∈[0, 1]
• ci: One-hot encoded aircraft category
• ¯ui: Normalized urgency
• [ ¯Ei, ¯Li]: Normalized time window
• pi: Priority score
• ¯li: Normalized current landing time (if assigned)
11


--- Page 12 ---
3.3.3. Priority Score Calculation
The priority calculation procedure is outlined in Algorithm 3:
Algorithm 3 Priority Score Calculation
Require: Aircraft i, Cost coefficients, Time window
1: Calculate urgency ¯ui from cost coefficients
2: // 1500 represents 25 minutes in seconds for time window normalization
3: time criticality ←1 −Li−Ei
1500
4: category priority ←1 −ci
2
5: cost factor ←normalize(mean(cost coefficients))
6: priority ←w1¯ui + w2 time criticality +w3 category priority +w4 cost factor
7: return priority
The components are calculated as follows:
1. Time Window Criticality (τi):
τi = 1 −Li −Ei
1500
(18)
2. Category Priority (κi):
κi = 1 −ci
2
(19)
3. Urgency (¯ui):
¯ui =
ui −umin
umax −umin
(20)
4. Cost Factor (¯ci):
¯ci = 1
4
X
k∈K
cik
maxj∈A cjk
(21)
where K = {300s, 900s, 1800s, 3600s} represents the cost tiers. [11] shows the normally time
windows range from 600-900 seconds before and after ’sta’, respectively. Therefore, to incorporate
criticality, the paper uses 1500 seconds of the time window size.
3.3.4. Edge Weight Assignment
For each edge (i, j) ∈E, a weight wij representing the feasibility of aircraft j following aircraft
i:
wij = f(sij, ∆tij, pi, pj)
(22)
where:
• sij: Required separation time
• ∆tij: Time difference between target times
• f(·): Weighting function combining separation and priority factors
12


--- Page 13 ---
3.4. Graph Neural Network Architecture
3.4.1. Message Passing Layers
The graph neural network processes node features through message passing operations:
ml
i =
X
j∈N(i)
MLPθ(hl−1
i
∥hl−1
j
∥eij)
(23)
hl
i = GRU(hl−1
i
, ml
i)
(24)
where ∥denotes feature concatenation, eij represents edge features, and MLPθ is a multi-layer
perceptron with parameters θ. The GRU update mechanism helps maintain temporal dependencies.
The attention mechanism employs scaled dot-product attention:
αij =
exp(eij/√dk)
P
k∈N(i) exp(eik/√dk)
(25)
These operations are implemented in two successive layers:
H1 = σ(AXW 1),
H2 = σ(AH1W 2)
(26)
where σ is the ReLU activation function and W 1, W 2 are learnable weight matrices.
3.4.2. Graph Attention Mechanism
Approach proposes a multi-head attention mechanism:
αk
ij =
exp(ek
ij)
P
l∈Ni exp(ek
il)
(27)
where ek
ij is the attention coefficient for head k between nodes i and j. The graph neural network
architecture enables message passing between aircraft nodes, allowing the model to learn implicit
relationships between aircraft characteristics, separation requirements, and runway constraints.
This learned representation captures complex scheduling patterns that would be difficult to express
in traditional optimization formulations.
3.5. Actor-Critic Network
The actor-critic architecture combines the advantages of both policy-based and value-based
learning. The actor network learns to propose landing times that satisfy operational constraints,
while the critic network evaluates these decisions to guide policy improvement. This dual network
structure helps balance exploration of new scheduling strategies with exploitation of known good
solutions.
3.5.1. Actor Network
The actor network outputs landing time distribution parameters:
[µ, log σ] = fθ(Z)
(28)
Landing time prediction is computed as:
ti = Ei + σ(µi)(Li −Ei)
(29)
13


--- Page 14 ---
Actor Network
Critic Network
Graph Embedding
Z
FC Layer 1
ha = ReLU(W1Z)
FC Layer 2
[µ, log σ] = W2ha
Landing Time
Distribution πθ(t|s)
FC Layer 1
hc = ReLU(V1Z)
FC Layer 2
v = V2hc
State Value
Vϕ(s)
Value Loss
Lv = (r + γV ′ −V )2
Policy Loss
Lπ = −log π(t|s)A(s, a)
Advantage Function:
A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −V (s)
Q(s, a) = r + γV (s′)
θ
ϕ
A(s, a)
Figure 3: Actor-critic network architecture for learning landing policies. The actor network outputs landing time
distributions while the critic estimates state values to guide policy improvement.
The variance parameter σ is clamped to ensure exploration stability:
σ = exp(clamp(log σ, −10, 2)) + ϵ
(30)
where ϵ = 10−5 is added for numerical stability.
3.5.2. Critic Network
State value estimation:
V (s) = gϕ(Z)
(31)
The architecture of both networks consists of fully connected layers with ReLU activations:
• Actor: Input →FC(256) →ReLU →FC(128) →[µ, log σ]
• Critic: Input →FC(256) →ReLU →FC(128) →V (s)
3.6. Policy Learning and Optimization
The policy learning process involves iterative optimization of both actor and critic networks
through carefully structured loss functions and gradient updates. The policy gradient is computed
using the advantage function:
14


--- Page 15 ---
A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −Vϕ(s)
(32)
where Q(s, a) represents the state-action value and Vϕ(s) is the critic’s value estimate.
The actor’s loss function incorporates both the policy gradient and an entropy term to encourage
exploration:
Lactor = −E[log πθ(a|s)A(s, a)] −λH(πθ)
(33)
where λ is the entropy coefficient (set to 0.02 in implementation) and H(πθ) is the policy
entropy.
The critic is trained to minimize the temporal difference error:
Lcritic = E[(rt + γVϕ(st+1) −Vϕ(st))2]
(34)
The implementation uses a time-varying learning rate schedule:
αt = αend + (αstart −αend)e−t/τ
(35)
where αstart = 1e−4, αend = 1e−5, and τ controls the decay rate based on training progress.
3.6.1. Optimization Process
The network parameters are updated using Adam optimizer with gradient clipping:
θt+1 = θt −αt · clip(∇θLtotal, −c, c)
(36)
where Ltotal = Lactor + Lcritic and c = 10.0 is the gradient clipping threshold. The learning rate
αt follows an exponential decay schedule to promote convergence while maintaining exploration
capability in early training stages.
3.7. Training Procedure
The training process is designed to gradually improve scheduling performance while maintaining
safety constraints. Through careful balancing of exploration and exploitation, the model learns to
generate efficient schedules while respecting operational requirements. The time-varying exploration
rate helps the model discover diverse scheduling strategies early in training while focusing on
refinement in later stages.
3.7.1. Loss Functions
Actor and Critic losses are defined as:
Lactor = −E[log πθ(a|s)A(s, a)] −λH(πθ)
(37)
Lcritic = E[(R + γVϕ(s′) −Vϕ(s))2]
(38)
where:
• A(s, a) is the advantage function: A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −Vϕ(s)
• H(πθ) is the policy entropy
15


--- Page 16 ---
• λ = 0.02 is the entropy coefficient
• γ = 0.99 is the discount factor
Algorithm 4 Training Procedure
Require: Batch of transitions (st, at, rt, st+1)
1: Calculate advantages At = rt + γVϕ(st+1) −Vϕ(st)
2: Update critic by minimizing Lcritic
3: Calculate policy gradient using At
4: Update actor by minimizing Lactor
5: Update exploration rate ϵt
3.8. Adaptive Exploration Strategy
The framework employs a sophisticated exploration mechanism that combines ϵ-greedy explo-
ration with parameter noise. The exploration rate ϵt follows a time-varying schedule:
ϵt = ϵend + (ϵstart −ϵend)e−t/τ
(39)
where ϵstart = 0.9 and ϵend = 0.3. Additionally, Gaussian noise is added to the actor’s parameters
during exploration:
θnoisy = θ + σtN(0, I)
(40)
The noise scale σt is adaptively adjusted based on the desired level of action perturbation:
σt = σt−1 · αsign(dtarget−dt)
(41)
where dt is the mean distance between perturbed and original actions, dtarget is the target distance,
and α is the adaptation rate.
3.9. Safety-Aware Sequential Assignment
While deep learning provides powerful optimization capabilities, ensuring strict adherence to
safety constraints is paramount in aviation applications. Proposed solution’s safety-aware assignment
process acts as a bridge between learned policies and operational requirements, guaranteeing that
all proposed schedules maintain mandatory separation times and time window constraints. This
hybrid approach combines the flexibility of learning-based methods with the reliability of rule-based
systems.
3.9.1. Assignment Algorithm
The safety-aware sequential assignment process ensures constraint satisfaction:
16


--- Page 17 ---
Algorithm 5 Safety-Aware Sequential Landing Assignment
Require: Current state st, Predicted landing times {ti}
1: Sort aircraft by priority score
2: for each aircraft i in priority order do
3:
attempts ←0
4:
while attempts < max attempts do
5:
if ValidateSeparation(ti) then
6:
Assign landing time ti
7:
break
8:
else
9:
ti ←AdjustLandingTime(ti)
10:
attempts ←attempts + 1
11:
end if
12:
end while
13:
if attempts = max attempts then
14:
Apply recovery procedure
15:
end if
16: end for
17: return Updated schedule
3.9.2. Separation Validation
The separation validation ensures safety constraints:
Algorithm 6 Validate Separation
Require: Aircraft i, Landing time ti, Schedule
1: for each scheduled aircraft j do
2:
∆t ←|ti −tj|
3:
sreq ←RequiredSeparation(i, j)
4:
if ∆t < sreq + buffer then
5:
return False
6:
end if
7: end for
8: return True
The separation validation process includes a buffer time b for enhanced safety:
∆tij ≥sij + b,
∀i, j ∈A, i ̸= j
(42)
When violations occur, the algorithm iteratively adjusts within [Ei, Li] and attempts 7 times
per aircraft (this number can be modified to satisfy computational efficiency) to find a suitable
arrival time. In given attempts, if there is no feasible arrival time satisfying all the constraints, the
model backtracks to the last feasible state. For enhanced security and weather-affected airports,
the proposed solution can include buffer time as shown in the above equation, e.g., where b is
typically set to 30 seconds in implementation (on top of the separation time). These changes can be
instantaneous. This methodology combines the representation power of graph neural networks with
17


--- Page 18 ---
the decision-making capabilities of reinforcement learning while maintaining operational constraints
and safety requirements. The multi-component architecture ensures both learning efficiency and
operational safety in aircraft landing scheduling.
4. Experimental Results and Analysis
The proposed solution is tested on the Paris-Orly Airport dataset introduced by [11]. The
dataset encompasses four distinct time periods representing different traffic patterns throughout the
day: morning peak (07:00-11:00), mid-day (11:00-15:00), afternoon peak (15:00-19:00), and evening
(19:00-23:00). This diversity in problem instances allows to evaluate this approach under varying
operational conditions and traffic intensities. All experiments were performed on a single machine
(M3 max processor). The implementation was done in Python.
4.1. Training Convergence Analysis
The training process evaluates the model across different scenario sizes, with systematic progres-
sion from smaller to larger aircraft sets. Scenario sizes were configured beginning with 5 aircraft
first, and then progressing with 10 aircraft data size. Third and fourth scenarios had 20, and 30
aircraft, respectively. The training process systematically evaluates the model across increasing
scenario complexities, progressing from 5 aircraft to 30 aircraft, with 4 meta-iterations (scenarios)
and 10,000 episodes per scenario. At each stage, the learning process begins by initializing the
actor-critic networks and environment with the corresponding scenario data. The exploration
strategy employs a time-varying epsilon parameter, starting at 0.9 and decaying to 0.3, which
controls the balance between exploring new solutions and exploiting learned policies. During each
episode, the environment is reset and the network processes the current state through a graph-based
representation capturing aircraft relationships and constraints. For action selection, the model either
explores random feasible landing times or exploits the current policy based on the epsilon value. A
safety-aware landing assignment mechanism validates all scheduling decisions against operational
constraints, including separation requirements and time windows. The network parameters are
updated using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e−4 and gradient clipping at 10.0 to
ensure stable training. The model learns a complex scheduling pattern through progressive training
and enforcing safety constraints.
Figures 4, 5, 6 present the training progression of the DRL framework across 10,000 episodes.
Figures are for all four scenarios. The average delay Fig. 4 show a consistent improvement,
decreasing from an initial delay of more than a minute to approximately half a minute of delay. The
total cost metric (Fig. 5 demonstrates similar convergence behavior, decreasing costs, indicating
effective cost optimization.
The reward signal (Fig.
6 exhibits expected fluctuations during
exploration while maintaining an overall stable learning trajectory. The reward signals exhibit
expected exploration-driven fluctuations while maintaining an overall stable learning trajectory,
indicating successful policy refinement. Training continues until either the maximum number of
episodes is reached or performance plateaus, defined as no improvement in average reward over 500
consecutive episodes.
The distribution of landing delays, illustrated in Figure 7, reveals that the proposed approach
achieves highly concentrated delays in the 0-2 minute range, skewing towards 0 minute. Most
aircraft land within 1 minute of their target time, with the distribution peak occurring at 0.5
minutes. This left-skewed distribution indicates the algorithm’s effectiveness in minimizing delays
while maintaining operational constraints.
18


--- Page 19 ---
(a) Scenario 1 Delays
(b) Scenario 2 Delays
(c) Scenario 3 Delays
(d) Scenario 4 Delays
Figure 4: Delay distribution over 10,000 episodes of training for all four scenarios.
Figure 8 visualizes a representative landing sequence for 30 aircraft, color-coded by wake
turbulence category. The sequence demonstrates effective separation management between different
aircraft categories, particularly evident in the careful spacing after heavy aircraft (red dots). The
gradually increasing slope indicates consistent runway utilization without excessive gaps, while still
maintaining all required separation constraints.
4.2. Comparative Analysis
To establish the effectiveness of the proposed approach, the results are compared with well-
known methods from the industry and literature. These include an exact CPLEX implementation
of the MIP formulation, a Tabu search metaheuristics approach [21], and the industry standard
First-Come-First-Served (FCFS). Given the computational complexities and time requirements
of the MIP implementation, the method uses various approaches of MIP including constraint
positioning shifting (CPS 2 and 3) and relaxations to find feasible solutions. To create a contextual
evaluation metric apart from computational time, cost, and delay metrics, the paper also uses
runway throughput analysis. Runway throughput resembles the [11] approach of finding the aircraft
per hour metric to assess the runway efficiency. Details are provided below.
4.2.1. Runway Throughput Analysis
The runway throughput (RT), a primary efficiency metric, is calculated as:
19


--- Page 20 ---
(a) Scenario 1 Costs
(b) Scenario 2 Costs
(c) Scenario 3 Costs
(d) Scenario 4 Costs
Figure 5: Total costs across training episodes for all four scenarios demonstrating cost optimization behavior.
RT = max
t∈T {N(t, t + 3600)}
(43)
where N(t1, t2) represents the number of aircraft landing between times t1 and t2. This metric
captures the maximum number of aircraft that can be safely accommodated within any one-hour
window. The total operational cost (TC) is computed using a tiered delay structure:
TC =
n
X
i=1
(c300,iδ300,i + c900,iδ900,i + c1800,iδ1800,i + c3600,iδ3600,i)
(44)
where cu,i represents the cost coefficient for time tier u for aircraft i, and δu,i represents the delay
falling within that tier.
The proposed approach achieves close to optimal throughput, representing considerable im-
provements over FCFS. At the same time, the method is able to provide solutions in significantly
less time compared to MIP and Tabu search solutions. Table 3 shows the average metric values
across experiments on the given instances. The algorithm is used over variety of instances, however,
to assess its performance over different runway conditions, the data and instances are carefully
selected. Table 4 shows specific instance from the [11] dataset and values of different metrics for
different methods. These instances are from data files ranging in four time intervals that include
07:00–11:00 , 11:00–15:00, 15:00–19:00, and 19:00–23:00 [11]. Furthermore, instances are then
divided for number of aircrafts from that given time period. For instance, alp 7 30.csv data instance
20


--- Page 21 ---
(a) Scenario 1 Rewards
(b) Scenario 2 Rewards
(c) Scenario 3 Rewards
(d) Scenario 4 Rewards
Figure 6: Total rewards across training episodes for all four scenarios showing learning stability.
Figure 7: Histogram of landing delays showing the distribution of deviations from target times. The concentration of
delays in the 0-2 minute range demonstrates the algorithm’s effectiveness in schedule optimization.
is from data 7 11.csv data file. data 7 11.csv show 07:00–11:00 time interval. In alp 7 30.csv, 7
indicates the beginning time of the time interval, and 30 indicates the number of aircraft in the
data instance. This format continues across data and instance files.
21


--- Page 22 ---
Figure 8: Final landing sequence for 30 aircraft showing the temporal distribution and wake turbulence categories.
The sequence demonstrates effective separation management and runway utilization while respecting operational
constraints.
Figure 9 illustrates the runway throughput across different methods. It is apparent that the
proposed DRL solution is close to the optimal solution consistently compared to Tabu search and
FCFS. This performance of the algorithm shows the feasibility of implementing optimal models
at airports as the model also has low computational times 3, 4. The next section 4.2.2 discusses
further details of combined effect of computational times and increased throughput.
4.2.2. Performance Results
Table 3 presents the comparative performance across different methods. Proposed DRL approach
demonstrates superior performance in terms of both solution quality and computational efficiency.
The throughput enhancement is particularly important during peak hours, where the method
maintains high efficiency while ensuring all safety constraints are satisfied. This is achieved through
the graph neural network’s ability to capture complex temporal dependencies and the actor-critic
architecture’s effective decision-making in high-density scenarios.
Table 3: Performance Comparison Across Methods
Method
Avg. RT
Avg. Cost
Avg. Comp. Time
(ac/hr)
(sec)
DRL (proposed)
47
1478
1.81
MIP
49
1416
> 3600
Tabu Search
43
1593
40.70
FCFS
34
1770
≤0.1
Note: RT = Runway Throughput
Similarly, Table 4 expands on performance results of individual instances. Different methods
are compared over multiple instances. As mentioned above, these instances are selected to provide
diversity of time and traffic conditions. As we can see, the proposed solution takes <1 second for
almost all data instances. For the (large) data files such as data 7 11.csv, the proposed solution
22


--- Page 23 ---
takes close to 5 seconds execution time. That is considerably better than their other counterparts,
MIP and Tabu search. FCFS performs better than the proposed solution in terms of computational
times, however, the results are not close to optimal or better than meta-heuristics. DRL apporach
even comes close to the optimal results. To achieve the optimal results, MIP technique takes
considerable computational time. For operational feasibility, the RT is rounded-down to represent
the aircraft/hour.
Table 4: Comparative Results of Different Solution Methods Over Benchmark Data Instances
Instance
DRL
MIP
Tabu
FCFS
RT
Time
RT
Time
RT
Time
RT
Time
alp 7 30
45
0.37
45
> 300
44
12.25
34
≤0.1
alp 11 50
50
0.63
51
> 3600
47
86.40
34
≤0.1
alp 15 30
58
0.40
60
> 300
53
12.66
35
≤0.1
alp 15 40
57
0.68
60
> 3600
49
94.20
34
≤0.1
alp 19 50
38
0.66
40
> 3600
35
35.59
35
≤0.1
data 7 11
45
5.61
46
> 3600
38
18.70
33
≤0.1
data 19 23
40
4.33
41
> 3600
37
25.10
34
≤0.1
Note: Computational time in seconds; DRL=Deep Reinforcement Learning
Fig. 9 shows runway throughput from the 4. We can observe that the proposed solution is
performing close to optimal solution in terms of MIP solution. We can see that during peak hours
(instances representing peak hours are alp 15 30 and alp 15 40), the importance of throughput
increases and algorithms like DRL and MIP are performing increasingly better than Tabu search
and FCFS. This observation suggests the resulting importance of algorithms that can increase
operational capacity.
Figure 9: The bar chart shows a comparison of various algorithms, and their respective performance in terms of
runway throughput, over different instances.
23


--- Page 24 ---
Fig. 10 shows combined impact of the proposed solution in terms of runway throughput and
computational time. The quadrants can be interpreted as top left being quadrant 1 (Q1), and then
the rest are clockwise. Meaning, top right denoted as Q2, bottom right as Q3, and bottom left as
Q4. Q1 is the most desirable qudrant from industrial application perspective. Given the importance
of real-time, instantaneous requirement of finidng solutions in dynamic cases, it is important to
have low computational times. Increased throughput and low computational times offers the DRL
algorithm compared to other algorithms.
Figure 10: Quadrant analysis of different methods assessing them over average computational time and average
runway throughput.
A significant advantage of the proposed framework lies in its efficient deployment lifecycle. While
the initial training phase requires approximately 40 hours of training, a standard investment for
sophisticated machine learning architectures, this represents a one-time cost that yields substantial
operational dividends. The computational metrics reported throughout this paper reflect the
solution’s testing performance, which accurately represents real-world deployment scenarios. The
framework demonstrates exceptional generalizability, a critical feature that distinguishes it from
alternative operations research approaches. Once trained, the model effectively adapts to diverse
operational contexts without requiring retraining—accommodating variations in problem scale,
aircraft classifications, runway configurations, and other contextual parameters. This architectural
characteristic enables consistent sub-second computation times across previously unseen test cases,
regardless of their complexity or dimensionality.
Unlike conventional approaches that may require recalibration or reconstruction for each distinct
operational scenario, this solution maintains performance integrity across the full spectrum of
test instances.
This generalizability represents a fundamental contribution to the field, as it
simultaneously achieves near-optimal results while dramatically reducing computational overhead
in practical applications.
24


--- Page 25 ---
5. Conclusion and Industrial Implications
This research demonstrates that deep reinforcement learning can be effectively deployed to
address the complex challenges of the ALP. The proposed graph-enhanced framework achieves
superior performance on large-scale instances while maintaining computational efficiency suitable
for real-time applications. Experimental results reveal that the framework consistently generates
near-optimal solutions within seconds, a significant improvement over traditional operations research
methods that often require hours of computations. The learning capabilities of the agentic framework
enable robust performance in varying traffic patterns and operational scenarios, while maintaining
required constraints.
The practical implications of this research for airport operations are substantial. The framework’s
ability to deal with dynamic problems in real-time makes it particularly valuable for industrial
deployment. The experimental results demonstrate reduction in operational costs through optimized
arrivals, alongside a significant improvement in runway utilization compared to current FCFS
approaches. The delay distribution analysis reveals that 95% of aircraft land within ±5 minutes of
their target times, significantly outperforming the baseline methods. This improvement is attributed
to the time-varying exploration strategy and the effective constraint handling mechanisms of the
framework.
The framework’s ability to generate solutions in under 1 second for most practical instances
makes it particularly suitable for dynamic rescheduling scenarios. This real-time capability, combined
with the model’s generalizability across different airport configurations without retraining, addresses
a critical need in modern air traffic management. The impact extends beyond individual airports,
as improved scheduling efficiency can help address growing air traffic demands without requiring
extensive infrastructure expansion. That could translate to considerable annual cost savings for
medium-sized airports and significantly larger cost savings for large-sized airports. In addition,
improved runway utilization enables the handling of additional traffic without infrastructure
expansion.
Several promising avenues for future research emerge from this work. Integration with weather
prediction models could enhance the framework’s robustness under varying environmental conditions.
Extension to multi-airport coordination scenarios would address broader air traffic management
challenges. The incorporation of airline preferences and priorities could further optimize overall
system efficiency. Development of explainable AI components would enhance controller trust and
facilitate broader adoption.
The success of this DRL-based approach suggests a paradigm shift in industrial scheduling sys-
tems. By combining learning capabilities with domain-specific constraints, this paper demonstrates
the potential for AI-driven solutions in critical aviation applications. The framework’s ability to
balance multiple objectives while maintaining safety requirements makes it particularly valuable
for industrial deployment in modern air traffic management systems. As air traffic continues to
grow globally, such intelligent scheduling systems will become increasingly crucial for maintaining
operational efficiency and safety. The framework’s demonstrated ability to generalize across different
scenarios while maintaining computational efficiency makes it a promising solution for the evolving
challenges in aviation operations management.
25


--- Page 26 ---
Acknowledgments
The author would like to express his gratitude to the University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and
the Jindal School of Management (JSOM) for their invaluable support and resources that made
this research possible.
References
[1] International Civil Aviation Organization, Global air transport outlook to 2025, ICAO Circular 333 (2022).
[2] G. Zhou, R. Wang, Y. Zhou, Flower pollination algorithm with runway balance strategy for the aircraft landing
scheduling problem, Cluster Computing 21 (2018) 1543–1560.
[3] A. Doc, Annual world airport traffic dataset, 2023, AirportsCouncilInternationalLast Accessed: 2023-11-20
(2016).
URL https://ops.group/blog/2016-16th-edition-icao-doc-4444/
[4] D. Briskorn, R. Stolletz, Aircraft landing problems with aircraft classes, Journal of Scheduling 17 (2014) 31–45.
[5] A. Salehipour, An algorithm for single-and multiple-runway aircraft landing problem, Mathematical and
Computational Simulation 175 (2020) 179–191.
[6] A. I. Hammouri, M. S. Braik, M. A. Al-Betar, M. A. Awadallah, Isa: a hybridization between iterated local search
and simulated annealing for multiple-runway aircraft landing problem, Neural Computing and Applications 32
(2019) 11745–11765.
[7] J. E. Beasley, M. Krishnamoorthy, Y. M. Sharaiha, D. Abramson, Scheduling aircraft landings—the static case,
Transportation Science 34 (2) (2000) 180–197.
[8] J. E. Beasley, M. Krishnamoorthy, Y. M. Sharaiha, D. Abramson, Displacement problem and dynamically
scheduling aircraft landings, Journal of the operational research society 55 (1) (2004) 54–64.
[9] A. T. Ernst, M. Krishnamoorthy, R. H. Storer, Heuristic and exact algorithms for scheduling aircraft landings,
Networks: An International Journal 34 (3) (1999) 229–241.
[10] I. Doc, 4444—procedures for air navigation services—air traffic management, International Aviation Civil
Organization: Montreal, PQ, CanadaLast Accessed: 2023-12-09 (2016).
URL https://ops.group/blog/2016-16th-edition-icao-doc-4444/
[11] S. Ikli, C. Mancel, M. Mongeau, X. Olive, E. Rachelson, The aircraft runway scheduling problem: A survey,
Computers & Operations Research 132 (2021) 105336.
[12] J. A. Bennell, M. Mesgarpour, C. N. Potts, Airport runway scheduling, 4OR 9 (2) (2011) 115–138.
[13] A. Salehipour, M. Modarres, L. M. Naeni, An efficient hybrid meta-heuristic for aircraft landing problem,
Computers & Operations Research 40 (1) (2013) 207–213.
[14] The OpenSky Network, Open air traffic data for research, https://opensky-network.org, accessed: January
23, 2021 (2013).
[15] A. Faye, Solving the aircraft landing problem with time discretization approach, European Journal of Operational
Research 242 (3) (2015) 1028–1038.
[16] P. Avella, M. Boccia, C. Mannino, I. Vasilyev, Time-indexed formulations for the runway scheduling problem,
Transportation Science 51 (4) (2017) 1196–1209.
[17] A. Ghoniem, F. Farhadi, A column generation approach for aircraft landing scheduling, Journal of the Operational
Research Society 66 (10) (2015) 1717–1729.
[18] H. Pinol, J. E. Beasley, Scatter search and bionomic algorithms for the aircraft landing problem, European
Journal of Operational Research 171 (2) (2006) 439–462.
[19] S. Vadlamani, S. Hosseini, A novel heuristic approach for solving aircraft landing problem with single runway,
Journal of Air Transport Management 40 (2014) 144–148.
[20] N. R. Sabar, G. Kendall, An iterated local search with multiple perturbation operators and time varying
perturbation strength for the aircraft landing problem, Omega 56 (2015) 88–98.
[21] B. Soykan, G. Rabadi, A tabu search algorithm for the multiple runway aircraft scheduling problem, Heuristics,
metaheuristics and approximate methods in planning and scheduling (2016) 165–186.
[22] F. Furini, M. P. Kidd, C. A. Persiani, P. Toth, Improved rolling horizon approaches to the aircraft sequencing
problem, Journal of Scheduling 18 (5) (2015) 435–447.
[23] F. Furini, C. A. Persiani, P. Toth, Aircraft sequencing problems via a rolling horizon algorithm, International
Symposium on Combinatorial Optimization (2012) 273–284.
26


--- Page 27 ---
[24] H. Balakrishnan, B. G. Chandran, Algorithms for scheduling runway operations under constrained position
shifting, Operations Research 58 (6) (2010) 1650–1665.
[25] A. Lieder, D. Briskorn, R. Stolletz, A dynamic programming approach for the aircraft landing problem with
aircraft classes, European Journal of Operational Research 243 (1) (2015) 61–69.
[26] K. Artiouchine, P. Baptiste, C. Durr, Runway sequencing with holding patterns, European Journal of Operational
Research 189 (3) (2008) 1254–1266.
[27] P. Van Leeuwen, N. Van Hanxleden Houwert, Scheduling aircraft using constraint relaxation, Proceedings of the
22nd Workshop of the UK Planning and Scheduling Special Interest Group (2003) 227–238.
[28] M. Lohatepanont, C. Barnhart, Airline schedule planning: Integrated models and algorithms for schedule design
and fleet assignment, Transportation science 38 (1) (2004) 19–32.
[29] I. Brito Soares, Y.-M. De Hauwere, K. Januario, T. Brys, T. Salvant, A. Nowe, Departure management with a
reinforcement learning approach, IEEE 18th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
(2015) 2465–2470.
[30] M. Brittain, P. Wei, Autonomous aircraft sequencing and separation with hierarchical deep reinforcement learning,
International Conference for Research in Air Transportation (2018) 1–8.
[31] B. Girish, An efficient hybrid particle swarm optimization algorithm in a rolling horizon framework for the
aircraft landing problem, Applied Soft Computing 44 (2016) 200–221.
[32] A. M. Shohel, S. Alam, M. Barlow, Cooperative co-evolutionary optimization for best-fit aircraft sequence and
runway configuration, Aerospace 5 (3) (2018) 26.
[33] J. A. Bennell, M. Mesgarpour, C. N. Potts, Dynamic scheduling of aircraft landing, European Journal of
Operational Research 258 (1) (2017) 315–327.
[34] M. Pohl, R. Kolisch, M. Schiffer, Runway scheduling during winter operations, Omega 102 (2020) 102344.
[35] D. Guo, Z. Zhang, B. Yang, J. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Lin, Integrating spoken instructions into flight trajectory
prediction to optimize automation in air traffic control, Nature Communications 15 (1) (2024) 9662.
[36] W. Song, X. Chen, Q. Li, Z. Cao, Flexible job-shop scheduling via graph neural network and deep reinforcement
learning, IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics 19 (2) (2022) 1600–1610.
27
