--- Page 1 ---
Spectral Umixing Comparison with Sparse, Iterative and
Mixed Integer Programming Models
Jade F. Preston1† and William F. Basener1*†
1School of Data Science, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA.
*Address correspondence to: wb8by@virginia.edu
Abstract
Hyperspectral unmixing is the analytical process of determining the pure materials and es-
timating the proportions of such materials composed within an observed mixed pixel spectrum.
We can unmix mixed pixel spectra using linear and nonlinear mixture models. Ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression serves as the foundation for many linear mixture models employed
in Hyperspectral Image analysis. Though variations of OLS are implemented, studies rarely
address the underlying assumptions that affect results. This paper provides an in depth dis-
cussion on the assumptions inherently endorsed by the application of OLS regression. We also
examine variations of OLS models stemming from highly effective approaches in spectral un-
mixing – sparse regression, iterative feature search strategies and Mathematical programming.
These variations are compared to a novel unmixing approach called HySUDeB. We evaluated
each approach’s performance by computing the average error and precision of each model. Ad-
ditionally, we provide a taxonomy of the molecular structure of each mineral to derive further
understanding into the detection of the target materials.
1
Introduction
Hyperspectral images capture the electromagnetic radiation reflected from surfaces and record the
reflectance across hundreds or thousands of contiguous spectral bands [1]. Researchers refer to this
mapping of material reflectance across spectral bands as spectral signatures or spectra. Pixels within
the images frequently contain a mixture of different materials – ultimately modifying the amount
of light photons returning to the hyperspectral sensor [2]. Researchers aim to identify and quantify
these materials through a process called spectral unmixing. Material mixtures can be categorized
and modeled as linear or nonlinear depending on compositional complexity [3].
The linear mixture model (LMM) – depicted by equation 1 – is often interpreted as a regression
problem [3, 4]. The observed mixed pixel spectrum (singular form of spectra) is represented by the
dependent variable, y, and can be further described as a vector of the pixel’s recorded reflectance
at waveband (i to N ). We, therefore, model the observed spectrum by inferring the pure materials
1
arXiv:2503.17118v1  [eess.IV]  21 Mar 2025


--- Page 2 ---
or endmembers from an image or constituent spectra from a spectral library. In this study, we use
an extensive spectral library for unmixing rather relying on “pure” image pixels. The matrix of
constituent spectra is represented by S. Neither the image endmembers nor the abundances are
known a priori.
However, if the spectral library is small, we can invert the library to estimate
these unknown abundances, represented by the vector a [5]. Inversion becomes impossible when
the spectral library is large — an increasingly common scenario — particularly when there are
more library spectra than spectral bands. Equation 2 displays the unmixing solution estimating
the unknown, fractional proportion of materials. All models inherently incorporate some level of
error. Thus, the unmixing solution is an estimate indicated by the lack of error vector, E, shown
in equation 1. In least squares models, the error is referred to as the residual or in this case the
distance between the inferred reflectance and the true pixel reflectance at wavelength i.
y = Sa + E
(1)
ˆa = (STS)−1STy
(2)
The basic form of linear regression is also referred to as OLS [6, 7]. OLS minimizes modeling
error by reducing the sum of the squared differences between the observed and inferred reflectance
values. There are alternative regression approaches (i.e. generalized or weighted least squares),
but this study focuses on OLS because it serves as the baseline for most unmixing techniques [5].
A common metric for assessing model error is mean squared error (MSE), which is calculated by
normalizing the residual sum of squares by the number of data points. Equation 3 presents the
formula for MSE. The OLS objective is to minimize the MSE by identifying the set of coefficients
that maximize the similarity between the response and the regressor values [8].
MSE = 1
M
M
X
i=1
(yi −(Sa)i)2
(3)
The scope of this study is primary material identification via four unmixing methods. We aim
to identify specific substances embedded in a mixed pixel regardless of pixel composition. In this
paper, we will examine the assumptions underlying OLS and their alignment, or lack thereof, with
the LMM. For instance, the OLS mixture model fails to provide practical abundance estimates when
the spectral library is large.
This paper also provides a comparison focusing on four highly effective unmixing techniques:
sparse regression, depth-first search (DFS) feature selection, mixed integer nonlinear programming
(MINLP), and band decorrelation.
In many past papers, the implementation of certain feature
selection techniques — i.e as step-wise regression — have been critiqued. It is our additional aim to
discuss the attributes of iterative feature selection that are useful in spectral unmixing.
Dimension reduction and decorrelation of library spectra are common practice in spectral un-
mixing. To our knowledge, no other study has pre-processed the data by whitening the spectral
bands as part the unmixing methodology. This paper presents a novel approach called Hyperspec-
tral unmixing with decorrelated bands (HySUDeB). Each of the techniques discussed in this paper
2


--- Page 3 ---
respond to one or more of the inadequacies realized through OLS unmixing. We compare the three
previously mentioned unmixing techniques to HySUDeB and investigate their performance trade
offs. This investigation includes a description of the physical-chemical structure of the materials
aiding in accurate detection.
1.1
Ordinary Least Square Assumptions
Researchers, in the spectral analysis field, often discuss the assumptions supporting the LMM but
the assumptions behind OLS are rarely explained. The outline below highlights primary OLS as-
sumptions and discusses their validity in the context of spectral unmixing [5, 9, 10]:
1. Linearity in Relationships — OLS assumes the dependent variable is a linear combination
of the predictor variables and the residuals. Specifically, linearity is exhibited through the
additive nature between parameters. This relationship is modeled as a linear function (shown
by Equation 1) in which both the contribution of the input variables and the error term are
considered additive.
This linear assumption holds primarily for hyperspectral unmixing scenarios with macroscopic
mixtures. Endmembers in these pixels occupy distinct or adjacent regions thus, we assume
light photons interact with only one material before returning to the sensor.
However, this assumption fails when light photons interact with more than one surface before
returning to the sensor. Scenarios where this assumption fails are when light interactions with
material mixtures are more complicated (e.g. scenes with high vegetation or mineral deposits)
[3, 11].
2. Independent Identically Distributed (IID) error — The residuals from OLS are assumed to
satisfy three key properties: independence, homoscedasticity, and normality with mean cen-
tered at zero. Independence implies that there is no correlation between the residuals. This
independence assumption means that the error of one observation (i.e. band 1 residual) will
not be correlated with the error of another observation (i.e. band 2 residual). Homoscedastic-
ity means the variance or spread of the residuals is constant across the input variables. When
we say the residuals are normally distributed with mean equaling zero, it means the residuals
follow a bell-shaped curve when plotted as a histogram, and their expected value is zero. Be-
cause the expected value of the error is zero, this implies: 1. OLS is an unbiased estimator
and 2. there is no correlation between the residuals and the input variables. Therefore, we
assume error is not computed in any one direction.
In the context of the LMM, a multivariate normal distribution is assumed for the residuals
with the mean centered at the observed pixel spectrum. This approximation is considered
generally reasonable, but errors derived from the LMM do not always adhere to the properties
of independence and homoscedasticity. Continuous and adjacent spectral bands often exhibit
correlations, especially between bands in close proximity [12, 13]. Factors such as correlated
bands, spectral variability, and spatio-temporal effects can disrupt homoscedasticity.
As a
3


--- Page 4 ---
result, residuals may exhibit fluctuating variances or in certain cases follow entirely different
distributions [14].
3. Noncollinear Regressor Variables — OLS requires the regressor variables exhibit noncollinear-
ity, meaning there is no linear dependency between the input vectors. When the input vectors
are linearly independent, a unique solution can exist which is considered vital to obtain the
closed form solution presented in Equation 2.
Noncollinearity is possible when there are more spectral bands than library spectra. However,
when there are more library spectra than spectral bands a unique solution of abundances cannot
be found. If the number of library spectra exceeds the number of bands, inversion is impossible
resulting in infinite solutions. This means that any number of abundance combinations can
reproduce the observed spectrum (y).
4. Correctly established models — The input variables are considered fixed implying that the
information available to describe the response variable to known a priori. We assume that
the pertinent variables are included in the model or otherwise excluded. Additionally, the
implementation of OLS regression assumes the inherent OLS assumptions are valid.
Unmixing requires either the observed image or a spectral library. Both of these approaches
can challenge the correctly established modeling assumption as well as the preceding assump-
tions. When unmixing a pixel using the image, we must assume that pure pixels of individual
materials are present and can be mapped to the mixed pixel, or that there exists a pixel
with similar spectral properties, indicating identical materials and or mixtures. Alternatively,
unmixing with a spectral library inherently assumes that the library contains materials that
match those in the pixel we aim to unmix. Any one of the assumptions discussed can fail
causing large estimated error or erroneous modeling conclusions.
1.2
Practical LMM Constraints
The unconstrained OLS model provides unrealistic abundance results and requires the implementa-
tion of one or more practical constraints. The two primary constraints enforced are the nonnegative
abundance and abundance sum to one constraints [15, 16]. Negative abundance observed from the
unconstrained model stem from a combination of over-fitting of the observed variable and the min-
imal presences of a particular substance [17]. The nonnegative abundance constraint – commonly
referred to as nonnegative least squares (NNLS) – ensures any variables included in the model have
coefficients greater than or equal to zero. Equation 4 displays the nonnegative abundance constraint
regularly imposed on the OLS model. N represents the explanatory variables. In the paper by Ke-
shava et al., the authors discuss the implementation of the sum-to-one abundance constraint. This
constraint forces the estimated coefficients of the explanatory variables to sum to one, adhering to
the practical assertion that the materials in the model make up a fractional proportion of the area
in the pixel [3]. Within this paper, we relax this constraint to comply with an alternative assump-
tion: materials in a mixed pixel may appear brighter in certain scenarios causing the abundances to
4


--- Page 5 ---
sum greater than one. Thus, the only practical constraint we enforce in this study is nonnegative
abundances.
ai ≥0
∀1 ≤i ≤N
(4)
1.3
Alternative Unmixing Techniques
1.3.1
Sparse Regression
Sparse unmixing is a technique in spectral unmixing that addresses some of the misalignments
found with OLS assumptions. High correlation between library spectra is a significant challenge in
spectral unmixing. Large spectral libraries are essential to capture spectral variability in intimate
mixtures, but their use can lead to overfitting and an ill-posed inversion problem, thereby making
regularization necessary. Sparse unmixing addresses these issues by selecting the optimal subset of
input variables from the library to describe the observed spectrum [4]. This approach introduces
regularization to the OLS model through penalties on the parameters.
There are many studies that have achieved unmixing success using sparse unmixing approaches.
The common penalties imposed are the L1 norm (also known as LASSO regression), L2 norm
(also known as RIDGE regression) or a combination of the L1 and L2 norm (their combination
is known as ElasticNet).
LASSO regression uses Manhattan distancing to shrink coefficients to
zero penalizing the size of the model. Subsequently, this L1 penalty adheres to the nonnegative
abundance constraint. Equation 5 displays the modified version of equation 3 which includes the L1
penalty on the model coefficients. The set of coefficients, ˆa, minimizes the objective function subject
to the L1 penalty norm.
ˆa = arg mina
 1
M ∥y −Sa∥2
2 + λ∥a∥1

(5)
1.3.2
Iterative Approaches
An alternative to sparse approaches are iterative approaches i.e. depth- and breadth-first search
strategies. Depth- and breadth-first search strategies are often incorporated in graph algorithms or
decision trees [18, 19], but their underlying principles have been adapted to a wide variety of use
cases i.e. step-wise regression. Both strategies iteratively identify a subset of features that best fit
the data [20]. Step-wise regression is primarily implemented for model selection with a secondary
aim of parameter estimation. In the context of unmixing, step-wise regression responds to the goal
of sparse unmixing which is to identify the subset of explanatory variables from a far larger set of
materials [21, 22].
Many statisticians caution against the implementation of step-wise regression due to issues with
multi-colinearity.
When explanatory variables are highly correlated, step-wise regression models
struggle with deciphering variable influence on the response variable. R.D Routledge says that in
certain scenarios of high correlation, the combination of explanatory variables can show a significant
impact on the response variable, while individually the variables are insignificant [23]. Additionally,
5


--- Page 6 ---
in another paper by Michael Lewis-Beck, the author explains an alternative scenario where three
variables are considered significant individually, but as they are iteratively included in the model,
their significance lowers. He claims the iterative process fails to depict the relationship between the
variables and ultimately their level of significance [24].
The studies discussing the limitations of step-wise regression often exhibit two characteristics
that are less relevant to spectral unmixing. Many of the correlated variables in spectral libraries
are the variations of the same substance rather than two highly correlated but different variables.
Additionally, OLS variables can have a negative impact on the response variable.
Practicality
prohibits the inference of negative abundance coefficients in the LMM. Considering these differences,
stepwise regression’s disadvantages become less pronounced in the spectral unmixing context. The
primary aim of variable selection aligns with stepwise regression’s design, making it well-suited
to identifying the most statistically significant materials influencing pixel reflectance. Winter et
al. explains that the iterative process of step-wise regression coupled with nonnegative abundance
enforcement lowers modeling error [17]. In another paper, Gault et al. compares NNLS, sparse and
step-wise approaches. The authors explain that step-wise regression can out perform non-iterative
approaches especially when detection is the main goal [25].
With these considerations in mind, we implement an iterative search strategy, focusing specifi-
cally on DFS feature selection. This approach begins with an empty set, iteratively identifies the
most significant explanatory variables and incorporates them into the model. The significance of
each variable is evaluated using the F-statistic, a ratio that compares explained versus unexplained
variance. The F-statistic is then used to calculate the probability (p-value) of obtaining the ob-
served F-statistic by chance. A low p-value suggests that the observed F-statistic is unlikely to have
occurred randomly. When the p-value falls below a predetermined threshold, the variable is consid-
ered to contribute significantly to the variance observed in the response variable and subsequently
included in the model [22–24].
1.3.3
MINLP
Despite its potential for higher accuracy [26], few researchers employ mathematical programming
for spectral unmixing. Among the studies that have utilized mathematical programming, there is a
noticeable lack of consistent terminology. Many papers describe techniques that originate from the
broader field of mathematical programming, such as linear programming [27, 28], integer program-
ming [29, 30], mixed integer programming (MIP), MINLP [31, 32] and other variations of nonlinear
programming [33–35]. While these techniques are related, each employs slightly different approaches.
Mathematical programming is a field of study that analyzes optimal decision making subject to a
set of limitations. Solutions are derived by optimizing an objective – a minimization or maximiza-
tion function – composed of decision variables. These variables are iteratively adjusted within the
defined limits to determine the best solution. The limits imposed are called constraints and rep-
resent practical requirements or boundaries. MIP integrates concepts from both linear and integer
programming because the decision variables are integer and continuous. MINLP is an optimization
method originating from MIP, but incorporates nonlinear relationships [36].
6


--- Page 7 ---
Bateson et al. completed a study in which they developed endmember bundles using principal
component analysis and simulated annealing to determine the dimension and vertices of the data
simplex. Each bundle is a collection of spectra for a single material; the author incorporated grass,
tree and soil bundles. Once the bundles were created, Bateson et al. unmixed pixels using linear
programming [27]. In another study, Bourguignon et al. compare nine variations of sparse mixture
models, showing the equivalence of more traditional mixture models to MIPs. The authors concluded
that with an accepted increase in computational demand, mixed integer formulations can reduce the
error of abundance estimation and provide exact solutions [35]. Mhenni et al. echo these sentiments
in their paper where they conduct unmixing using a mathematical program incorpating sparse and
exclusive group constraints [26].
2
Materials and Methods
2.1
Experimental Design
Our observed dataset was derived from a hyperspectral image captured using the Airborne Vis-
ible/Infrared Imaging Spectrometer (AVIRIS). AVIRIS is one of the first airborne hyperspectral
imagers developed in the 1980s by NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory [37]. It currently collects
data across 224 contiguous spectral bands, covering wavelengths from 0.38 to 2.5 micrometers. The
image used in this study consists of 350x400 pixels, capturing a section of Cuprite Hills, Nevada
[38]. Cuprite Hills is a well-known mineralogical site and a prime testing ground for studying natural
intimate mixtures. Additionally, we utilized the spectral library from the U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) to infer materials embedded in the observed Cuprite image pixels. Our spectral library was
comprised of 481 mineral spectra. Many of the spectra from the library are a variation of the same
substance to aid material detection within the intimate mixtures found at Cuprite Hills [39].
The specific regions of interest (ROIs) within the AVIRIS image are comprised of pixels from alu-
nite, kaolinite and montmorillonite locations. We used a graphical user interface, “Hyperspectralpy”
[40] and the adaptive coherence estimator (ACE) detection algorithm to select the pixels within the
ROIs. “Hyperspectralpy” is a Python package that provides enhanced analysis and visualization of
hyperspectral images. The ACE algorithm selects target mineral spectra from the spectral library
and applies a whitening transformation to the image and library spectra. Following the whitening
process, an ACE score is computed depicting the strength of the target mineral’s presence within
image. Figure 1 displays the selected ROIs via the red colored regions. The top row in Figure 1
are the plots of the ACE detection score for the target mineral. An increased presence of alunite,
kaolinite and montmorillonite are indicated by the dark red. Consequently, we selected pixels with
higher computed ACE scores (shown in the bottom row of Figure 1).
We then inferred models from the selected mixed pixels. Each inferred model represents the best
fit of the observed spectrum. Subsequently, we recorded the category of each mineral from every
model. Mineral categories are generally based on the physical-chemical or atomic bonding structure
of the substance. These characteristics have both distinctive as well as similar properties ultimately
modifying their utility in material identification.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Figure 1: Display of the selected ROIs for three target minerals: alunite, kaolinite, and montmo-
rillonite. The top row of plots show the regions where the target mineral shows higher abundance
and the bottom row depicts the actual selected pixels from the locations with higher presence of the
target mineral.
Figure 2 displays a few of the most common mineral categories of the spectra incorporated in
each of the models.
Each plot depicts the spectral pattern of minerals from specific categories.
The physical patterns are indicative of their chemical structure. Sulfates have a SO2−
4
chemical
formula because they are comprised of one sulfur and four oxygen atoms. Tectosilicates have a SiO
chemical formula which is indicative of their silicon and oxygen composition. Nesosilicates generally
incorporate a silicon atom and four oxygen atoms, SiO4. Phyllosilicates have a chemical formula,
Si2O5, describing their composition of two silicon atoms and five oxygen atoms.
2.2
Statistical Analysis
2.2.1
LASSO Regression
LASSO regression was incorporated in this study because of its sparse solutions and known com-
putational advantages. It responds to the disadvantages of OLS because it minimizes overfitting
through noise reduction. The penalty parameter controlling sparsity was selected using cross vali-
dation (CV) ranging from 0.001. to 0.1 with 0.001 step size and k=5 fold. Additionally, we used the
Python packages “Lasso” and “LassoCV” for implementation.
8


--- Page 9 ---
(a) Chemical Formula: SO2−
4
(b) Chemical Formula: SiO
(c) Chemical Formula: SiO4
(d) Chemical Formula: Si2O5
Figure 2: Comparison of the mineral types sulfate, tectosilicate, and nesosilicate, and phyllosilicate.
The purple spectrum (Figure 2a) represents alunite. The green and blue spectra (Figure 2d) rep-
resent kaolinite and montmorillonite, respectively. The dotted blue spectra within the other plots
(Figures 2b and 2c) are minerals that were often incorporated in the models.
2.2.2
Depth-first Search Strategy
We implemented a DFS strategy because of its inherent feature selection capabilities. We developed
the script for this technique and did not utilize a Python package. This approach can incur higher
computational risk due to its iterative nature, but this allows for primary variable identification.
2.2.3
Mixed Integer Nonlinear Program
The formulation of the MINLP within this paper has similarities to the models developed in Bour-
guignon et al.
and Mhenni et al.
with slight deviations [26, 35].
The following model is the
mathematical program incorporated in this study.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Sets
I = Set of all spectra in the library
i = [1, ..., n] ∈I
J = Set of all spectral bands
j = [1, ..., m] ∈J
Parameters
yj = observed pixel reflectance for band j
sij = reflected intensity for spectrum i in band j
M = number of spectral bands
N = number of library spectra
Bi = max abundance associated with spectrum i
P = number of spectra included in the model
Decision Variables
xi = decision to assign spectrum i to the model
ai = abundance associated with spectrum i
Objective Function
minimize Z =
v
u
u
t 1
M
M
X
j=1

yj −
N
X
i=1
(aisij)
2
Constraints
Bixi ≥ai
n
X
i
xi ≥P
∀xi ∈{0, 1},
ai ≥0
Objective Explained
Minimize the root mean squared error between the observed spectrum and the inferred spectrum
(the spectra incorporated in the model and their associated abundances).
10


--- Page 11 ---
Constraints Explained
1. Abundances can only be assigned to spectra included in the model and must adhere to the
maximum material reflectance.
2. Model size constraint: The sum of the number of spectra assigned to the model must adhere
to the model size parameter (P).
3. The decision to include a spectrum in the model (si) is binary. The abundance associated with
a spectrum (ai) must be positive.
2.2.4
HySUDeB
In this novel approach, we decorrelated the spectral bands as part of the unmixing process. This
band decorrelation is also known as whitening. The OLS assumption is that the residuals follow
a multivariate normal distribution with the mean centered at the pixel spectrum and covariance
proportional to the identity matrix. However, this assumption may not always be appropriate, thus
whitening becomes beneficial because we assume the covariance matrix of the spectral bands is not
originally constant. Within the whitening process, we computed the covariance of our observed
image. From the covariance matrix we derived the eigenvalues and eigenvectors. The library spectra
and the observed spectrum were whitened by subtracting the mean and applying a transforma-
tion using the covariance matrix’s eigenvalues and eigenvectors [41]. Once band decorrelation was
complete, we applied LASSO regression to the whitened spectra.
3
Results
We compared the unmixing performance of each technique based on computation time, error, de-
tection accuracy and mean average precision at k. Detection accuracy was based on the number of
target spectra inferred from the modeling approaches – we tallied the number of alunite, kaolinite,
and montmorillonite detections achieved by each approach. Figure 3 displays each technique’s per-
formance for the alunite ROI in terms of computation time and root mean squared error (RMSE)
– square root of equation 3. Though Figure 3 is the result for the alunite ROI and the resulting
plots for kaolinte and montmorillonite have different numeric values, the performance spread is the
same for each of the ROIs in terms of this average RMSE vs average computation time plot. LASSO
regression had the lowest average computation time. MINLP had the lowest average residual error,
but far higher computation time than the other three techniques. DFS feature selection was not the
highest performer in either area, but it shows to be the best overall for speed and minimal error.
HySUDeB had similar computation time as LASSO regression, but because the units on the data
for HySUDeB are different than the units for the other methods, the computed RMSE was much
higher.
The results for detection accuracy are shown in Table 1. For each of the ROIs, LASSO regression
incorporated the the highest number of target minerals across each of its models. MINLP had the
second highest detection percentages. When target variables were incorporated in the solutions,
11


--- Page 12 ---
Figure 3: Display of technique performance based on average error and computation time for the
alunite ROI.
MINLP only included the target mineral once – while other approaches incorporated variations of
the target in many models.
Table 2 displays the results in terms of detection precision. Precision at k is an indication of
importance placed on the target mineral. Minerals included in each model were ranked based on
model size and assigned abundance. Specifically, precision at k measures the number of times the
target mineral was one of the top ordered materials. This precision table shows that HySUDeB
performed the best with the alunite ROI and MINLP preformed the best with the other two regions,
kaolinite and montmorillonite.
Target Detection Percentage
Lasso
DFS
MINLP
HySudeB
Alunite
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.95
Kaolinite
1.0
0.65
1.0
0.94
Montmorillonite
0.85
0.56
0.77
0.22
Table 1: Detection percentages for target minerals (alunite, kaolinite, and montmorillonite) across
four techniques: Lasso, DFS, MINLP, and HySudeB.
In addition to measuring performance, we identified the mineral categories incorporated in the
each modeling approach.
The most commonly included categories regardless of technique were
sulfates, tectosilicates, nesosilicates, carbonates and phyllosilicates. Figure 4 shows the count for
all the included mineral categories across all three ROIs. The categories shown in Figure 4 are
12


--- Page 13 ---
Figure 4: Display of the count of the included minerals across all the implemented approaches.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Mean Average Precision at k
Lasso
DFS
MINLP
HySudeB
Alunite
0.41
0.58
0.36
0.60
Kaolinite
0.39
0.31
0.54
0.46
Montmorillonite
0.14
0.14
0.18
0.03
Table 2: Average mean precision at k for minerals (alunite, kaolinite, and montmorillonite) across
four techniques: Lasso, DFS, MINLP, and HySudeB.
Figure 5: Display of the count of the minerals from the library that were included in the models for
the alunite ROI.
not an exhaustive list of the mineral types found in the spectral library. Figure 5 shows a more
extensive list of the primary library categories as well as the counts based on unmixing approach.
LASSO regression showed to have the most difference in mineral inclusion but the lowest diversity
in mineral category for each ROI. For example in Figure 5, Hydroxide minerals were included in all
the other approaches expect LASSO. DFS feature selection and HySUDeB had similar spreads of
included mineral categories. Both approaches show a definitive gap between the highest counts and
second highest counts. Even though, LASSO regression, included the highest amount of sulfates
in the models for the alunite ROI (presumably because alunite is a sulfate), LASSO regression
included nearly as many phyllosilicates. HySUDeB was a close second to LASSO regression in terms
of icluding sulfates in the model for the alunite ROI, however unlike LASSO regression there is a
distinct difference between the count for sulfates and phyllosilicates. HySUDeB shows this pattern
of category inclusion with the kaolinite and montmorillonite ROIs as well.
14


--- Page 15 ---
4
Discussion
This study compared four unmixing techniques using four aspects: computation time, error mini-
mization, detection accuracy and mean average precision at k. Our results indicate that the employed
techniques dominate in specific tasks and goals. No one method was universally superior but each
are highly effective depending on the aim of the study. LASSO regression was the fastest unmixing
technique. MINLP had the lowest minimal error and DFS feature selection achieved the best bal-
ance in every category. HySUDeB performed well in detecting the target mineral category and thus
features associated with those categories.
The goal of this study was primary mineral detection. LASSO regression performed the best due
to cross validation. The penalty parameter allowed the model to become less sparse. This lowered
sparsity ensured: 1) the target mineral was included in the model at a minimum 85% of the time
and 2) LASSO regression obtained the highest cumulative target mineral count. However, this also
caused the model sizes to be larger and ultimately lowered the mean average precision at k.
HySUDeB performed well in terms of feature detection of the target mineral – as did DFS feature
selection. For each of the ROIs, the chemical category of the target mineral was definitive because
HySUDeB addresses the OLS homoscedasticity failures. In this approach, we decorrelated spectral
bands, effectively whitening the data. By transforming the spectral data into a space where the
bands are uncorrelated, we stabilized the variance of the residuals and improved the reliability of
our model estimates.
The decorrelation process in HySUDeB enhanced the precision scoring of specific minerals, such
as alunite. Band decorrelation ensured evenly distributed error, enabling more precise identification
of mineral signatures in the presence of varying noise levels across spectral bands. Computation time
was not affected with the implementation of whitening, but the error had different units and thus
comparing RMSE was not meaningful. Future work could focus on refining techniques like HySUDeB
to decrease the residual error while also maintaining the computation and detection capabilities.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the School of Data Science at the University of Virginia for their
support during this research process and providing access to publication catalogs.
References
1.
Manolakis D, Marden D, Shaw GA, et al. Hyperspectral image processing for automatic target
detection applications. Lincoln laboratory journal 2003;14:79–116.
2.
Somers B, Asner GP, Tits L, and Coppin P. Endmember variability in spectral mixture analysis:
A review. Remote Sensing of Environment 2011;115:1603–16.
3.
Keshava N and Mustard JF. Spectral unmixing. IEEE signal processing magazine 2002;19:44–
57.
15


--- Page 16 ---
4.
Borsoi RA, Imbiriba T, Bermudez JCM, et al. Spectral variability in hyperspectral data un-
mixing: A comprehensive review. IEEE geoscience and remote sensing magazine 2021;9:223–
70.
5.
Dismuke C and Lindrooth R. Ordinary least squares. Methods and designs for outcomes re-
search 2006;93:93–104.
6.
Fox J. Applied regression analysis and generalized linear models. Sage publications, 2015.
7.
Burton AL. OLS (Linear) regression. The encyclopedia of research methods in criminology and
Criminal Justice 2021;2:509–14.
8.
Wang Z and Bovik AC. Mean squared error: Love it or leave it? A new look at Signal Fidelity
Measures. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 2009;26:98–117.
9.
Poole MA and O’Farrell PN. The assumptions of the linear regression model. Transactions of
the Institute of British Geographers 1971:145–58.
10.
Tranmer M and Elliot M. Multiple linear regression. The Cathie Marsh Centre for Census and
Survey Research (CCSR) 2008;5:1–5.
11.
Dobigeon N, Tourneret JY, Richard C, Bermudez JCM, McLaughlin S, and Hero AO. Nonlinear
unmixing of hyperspectral images: Models and algorithms. IEEE Signal processing magazine
2013;31:82–94.
12.
Chang CI. Hyperspectral data processing: algorithm design and analysis. John Wiley & Sons,
2013.
13.
Chang CI and Liu KH. Progressive band selection of spectral unmixing for hyperspectral im-
agery. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 2013;52:2002–17.
14.
Bioucas-Dias JM, Plaza A, Camps-Valls G, Scheunders P, Nasrabadi N, and Chanussot J.
Hyperspectral remote sensing data analysis and future challenges. IEEE Geoscience and remote
sensing magazine 2013;1:6–36.
15.
Keshava N, Kerekes JP, Manolakis DG, and Shaw GA. Algorithm taxonomy for hyperspec-
tral unmixing. In: Algorithms for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and Ultraspectral Imagery VI.
Vol. 4049. SPIE. 2000:42–63.
16.
Heinz DC et al. Fully constrained least squares linear spectral mixture analysis method for
material quantification in hyperspectral imagery. IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote
sensing 2001;39:529–45.
17.
Winter ME, Lucey PG, and Steutel D. Examining hyperspectral unmixing error reduction due
to stepwise unmixing. In: Algorithms and Technologies for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and
Ultraspectral Imagery IX. Vol. 5093. SPIE. 2003:380–9.
18.
Kozen DC and Kozen DC. Depth-first and breadth-first search. The design and analysis of
algorithms 1992:19–24.
19.
Bundy A and Wallen L. Breadth-first search. Catalogue of artificial intelligence tools 1984:13–3.
20.
Dash M and Liu H. Feature selection for classification. Intelligent data analysis 1997;1:131–56.
16


--- Page 17 ---
21.
Ruengvirayudh P and Brooks GP. Comparing stepwise regression models to the best-subsets
models, or, the art of stepwise. General linear model journal 2016.
22.
Olusegun AM, Dikko HG, and Gulumbe SU. Identifying the limitation of stepwise selection for
variable selection in regression analysis. American Journal of Theoretical and Applied Statistics
2015;4:414–9.
23.
Routledge R. When stepwise regression fails: correlated variables some of which are redundant.
International Journal of Mathematical Education in Science and Technology 1990;21:403–10.
24.
Lewis-Beck MS. Stepwise regression: A caution. Political Methodology 1978:213–40.
25.
Gault TR, Jansen ME, DeCoster ME, Jansing ED, and Rodriguez BM. Comparing performance
of standard and iterative linear unmixing methods for hyperspectral signatures. In: Algorithms
and Technologies for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and Ultraspectral Imagery XXII. Vol. 9840.
SPIE. 2016:579–90.
26.
Mhenni RB, Bourguignon S, Ninin J, and Schmidt F. Spectral unmixing with sparsity and
structuring constraints. In: 2018 9th Workshop on Hyperspectral Image and Signal Processing:
Evolution in Remote Sensing (WHISPERS). IEEE. 2018:1–5.
27.
Bateson CA, Asner GP, and Wessman CA. Endmember bundles: A new approach to incorpo-
rating endmember variability into spectral mixture analysis. IEEE transactions on geoscience
and remote sensing 2000;38:1083–94.
28.
Marinoni A and Gamba P. A novel approach for efficient p-linear hyperspectral unmixing.
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing 2015;9:1156–68.
29.
Jokar S and Pfetsch ME. Exact and Approximate Sparse Solutions of Underdetermined Linear
Equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 2008;31:23–44.
30.
Liu Y, Condessa F, Bioucas-Dias JM, Li J, Du P, and Plaza A. Convex formulation for multi-
band image classification with superpixel-based spatial regularization. IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 2018;56:2704–21.
31.
Schmidt F, Salomon G, M`ege D, Gurgurewicz J, and Bourguignon S. Spectral unmixing with
positivity, sparsity and group exclusivity constraints. Tech. rep. Copernicus Meetings, 2021.
32.
Schmidt F, Salomon G, Bourguignon S, Gurgurewicz J, and M`ege D. Mineralogy Analysis
Using Linear Unmixing Under Group Constraint. In: In 2023 13th Workshop on Hyperspectral
Imaging and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing (WHISPERS). IEEE. 2023.
33.
Dache A, Vandaele A, Gillis N, and Nadisic N. Exact and Heuristic Methods for Simultane-
ous Sparse Coding. In: 2023 31st European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). IEEE.
2023:1753–7.
34.
Ermon S, Le Bras R, Suram S, et al. Pattern decomposition with complex combinatorial con-
straints: Application to materials discovery. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence. Vol. 29. 1. 2015.
17


--- Page 18 ---
35.
Bourguignon S, Ninin J, Carfantan H, and Mongeau M. Exact sparse approximation problems
via mixed-integer programming: Formulations and computational performance. IEEE Trans-
actions on Signal Processing 2015;64:1405–19.
36.
Smith JC and Taskin ZC. A tutorial guide to mixed-integer programming models and solution
techniques. Optimization in medicine and biology 2008:521–48.
37.
Qian SE. Hyperspectral satellites, evolution, and development history. IEEE Journal of Selected
Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing 2021;14:7032–56.
38.
Swayze GA, Clark RN, Goetz AF, et al. Mapping advanced argillic alteration at Cuprite,
Nevada, using imaging spectroscopy. Economic geology 2014;109:1179–221.
39.
Clark R, Swayze G, Wise R, et al. USGS digital spectral library splib06a: Us geological survey,
digital data series 231, 2007. URL http://speclab. cr. usgs. gov/spectral. lib06/ds231/index.
html 2007.
40.
Basener B. Hyperspectralpy. 2022. url: https://pypi.org/project/hyperspectralpy/.
41.
Basener B. An automated method for identification and ranking of hyperspectral target de-
tections. In: Algorithms and Technologies for Multispectral, Hyperspectral, and Ultraspectral
Imagery XVII. Vol. 8048. SPIE. 2011:131–8.
A
Referenced code
All the referenced and supporting code will be stored within the corresponding GitHub repository
(https://github.com/bakerjf1993/Hyperspectral-Unmixing/tree/main/2024%20Journal%20of%
20Remote%20Sensing).
18
