--- Page 1 ---
Flexible Semantic-Aware Resource Allocation:
Serving More Users Through Similarity Range
Constraints
Nasrin Gholami∗, Neda Moghim∗†, Behrouz Shahgholi Ghahfarokhi∗, Pouyan Salavati∗,
Christo Kurisummoottil Thomas‡, Sachin Shetty†, Tahereh Rahmati∗
∗Department of Computer Engineering, University of Isfahan,
†Center for Secure and Intelligent Critical Systems, Old Dominion University, VA, US
‡ Bradley Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA, USA
Emails: {ngholami1234, n.moghim, shahgholi, pouyan}@eng.ui.ac.ir,
christokt@vt.edu, sshetty@odu.edu, tahereh.rahmati@gmail.com
Abstract—Semantic communication (SemCom) aims to en-
hance the resource efficiency of next-generation networks by
transmitting the underlying meaning of messages, focusing on
information relevant to the end user. Existing literature on
SemCom primarily emphasizes learning the encoder and decoder
through end-to-end deep learning frameworks, with the objective
of minimizing a task-specific semantic loss function. Beyond its
influence on the physical and application layer design, semantic
variability across users in multi-user systems enables the design
of resource allocation schemes that incorporate user-specific
semantic requirements. To this end, a semantic-aware resource
allocation scheme is proposed with the objective of maximizing
transmission and semantic reliability, ultimately increasing the
number of users whose semantic requirements are met. The
resulting resource allocation problem is a non-convex mixed-
integer nonlinear program (MINLP), which is known to be NP-
hard. To make the problem tractable, it is decomposed into a set
of sub-problems, each of which is efficiently solved via geometric
programming techniques. Finally, simulations demonstrate that
the proposed method improves user satisfaction by up to 17.1%
compared to state of the art methods based on quality of
experience-aware SemCom methods.
Index Terms—Compression Rate, Resource Allocation, Seman-
tic Communication, Semantic Similarity
I. INTRODUCTION
Semantic communication (SemCom) has recently gained
prominence as a promising approach for managing the grow-
ing data demands of connected intelligent systems such as
augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR), autonomous driv-
ing, and intelligent transportation systems, all of which require
high data throughput and ultra-low latency. Unlike conven-
tional communication systems, which focus on transmitting
symbols or bits, SemCom prioritizes the meaning of the
transmitted data in the communication context. By transmit-
ting only relevant information, SemCom improves resource
efficiency and network capacity. Artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques are used to extract semantic information from the
source data, encode it and reconstruct the erroneous channel
output at the receiver [1]–[3]. While significant progress has
been made, key challenges remain, particularly in optimizing
communication resources in a way that is sensitive to the
semantic relevance of transmitted content. Addressing this
semantic-aware resource allocation is essential for advancing
the efficiency and reliability of next-generation networks.
The benefits of semantic-aware resource allocation vary
depending on the end-user’s intent, which may range from
complete data reconstruction, referred to as semantic-oriented
communication (SOC), to achieving task-specific objectives,
known as task- or goal-oriented semantic communication. In
this context, reconstruction performance at the receiver can
be quantified using semantic similarity, which measures the
extent to which the recovered data aligns with the intended
communication objective. This measure depends on both the
amount of transmitted semantic information, determined by
the compression rate, and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
of the communication channel. While traditional networks
primarily focus on communication reliability, it is increasingly
critical to design novel resource allocation schemes that also
account for semantic similarity in order to optimize end-to-end
performance.
A. Related works
Several studies [1], [4]–[16] have addressed this challenge.
[1] proposed a framework for text transmission that maximizes
semantic similarity by jointly optimizing the allocation of
resource blocks and semantic feature selection. In [4], the
authors introduced a method to optimize semantic spectral
efficiency by adjusting the number of transmitted semantic
symbols and channel assignment. [5] proposed a method to
enhance system throughput through user association and band-
width allocation. In [6], semantic accuracy and conventional
constraints were considered to maximize energy efficiency,
focusing on power allocation and determining the semantic
compression rate. [7] proposed a controllable compression
module that balances content quality and the size of trans-
mitted semantic information. [8] introduced a method to
maximize the effective semantic transmission rate by jointly
optimizing the semantic extraction ratio and base station (BS)
association while meeting semantic accuracy requirements.
Other research has focused on enhancing user experience
quality (QoE) [9], [10], [11], improving energy efficiency
(minimizing energy consumption) [12], and increasing task
arXiv:2504.20939v1  [cs.NI]  29 Apr 2025


--- Page 2 ---
execution success probability [13], [14], [15]. In task-oriented
SemCom [5], [12], [16], the amount of transmitted data is
lower than in full data reconstruction, leading to reduced
resource requirements, differentiating it from approaches fo-
cused on complete reconstruction.
Previous works have also adopted simplifying assumptions
in resource allocation. A common approach is to assign
a single channel per user, as in [1], [4], [5], [12]. Fixed
power allocation is another typical assumption [1], and [9].
In contrast, a key advantage of semantic communication lies
in its ability to prioritize information based on its relevance to
task success. This allows the system to transmit only essential
content—determined by the compression rate—while account-
ing for constraints such as acceptable delay and available
spectral or computational resources.
Contrary to prior art that typically allocate identical re-
sources to all users, which often leads to inefficiencies by
over-allocating to less critical information and limiting more
important content, our method allocates resources based on
semantic relevance. Furthermore, strict constraints like seman-
tic similarity reduce network flexibility in meeting user needs
and allocating resources. In response, we propose a flexible
resource allocation approach based on each user’s acceptable
semantic similarity range. The main contributions of this
paper are as follows:
• We propose a flexible resource allocation framework
for multi-user semantic-oriented communication (SOC),
which jointly considers required semantic similarity, min-
imum delay, and SNR.
• We introduce semantic similarity ranges to enhance allo-
cation flexibility, enabling the system to adapt to varying
resource availability and user density.
• We formulate the joint optimization of semantic and
transmission reliability as a mixed-integer nonlinear pro-
gramming problem (MINLP). We develop an algorithm
to tackle the NP-hard nature of the MINLP problem
by iteratively allocating bandwidth and power, while
determining appropriate compression rates for each user.
• Simulation results show that our method improves user
satisfaction and total network semantic similarity by
17.1% and 14%, respectively, compared to rigid semantic
similarity-based schemes.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II presents the system model and formulates the resource
allocation problem. Section III details the solution approach.
Section IV discusses the simulation results and Section V
concludes the paper.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
We consider the uplink of a wireless network, where a base
station (BS) is located at the center of the coverage area,
and N users are uniformly distributed throughout the region.
All users and the BS are equipped with a single antenna and
are stationary. A centralized resource allocation approach is
employed, where the BS assigns resources (power and avail-
able bandwidth) to users and determines their compression
rates for transmitting semantic information. We assume that all
users have similar priority for data transmission, although the
expected quality of semantic reconstruction may vary across
users.
Deep neural networks used in SemCom for extracting
semantic data often need updating when tasks change or when
multiple models are required for different tasks. To solve
this, [17] introduced the UDeepSC model, a unified end-to-
end framework that supports various tasks and data types.
In this study, we adopt UDeepSC for the semantic encoder
and decoder. Users employ both a semantic encoder and a
channel encoder, while the BS uses a semantic decoder and a
channel decoder. This paper focuses on image transmission,
where users extract semantic information from images using
the semantic encoder. Based on a set compression rate (O),
the encoded data is transmitted to the BS, which reconstructs
the image using both decoders. For simplicity, we assume or-
thogonal resource allocation (no interference) and an additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The received SNR
for the ith user is derived as follows:
SNRi = Pihi
βiN0
.
(1)
Here, N0 represents the noise power spectral density, Pi
denotes the transmission power, and βi is the allocated band-
width for the ith user. hi is the channel gain between the ith
user and the BS. The next section will explain the resource
allocation problem in detail.
A. Problem formulation
As previously mentioned, this paper focuses on full data
reconstruction at the receiver, as required in SOC, which
requires transmitting a large amount of semantic information
over limited spectrum resources. As a result, when many users
request service, the BS may not be able to meet all their
demands. Therefore, our goal is to enhance the number of
satisfied users. Our method addresses both conventional and
semantic requirements. Specifically, we propose a resource al-
location approach that ensures both transmission and semantic
reliability, aiming to maximize the number of satisfied users
within the network.
1) Reliable Transmission: To ensure transmission relia-
bility, data must be transmitted with high fidelity through
the physical channel. This requires an SNR above a certain
threshold to minimize bit error rates (BER) and guarantee
reliable data recovery at the receiver. Therefore, the following
constraint is incorporated into the resource allocation problem:
0 < SNRith ≤SNRi.
(2)
Here, SNRith represents the minimum required SNR of the
ith user.
2) Semantic reliability: Ensuring semantic reliability (ξ)
requires that the data recovered by the semantic decoder
closely aligns with the original data, maintaining an acceptable
level of semantic similarity for users. Semantic similarity is a
function of O and SNR, denoted as ξ(O, SNR). Higher com-
pression rates increase the demand for computing resources


--- Page 3 ---
and reduce semantic similarity, while lower rates increase the
need for spectrum resources and enhance semantic similarity.
Thus, given the trade-off between computational and commu-
nication resources in SemCom, a deficiency in one can be
compensated by leveraging the other.
Previous research on resource allocation for SemCom typ-
ically establishes a fixed threshold for the minimum required
semantic similarity. Enforcing a strict semantic similarity
constraint requires a specific amount of communication re-
sources, which limits flexibility in resource allocation. To
address this, we propose a range for semantic similarity. User
i specifies a minimum semantic similarity threshold (ξi,thmin),
indicating acceptable data retrieval and reliable transmission
at the semantic level. Additionally, a maximum semantic
similarity threshold (ξi,thmax) is defined, reflecting the user’s
highest satisfaction regarding computational resources and
energy consumption. Based on this range, the BS can flexibly
adjust the compression rate, transmission power, and assigned
bandwidth to serve more users. Consequently, the following
constraint is incorporated into the resource allocation problem:
0 < ξi,thmin ≤ξi(Oi, SNRi) ≤ξi,thmax ≤1,
(3)
where ξi(Oi, SNRi) represents the semantic similarity of
the ith user. For simplicity, we denote it as ξi hereafter.
Furthermore, our proposed method incorporates a delay
constraint, ensuring that within a given time interval (τith), the
required semantic information for user data reconstruction is
successfully transmitted. The transmission delay is influenced
by the compression rate and power allocation factor. Given
the transmission rate of the ith user Ri = βilog(1 + SNRi)
and the raw data size d0,i, the transmission time is defined as:
ti = d0,i·(1−Oi)
Ri
. Thus, the following constraint is imposed on
the transmission delay: ti ≤τith.
In our proposed method, transmission is considered reliable,
and the corresponding user is deemed satisfied if both SNR
and semantic similarity exceed specified thresholds. If SNRith
SNRi
is less than one, it ensures the transmission reliability for the
user ith. Similarly, this principle applies to semantic reliability,
represented by (
ξi,thmin
ξi
). Therefore, if both ratios are less than
one, the user is considered satisfied. To maximize the number
of satisfied users, our objective is to minimize the product of
semantic and transmission reliabilties across all users, which
is defined as:
N
P
n=1
( SNRith
SNRi )a · (
ξi,thmin
ξi
)a. Here, a represents
a penalty factor and selecting a large a penalizes unsatisfied
users. This implies that if any of the ratios exceed one, the
objective function increases. Furthermore, since Ri represents
the transmission rate of the ith user, multiplying SNR by
semantic similarity yields the effective transmission rate. This
suggests that even if a user’s SNR is high, a low level of
semantic similarity can result in resources being allocated
to transmit less critical information. Consequently, resource
efficiency decreases, and the value of (5) is reduced.
The overarching goal is to maximize the number of satisfied
users by minimizing the product of semantic and transmission
reliability metrics, thereby enhancing network capacity while
meeting users’ requirements. The detailed problem formula-
tion is presented below.
F :
min
{βn,On,Pn}∀n
N
X
n=1
(SNRith
SNRi
)a · (ξi,thmin
ξi
)a
subject to:
C1 : 0 <
N
X
n=1
βi ≤M,
i ∈N,
C2 : βi,min ≤βi,
i ∈N,
C3 : 0 < Pi ≤Ptot,
i ∈N,
C4 : 0 < SNRith ≤SNRi,
i ∈N,
C5 : 0 < Oi ≤1,
i ∈N,
C6 : ti ≤τith,
i ∈N,
C7 : 0 < ξi,thmin ≤ξi ≤ξi,thmax ≤1, i ∈N.
(4)
Here, n = {1, · · · , N} is the user set, and βi denotes the
allocated bandwidth for user i. C1 ensures that the total allo-
cated bandwidth does not exceed the available bandwidth (M).
C2 ensures that each user’s minimum bandwidth requirement
is satisfied. C3 guarantees that the transmission power (Pi) for
each user remains within the maximum allowed power (Ptot),
while C4 ensures that each user meets their minimum required
SNR (SNRith) for reliable transmission. The compression
rate directly impacts semantic similarity and is determined for
each user based on factors like semantic similarity range and
available bandwidth. The range for the compression rate Oi is
[0, 1], as ensured by C5. C6 ensures that the user transmission
delay remains within acceptable limits. Finally, C7 ensures
that the users meet the semantic similarity constraint. Next, we
focus on optimizing βi, Oi, and Pi by minimizing the product
of transmission and semantic similarity metrics, subject to the
system constraints defined in (4).
III. PROPOSED RESOURCE ALLOCATION ALGORITHM
Problem (4) is a non-convex nonlinear problem and belongs
to the class of MINLP problems. Generally, MINLP problems
are NP-hard (Non-deterministic Polynomial-time hard) and
cannot be efficiently solved using traditional optimization
methods. Furthermore, there is no closed-form expression for
the semantic similarity indicator (ξi). Therefore, due to the
interdependencies between semantic similarity, compression
rate, and minimum acceptable delay, we decompose (4) into
two sub-problems of power and bandwidth allocation (F1) and
compression rate adjustment (F2), formulated as follows:
F1 : min
β,P
N
X
n=1
(SNRith
SNRi
)a · (ξi,thmin
ξi
)a
subject to: C1, C2, C3, C4.
and
F2 : min
O
N
X
n=1
(SNRith
SNRi
)a · (ξi,thmin
ξi
)a
subject to: C5, C6, C7.
(5)


--- Page 4 ---
Based on the objective function and constraints of F1, the
problem can be formulated as a geometric programming (GP)
problem, solvable with tools like CVX.
By substituting (1) into F1 and performing some manipu-
lations, (7) can be rewritten as (9).
F
′
1 : min
β,P
N
X
n=1
(SNRith)a · (ξi,thmin)a · (Pi)−a · (hi)−a
· (βi)a · (ξi)−a · (N0)a
subject to:
C
′
1 : 0 <
N
X
n=1
M −1 · βi ≤1
C
′
2 : 0 < β−1
i
· βi,min ≤1
C
′
3 : 0 < P −1
tot · Pi ≤1
C
′
4 : 0 < SNRith · P −1
i
· h−1
i
· βi · N0 ≤1,
(6)
Since there is no closed-form expression for semantic simi-
larity, we run the selected encoder-decoder model (UDeepSC)
over specific SNR and compression rate ranges with defined
step sizes to obtain similarity values. The resulting similarity
table is then used to solve F2. To address problem (6), we
propose Algorithm 1, which iteratively solves F2 and F
′
1 to
reach a suboptimal solution.
To solve F2 , the users’ transmission reliability is prioritized
in the first step. For each user, based on the iteration’s
SNR (SNRi,it), initialized with SNRith, and C7, the best
similarity value ξi is selected by searching the lookup table.
The nearest similarity value less than ξi,thmax and satisfying
C7 is selected as optimal. With the obtained SNRi,it, and ξi,
the corresponding compression rate from the lookup table is
selected as the solution to F2 (i.e. Oi). If selected ξi and Oi
satisfy C6, they are used to solve F
′
1. Otherwise, the next best
similarity value (ξi) is selected based on SNRi,it, iterating
until no further options exist. In such a case, ξi and Oi are
obtained from the lookup table using SNRith.
Computational Complexity: The complexity of the pro-
posed algorithm is influenced by several factors: the number of
iterations (it), the lookup table method, and the complexity
of the GP problem. Since ξi can only be obtained through
the lookup table method, an exhaustive search method is
used. The complexity of this search is acceptable due to the
limited ranges for SNR and compression rate. Therefore, the
complexity of it is O(kN), where N is the number of users
and k is the size of the similarity table. Additionally, the
convexity and duality properties of GP are well understood,
and robust numerical solvers for GP are readily available.
In practice, interior point methods applied to GP exhibit
polynomial time complexity (O(n3), where n is the number
of variables and constants.) and perform efficiently with
high-quality software (e.g., the MOSEK package) [18], [19].
Therefore, considering the polynomial complexity of GP and
the limited number of iterations in the algorithm, the overall
complexity of the problem is polynomial in terms of the
number of users (O(it(kN + (7N + 3)3))).
Algorithm 1 Proposed algorithm for bandwidth, power allo-
cation, and compression rate adjustment.
Input: N, M, Ptot, a, N0, H = {h1, ..., hN}
SNRith = {SNR1th, ..., SNRNth},
ξi,thmin = {ξ1,thmin, ..., ξN,thmin},
ξi,thmax = {ξ1,thmax, ..., ξN,thmax}
Result: β, O, P
initialization Set SNRi,it = SNRith for each user, i.
Set iter = 0
Set βi = βi,min
repeat
for i = 1 to N do
while true do
With the use of a similarity table, find: Next best
optimal ξi and its corresponding Oi for SNRi,it
satisfying C7
if C6 is satisfied then
break
else
if there is no more optimal ξi candidate then
Set ξi to the best similarity corresponding
to the SNRith using the similarity table
Set Oi to the corresponding compression
rate of selected ξi and SNRith from the
similarity table
break
end
end
end
end
Solve F
′
1 as a GP problem using each user’s ξi
Calculate each SNRi,it using calculated βi, Pi
Set iter = iter + 1
until iter < itermax or ∆F < ∂;
IV. EVALUATION AND SIMULATION RESULTS
The performance of the proposed method is evaluated
through a simulation study, as detailed in this section. In
our simulation, we use Python to run the UDeepSC model,
which was implemented using PyTorch and trained on the
CIFAR-10 dataset. Additionally, MATLAB is employed to
simulate the proposed algorithm and solve the GP problem
using CVX. We compare the proposed method with three
other approaches: the baseline method, where users transmit
data using conventional communication, the strict similarity
method (our method without similarity rang), where each
user has a predefined minimum semantic similarity and the
proposed method in [11] (QoE-based RA). The QoE-based
resource allocation (RA) method employs a strict semantic
similarity constraint and assigns a single channel to each
user. Its objective is to maximize both the semantic rate and
semantic similarity in alignment with users’ preferences. The
following metrics are evaluated:


--- Page 5 ---
• Number of satisfied users: Users are considered satisfied
when both the minimum semantic similarity (ξi,thmin)
and minimum SNR (SNRith) are met.
• Semantic similarity of the users: Semantic similarity
measures how closely the reconstructed image matches
the original data. Here, Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR) is used to assess image reconstruction perfor-
mance by calculating the ratio between the maximum
possible power and noise.
PSNR = 10log10( P 2
max
MSE )
(7)
MSE = 1
n
n
X
n=1
(SIi −RIi)2,
(8)
where MSE represents the mean-square error between the
source image and reconstructed image, Pmax is the maximum
pixel value (255), and n is the total pixel count. Simulations
are conducted in a cell with a 100m radius and uniformly
distributed users. The values of
SNRith
SNRi
and
ξi,thmin
ξi
in
equation (6) range from 0 to 1 for the satisfied users. To
reflect the effect of unsatisfied users, we set a=2, although
larger exponents could also be used. In the proposed method,
ξi,thmin and ξi,thmax selected within the range of 0.6 to 0.9. In
the strict similarity method, the minimum semantic similarity
for each user is set within this range. Other parameters are
listed in Table I.
Figure 1 shows the number of satisfied users as a func-
tion of the maximum available bandwidth. In the proposed
method, users have a range for semantic similarity, allowing
the BS to allocate resources more flexibly. When the BS
cannot serve all users with the available resources, it adjusts
the compression rate for each user based on their semantic
similarity range to serve more users. This flexibility enables
the proposed method to increase the number of satisfied users
by dynamically adjusting the acceptable semantic similarity
and compression rate. In contrast, the strict similarity method
allocates resources to ensure users’ strict requirements are
met. As a result, users must transmit specific amounts of
semantic information to guarantee semantic similarity, leading
to higher resource consumption and fewer satisfied users
compared to the proposed method. Additionally, the baseline
method, which uses classical communication, results in the
fewest satisfied users because it transmits raw data, consuming
more resources. Moreover, the QoE-based RA method results
in fewer satisfied users compared to the proposed method.
This limitation arises from its exclusive allocation of a single
channel per user, even when additional channels are available.
Consequently, users are deprived of these resources, leading
to a reduction in transmitted semantic features, and ultimately,
decreased semantic similarity and satisfaction. Furthermore, if
the requirements of a user are not met, it results in resource
wastage, prevents other users from accessing those resources,
and ultimately reduces the overall number of satisfied users.
In addition, this method also has less flexibility in resource
allocation and user satisfaction level due to the use of strict
semantic similarity constraints. Additionally, since the pro-
posed method serves a higher number of users with the same
bandwidth, its resource efficiency in terms of the number of
satisfied users is greater than that of the other methods.
Figure 2 shows the semantic similarity values provided to
satisfied users. In this figure, the semantic similarity ranges
for users in the proposed method are displayed next to
the corresponding bar chart, while the minimum semantic
similarity for users in the strict similarity method and QoE-
based RA are shown above the respective bar chart. In the
proposed method, all users, except for user 8, were served
within their semantic similarity range. However, in the strict
similarity method, users 5, 8, and 10 were not served due to
the rigid semantic similarity requirements, resulting in more
resources being allocated to the users who were served. In
contrast, the proposed method improves resource allocation by
reducing users’ resource consumption and providing a seman-
tic similarity slightly below their maximum request (ξi,thmax).
This approach allows the proposed method to satisfy more
users while ensuring the provided similarity remains above
the minimum required value (ξi,thmin), thus keeping users
satisfied.
Furthermore, the QoE-based RA method, due to its strict
semantic similarity constraint and the allocation of a single
channel per user, can lead to user dissatisfaction when the
similarity constraints are not met. This single-channel alloca-
tion also results in the underutilization of channels assigned to
dissatisfied users, preventing other users from accessing these
channels. Consequently, the number of satisfied users is lower
compared to the other two methods.
Figure 3 shows the average semantic similarity of the
network as a function of the maximum available bandwidth.
As seen, the proposed method has lower average similarity
compared to the strict similarity method. This decrease is
intentional, as the proposed method prioritizes serving more
users. The trade-off between lower similarity and accommo-
dating more users is acceptable. On the other hand, the strict
similarity method uses a more rigid constraint, resulting in
higher similarity but fewer users being served, leading to a
higher average similarity than the proposed method. While
the QoE-based RA method incorporates a strict semantic
similarity constraint, its average semantic similarity is lower
than that of the strict semantic similarity method due to the
allocation of a single channel per user and the underutilization
of channels assigned to dissatisfied users. These factors also
make its average semantic similarity (0.7058) almost the same
as that of the proposed method (0.7085).
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a flexible resource allocation method
for SOC. Our algorithm optimizes resource allocation in
SemCom by dynamically adjusting the compression rate,
transmission power, and bandwidth to ensure that users’
data retrieval meets a specified range of semantic similarity
thresholds. The algorithm incorporates a minimum and max-
imum semantic similarity threshold for each user, allowing
flexibility in resource allocation while maintaining acceptable


--- Page 6 ---
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Maximum bandwidth
8-25 MHZ
User’s Max. transmission power
0.5W
Noise power spectral density, N0
-173dBm/Hz
Users’ delay constraint
0.4-0.6 ms
Initial data size, d0
3-5 Mbit
Minimum Users SNR
20-25dB
Fig. 1. Number of satisfied users VS maximum available bandwidth.
data quality. Additionally, a delay constraint ensures the timely
transmission of the required semantic information for data
reconstruction. Simulation results show that a slight, yet
acceptable, reduction in semantic similarity for some users
enables more efficient resource allocation, allowing the system
to serve more users while maintaining overall satisfaction
within the network. For future work, we will extend the
proposed method to accommodate various data types and
integrate task- and goal-oriented semantic communications
into the resource allocation process.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wang, M. Chen, T. Luo, W. Saad, D. Niyato, H. V. Poor and S. Cui,
”Performance optimization for semantic communications: An attention-
based reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2598-2613, Sep. 2022.
[2] C. Chaccour, W. Saad, M. Debbah, Z. Han and H. V. Poor, ”Less Data,
More Knowledge: Building Next Generation Semantic Communication
Networks,” in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Feb. 2025.
[3] S Fiorellino, C Battiloro, EC Strinati, P Di Lorenzo, ”Dynamic Relative
Representations for Goal-Oriented Semantic Communications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.16986, Mar 25. 2024
[4] L. Yan, Z. Qin, R. Zhang, Y. Li, and G. Y. Li, ”Resource allocation
for text semantic communications,” IEEE Wireless Communications
Letters, vol. 11, no. 7, Jul. 2022.
[5] L. Xia, Y. Sun, X. Li, G. Feng, and M. A. Imran, ”Wireless re-
source management in intelligent semantic communication networks,”
in IEEE INFOCOM 2022-IEEE Conference on Computer Communica-
tions Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), pp. 1-6. 2022,
[6] R. Xu, Z. Yang, Z. Zhao, Q. Yang and Z. Zhang, ”Resource Allocation
for Green Probabilistic Semantic Communication with Rate Splitting,”
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), Denver, CO, USA, 2024.
[7] J. Liu et al., ”Optimizing Resource Allocation for Multi-Modal Semantic
Communication in Mobile AIGC Networks: A Diffusion-Based Game
Approach,” in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and
Networking.
[8] H Chen, F Fang, and X Wang. ”Knowledge Sharing-enabled Semantic
Rate Maximization for Multi-cell Task-oriented Hybrid Semantic-Bit
Communication Networks”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01635, Jan 3.
2025
Fig. 2. Semantic similarity of the satisfied users.
Fig. 3. Average similarity VS maximum available bandwidth.
[9] L. Yan, Z. Qin, R. Zhang, Y. Li, and G. Y. Li, ”QoE-aware resource
allocation for semantic communication networks,” in GLOBECOM
2022-2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference, 2022: IEEE, pp.
3272-3277.
[10] Z Shao, Q Wu, P Fan, Wang K, Q Fan, W Chen, KB Letaief. ”Semantic-
Aware Resource Management for C-V2X Platooning via Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning”, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04672, Nov 7.
2024
[11] L. Yan, Z. Qin, R. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Tao, and G. Y. Li, ”QoE-based
Semantic-Aware Resource Allocation for Multi-Task Networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.06543, 2023.
[12] Z. Yang, M. Chen, Z. Zhang, and C. Huang, ”Energy efficient semantic
communication over wireless networks with rate splitting,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1484-1495,
2023.
[13] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, and N. Jiang, ”Adaptable semantic compres-
sion and resource allocation for task-oriented communications,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2204.08910, 2022.
[14] H. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Li, K. Long, and A. Nallanathan, ”DRL-driven
Dynamic Resource Allocation for Task-Oriented Semantic Communica-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 7, pp. 3992-
4004, Jul. 2023.
[15] C. Liu, C. Guo, Y. Yang, and J. Chen, ”Bandwidth and power
allocation for task-oriented semanticcommunication,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.10795, 2022.
[16] B. Du, H. Du, H. Liu, D. Niyato, P. Xin, J. Yu, et al., ”YOLO-
based Semantic Communication with Generative AI-aided Resource
Allocation for Digital Twins Construction,” in IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, 2023.
[17] G. Zhang, Q. Hu, Z. Qin, Y. Cai, G. Yu and X. Tao, ”A Unified Multi-
Task Semantic Communication System for Multimodal Data,” in IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 72, no. 7, Jul. 2024
[18] Y. Nesterov and A. Nemirovsky, Interior Point Polynomial Methods in
Convex Programming. SIAM Press, 1994.
[19] M Chiang. Geometric programming for communication systems. Foun-
dations and Trends® in Communications and Information Theory. 2005
Jul 14;2(1–2):1-54.
