--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:2505.21331v1  [cs.DS]  27 May 2025
Scheduling with Uncertain Holding Costs
and its Application to Content Moderation
Caner Gocmen∗
Thodoris Lykouris†
Deeksha Sinha‡
Wentao Weng§
Abstract
In content moderation for social media platforms, the cost of delaying the review of a content
is proportional to its view trajectory, which fluctuates and is apriori unknown. Motivated by
such uncertain holding costs, we consider a queueing model where job states evolve based on a
Markov chain with state-dependent instantaneous holding costs. We demonstrate that in the
presence of such uncertain holding costs, the two canonical algorithmic principles, instantaneous-
cost (cµ-rule) and expected-remaining-cost (cµ/θ-rule), are suboptimal. By viewing each job
as a Markovian ski-rental problem, we develop a new index-based algorithm, Opportunity-
adjusted Remaining Cost (OaRC), that adjusts to the opportunity of serving jobs in the
future when uncertainty partly resolves. We show that the regret of OaRC scales as ˜O(L1.5√
N),
where L is the maximum length of a job’s holding cost trajectory and N is the system size. This
regret bound shows that OaRC achieves asymptotic optimality when the system size N scales to
infinity. Moreover, its regret is independent of the state-space size, which is a desirable property
when job states contain contextual information. We corroborate our results with an extensive
simulation study based on two holding cost patterns (online ads and user-generated content)
that arise in content moderation for social media platforms. Our simulations based on synthetic
and real datasets demonstrate that OaRC consistently outperforms existing practice, which is
based on the two canonical algorithmic principles.
1
Introduction
Content moderation is important for any platform [Gil18] and is especially technically challenging
for large social media platforms [HCFM+22] due to the scale of content from billions of users.
To address this technical challenge, social media platforms like Meta and TikTok rely on an AI-
human pipeline and employ tens of thousands of humans reviewers [Met22, Tik25b]. In particular,
Artificial Intelligence (AI) models initially filter content that clearly violates the platform’s policies
[Met25, Tik25a] and route ambiguous content to human reviewers (see Section 1.2 for further
discussion of this pipeline). Human reviewers then scrutinize the latter content to identify further
policy violations. The central objective of this human review system is to reduce the prevalence
of policy-violating content (henceforth referred to as prevalence), which is typically proportional
to its number of views [HCFM+22]. As such, a content’s holding cost, which is proportional to
its accumulated views while waiting for review, differs across content. Given the large volume of
∗Meta Platforms, caner@meta.com
†Massachusetts Institute of Technology, lykouris@mit.edu
‡Meta Platforms, deekshasinha@meta.com
§Massachusetts Institute of Technology, wweng@mit.edu
1


--- Page 2 ---
(2,2,2,2,2,0,…), w.p. 1
(3,0,0,0,0,0,…), w.p. 1/2
(3,6,6,6,6,0,…), w.p. 1/2
Holding Cost Trajectories
Observed Arrival
Service
Queue
Actual Arrival
Total holding cost = 2×6 = 12
Canonical Scheduling Algorithms
?
?
?
?
?
?
Observed Arrival
Service
Queue
Actual Arrival
A Better Scheduling Algorithm
Total holding cost = 3×3+2 =11
No more cost
?
?
?
Figure 1: Existing algorithmic principles (instantaneous or expected remaining cost) always serve
new Video jobs. Waiting for one period improves our decisions by distinguishing the Video jobs.
content and the heterogeneity in holding costs, the scheduling algorithm, which determines the
review order, plays a vital role in the prevalence reduction efforts for content moderation.
There are two canonical algorithmic principles on how to schedule jobs with heterogeneous
holding costs, which have been extensively studied with applications from manufacturing systems
[Pin12] to service systems such as call centers [GKM03] and hospitals [AIM+15]. First, the (gener-
alized) cµ-rule greedily serves jobs with the maximum (service-rate-weighted) instantaneous holding
cost. This algorithm is optimal for linear holding costs [CS61] as well as heavy-traffic optimal for
convex holding costs [VM95, MS04]. Second, the cµ/θ-rule prioritizes jobs with highest (service-
rate-weighted) expected remaining holding cost. This algorithm is asymptotically optimal when jobs
have linear holding costs and abandon the system at an exponential rate [AGS10, AGS11]. The
optimality guarantees for both algorithmic principles rely on the assumption that the holding cost
of a job follows a deterministic and known function of the wait time until the job gets served or
(independently) abandoned.
This known-holding-cost setting is not applicable to content moderation. In content moderation,
the holding cost of a job (content waiting for human review) is the product between the probability
that it violates the platform’s policies and the number of views it accumulates [HCFM+22]. The
platform uses AI models to predict the former quantity and this prediction stays mostly intact
throughout the lifetime of a post [ABB+22].
However, the latter quantity depends on a con-
tent’s uncertain view trajectory, whose uncertainty gradually resolves over time [CKR+09]. Such
uncertainty manifests in social media platforms due to the large sources of inherent randomness
contributing to a content’s view trajectory. For example, a content’s view trajectory depends on
whether it is liked or reshared by friends [RXS+17, HKL+21], whether it is recommended by the
platform [HKL+21], or even whether it turns out to provoke positive emotion [BM12]. Despite the
available tools for content popularity prediction (see [ZEH+15, RXS+17, HKL+21] and the refer-
ences therein), perfectly predicting a content’s view trajectory is unrealistic [SDW06, CAD+14],
which separates content moderation from the typical known-holding-cost setting. We note that un-
certainty in holding costs is not unique to content moderation but also arises in other applications.
For example, in healthcare, patients’ health conditions can deteriorate or improve over time but
the conditions’ evolution is uncertain a priori [HCD22].
When holding costs are uncertain, the two canonical algorithmic principles discussed above fail
to deliver near-optimal performance; Figure 1 provides an example illustrating this suboptimality.
In this example, the system operates in discrete-time periods and there are three possible job
holding cost trajectories, which we pictorially refer to as Post, BlueVideo, and RedVideo. All
jobs incur zero cost after five periods. A Post job incurs a cost of 2 for the initial five periods, a
BlueVideo job incurs a cost of 3 for the first period but has 0 cost afterwards, and a RedVideo
job incurs a cost of 3 for the first period and a constant cost of 6 afterwards.
The algorithm
2


--- Page 3 ---
observes the current holding costs (but not the future), serves one job, and pays the holding cost
for unserved jobs. In each period, two jobs arrive: one is Post (the algorithm knows since only
Post jobs have holding cost 2) and the other one is Video, which has equal probability to be
a BlueVideo or a RedVideo job (the algorithm knows it is either of the two since the holding
cost is 3, but not the actual realization since it cannot observe future holding costs). Both the
canonical algorithmic principles will prioritize a Video job over any Post job as it has a larger
instantaneous cost (3 > 2) and a larger expected remaining cost (0.5×3+0.5×(3+6×4) > 5×2).
The algorithm will serve a Video job for every period and all Post jobs will backlog in the queue.
However, serving a BlueVideo job is suboptimal as it will incur no more cost after its first period.
Instead, a better algorithm can account for the future opportunity to serve a Video job once its
uncertainty is resolved. If the algorithm prioritizes a new Post job over a new Video job, it can
avoid servicing a BlueVideo job while still being able to serve a RedVideo job in the next period.
This illustrates that with uncertain holding costs, canonical algorithmic principles are suboptimal:
the instantaneous-cost principle completely ignores the future holding cost a job can incur, while
the expected-remaining-cost principle disregards the opportunity of serving a job in the future when
the job’s uncertainty partially resolves.
Thus motivated, this paper tackles the following research question:
How should we redesign the scheduling algorithm in the face of uncertain holding costs?
1.1
Our methodological contributions
Model.
To capture uncertain holding costs, we consider a discrete-time queueing system where
the instantaneous holding cost of a waiting job is determined by the job’s state and the state evolves
according to a known Markov chain. In particular, the system is specified by the following model
primitives: a system size N, an arrival rate λ, a service rate µ, a cost vector c, and a transition
kernel between the states. In each period t, a random number of servers R(t) ∼Bin(N, µ) are
available to serve jobs. The scheduling algorithm selects at most R(t) jobs from the waiting queue
Q(t) and those jobs leave the system without incurring further cost. All remaining jobs j with
state Sj(t) incur an instantaneous holding cost c(Sj(t)). Moreover, each job j transitions to a new
state Sj(t+1) in the next period according to the Markov chain, which we assume is a directed tree.
A job can also transition into an empty state ⊥, meaning that the job abandons the system without
getting service. At the end of a period, a random number of new jobs, A(t) ∼Bin(N, λ), join the
system. A feasible scheduling algorithm selects jobs for service with known model primitives and
current states of all waiting jobs but no knowledge of jobs’ future states and thus cost trajectories.
The goal is to design a feasible scheduling algorithm with minimum holding cost. A scheduling
algorithm is asymptotically optimal if, as the system size N increases, the gap between its long-run
average holding cost and that of an optimal feasible scheduling algorithm is sublinear in N.
Algorithm.
The key tension, as demonstrated in Figure 1, is whether to serve a job now (to
prevent its future uncertain cost using current capacity) or postpone its service (to save current
capacity but endure an instantaneous cost).
Relaxing the capacity constraint with a capacity
price γ that we later specify, this tension is captured by a ski-rental problem. In ski-rental, a skier
chooses, over a time horizon, whether to pay a one-time cost of buying equipment (similar to how
serving a job pays the capacity price γ) or to pay a daily rental cost (similar to how postponing
the service of a job yields an instantaneous holding cost). Although a typical ski-rental problem
3


--- Page 4 ---
assumes a uniform daily rental cost that becomes zero after an ex-ante unknown time [KKR01],
the daily rental cost in our setting is uncertain as the instantaneous cost of a job changes over time.
Thanks to the Markovian structure of jobs, this problem, which we refer to as Markovian ski-
rental, can be formulated as a dynamic program for any given capacity price γ. Specifically, the
cost-to-go function V (γ, i) for a job with current state i satisfies V (γ, i) = min

γ, c(i) + V f(γ, i)
	
with V f(γ, i) being the expected (future) cost-to-go function for the next state conditioning on
the current state. This recursion shows that the optimal cost for a job with current state i is the
minimum between (i) the cost γ of serving it now, or (ii) the sum of the instantaneous cost c(i) and
the future minimum cost V f(γ, i). Based on this formulation, our scheduling algorithm, named
Opportunity-adjusted Remaining Cost (or OaRC in short), computes a suitable capacity
price γ⋆from the dual of a linear program (LP), which is a fluid relaxation of the original problem.
It then creates an index for a job with state i by IndexOaRC(i) = c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) and serves the
R(t) jobs with highest indices. Theoretically, this algorithm enjoys a regret bound independent of
the state-space size and achieves asymptotic optimality (Theorem 1). Practically, it motivates an
easy-to-implement heuristic that shows strong numerical performance (see Sections 1.2 and 5).
Analysis.
Our analysis contains four components. First, using the tree structure, we derive the
fluid equilibrium for any priority algorithm, which operates based on a fixed ordering of states
and serves jobs with states in this ordering (Section 4.1). The class of priority algorithms includes
any index-based scheduling algorithms, such as OaRC, with a suitable tie-breaking rule. Second,
using the complementary slackness theorem, we prove that the fluid equilibrium for OaRC is
optimal for the fluid LP (Lemma 4.3). Third, we show that the steady-state distribution of queue
lengths under any priority algorithm behaves similarly with its fluid equilibrium up to a ˜O(
√
N)
term (Lemma 4.4). Lastly, we establish that the fluid LP is a lower bound for the long-run average
holding cost of any feasible algorithm (Lemma 4.5). These combined show that the regret of OaRC
is at most ˜O(
√
N), thus establishing its asymptotic optimality.
Our main contribution lies in the third component (Section 4.4) which shows that the steady-
state distribution for a priority algorithm is close to its fluid equilibrium. In particular, for any
priority algorithm, there is a minimum set of states, which we call the top set, such that fully serving
jobs with these states would clear all the jobs the algorithm should serve in its fluid equilibrium.
We establish that the algorithm (with high probability) serves all the jobs in the subtree of this
top set by analyzing a corresponding Lyapunov function. The Lyapunov analysis contains two
steps. The first step shows that this Lyapunov function has a negative drift if its value is large
enough (Lemma 4.10). A main challenge is to upper bound the numbers of jobs with states in the
top set, which are correlated random variables. We tackle this challenge by analyzing a system
with no job-level correlation and establish a large deviation result (Lemma 4.8). The second step
translates the negative drift into a high probability bound of the Lyapunov function. A difficulty
is that our Lyapunov function can, albeit with small probability, change significantly within one
period. Existing techniques rely on an almost sure upper bound on the change and thus fail to give
satisfactory guarantees. To address this issue, we develop a new geometric tail bound (Lemma 4.9)
that only requires the Lyapunov function to have a small change with high probability.
1.2
Application to content moderation for social media platforms
Our work proposes a better scheduling algorithm for content moderation in social media platforms.
The volume of content in social media platforms is too large to be all reviewed by humans [ABB+22].
4


--- Page 5 ---
As a result, current content moderation systems combine AI and human reviewers, where an initial
AI filter determines whether a content violates any of the platform’s policies and admits it for
further human review if the AI is uncertain [LW24]. The content that is deemed policy-violating
either by the AI system or by human reviewers is then removed from the platform. The scheduling
algorithm for the human review system determines the order in which humans review the content
that was admitted by the AI system, i.e., the content enqueued for human review. Let pViolating(j)
be the probability that content j is policy-violating and CumView(j) be the cumulative number
of views of content j until a human reviews it (or the end of a time horizon if a human never
reviews it). The system seeks to minimize the predicted policy-violating views, defined by the sum
of pViolating(j)×CumView(j) among enqueued content j.1 There are three scheduling algorithms
used in practice:
• pViolating [Cha23] prioritizes the content with the largest policy-violating probability,
which is typically available from (a group of) machine learning (ML) models [ABB+22].
• Velocity [ABB+22] prioritizes the content with the largest number of views in the last period
weighted by the policy-violating probability.
This mimics the first canonical algorithmic
principle discussed above and optimizes instantaneous cost similar to the cµ-rule.
• pIV [MSA+21] prioritizes content with the highest predicted number of remaining views
weighted by the policy-violating probability. This mimics the second canonical algorithmic
principle discussed above and optimizes the expected remaining cost similar to the cµ/θ rule.
These baseline algorithms do not carefully incorporate the uncertainty in the content’s view tra-
jectory. The first two do not account for future views at all, while pIV only considers the expected
number of future views and, as a result, may overtly tailor to content that may become extremely
viral but with low probability of being policy-violating. In contrast, our algorithm adapts to this
uncertainty, yielding significant practical improvements as we detail below.
To avoid the overhead of training a reinforcement learning model for the cost-to-go function V f,
we propose a simplified implementation of OaRC based on hindsight approximation [SFC+23],
which we call HOaRC. Specifically, we approximate the cost-to-go function by the product of
(i) the policy-violating probability and (ii) the predicted remaining views capped by a hyper-
parameter γ. We prioritize content with the highest HOaRC index, (informally) defined by
IndexHOaRC = pViolating · (Views in the last period + Prediction of min{γ, Remaining views}) .
This algorithm is easy to deploy in practice as it is index-based like the existing algorithms. Al-
though it requires building a new ML model to predict min{γ, Remaining views}, there are existing
ML models predicting a content’s remaining views [ZEH+15, RXS+17, HKL+21]. One can reuse
the training pipeline of these models to create the new one by capping the target value with γ.
Our simulations based on synthetic and real datasets (Section 5) demonstrate substantial im-
provement of HOaRC over existing scheduling approaches. The simulations capture two distinct
business settings that are relevant for content moderation systems: one is for online advertising (the
ads setting), the other one is for user-generated content (the UGC setting). The ads setting consid-
ers a synthetic dataset for content view trajectories, which mimics a platform’s promotion campaign
of different ads using multi-armed bandits and budget pacing [CKRU08, AGWY14, SBF17]. The
1We use the predicted instead of the actual policy-violating views, which is based on the actual human labels of
content, because the latter is unobservable for unreviewed content. See Section 5.1 for a more detailed discussion.
5


--- Page 6 ---
UGC setting employs both (i) a synthetic dataset generated from a Hawkes process motivated by
practical content traces [HKL+21] and (ii) a real dataset from [RXS+17] containing the view tra-
jectories of over ten thousand YouTube videos. For all three datasets and a wide range of reviewing
capacity, HOaRC consistently delivers 2.6% to 8.5% reduction in policy-violating views compared
to existing practices. Another way to measure the benefit of HOaRC is through its reviewer-hour
savings, i.e., the reduction in the number of human reviews needed to prevent the same amount
of policy-violating views as a baseline scheduling algorithm. Given that social media platforms
employ tens of thousands of reviewers [Met22, Tik25b], even one percent reviewer-hour savings
can unleash thousands of reviewer hours per day with no deterioration in moderation quality. Our
simulations demonstrate that HOaRC offers 7.8% to 25% reviewer-hour savings across all three
datasets; if realized in practice, this can translate to millions of reviewer hours for one year.
1.3
Related work
Online learning and scheduling.
Our work falls broadly under the recent literature of using
online information (learning) to enable better scheduling decisions [WX21]. Specifically, our model
resembles a Bayesian setting where dynamic job classes capture uncertainties in job information
that gradually resolve over time. Leveraging information in such uncertainties can help develop
better scheduling algorithms. For example, [BR16, BRW23] show how to use information on the
job abandonment distribution to achieve optimal queue length as some jobs leave the system sooner
than others. To capture uncertainty in patients’ future health conditions, [HCD22] study a queueing
model where patients randomly transition between a moderate and an urgent state. They propose
an optimal index-based scheduling algorithm that incorporates state transition information. Jobs
with dynamic classes are also used to model liver allocation systems [AAA+12] as well as service sys-
tems with customer upgrades [DL10]. Our contribution to this literature is extending the Bayesian
framework to model jobs in content moderation and proposing an asymptotically optimal algorithm
with a regret bound independent of the number of possible job states. Although jobs in our model
and these studies change states only while they are waiting, in another literature they change states
only upon service but can either rejoin the system or leave [ADVS13, MX16, BM19, SGMV20].
Such models capture expert systems where inspection of a job by the server reveals new information.
Another stream of literature focuses on a frequentist setting where there are different types
of jobs and each type has ex-ante unknown model primitives (e.g., service rates, rewards, aban-
donment rates). Focusing on achieving low regret, i.e., reaching the perfect-information bench-
mark algorithm in a long time horizon, [KAJS18, KSJS21, SSM21, ZBW24] design learning al-
gorithms for unknown service rates that achieve asymptotically optimal queue lengths or holding
costs. [HXLB22, FM22, SLL24, vKSSW24, XHKS25] focus on learning unknown payoffs of different
servers while assuming known service rates. [JSS24, CLH24] study learning algorithms for dynamic
pricing in a queueing system. A separate literature focuses on scheduling algorithms that stabilize
queueing systems with unknown service rates. [NRLP12, SSM21] combine the MaxWeight algo-
rithm from [TE92] with forced exploration or frame-based learning to stabilize a queueing system
with unknown service rate. To capture the transient performance of learning algorithms in queueing
systems, [FLW23] propose a metric for the transient cost of learning in queueing and give algorithms
with near-optimal transient performance. Moving beyond a stationary setting, [YSY23, NM23a]
show that MaxWeight with discounted or sliding-window upper confidence bound estimates sta-
bilizes queueing systems with non-stationary service rates. [GT23, SBP21, FHL22, FLW24] design
decentralized learning algorithms with various stability and delay guarantees.
6


--- Page 7 ---
Restless bandits and scheduling.
Our model can be viewed as restless bandits with dy-
namically arriving and departing arms.
In a typical restless bandit setting, a decision maker
activates a subset of arms and the arms transition according to a known Markov chain depend-
ing on whether the arm is activated or not [Whi88].
Our work is close to the development of
index-based algorithms in restless bandits; see [NM23b] for a survey. [Whi88] derives the Whit-
tle index algorithm which is asymptotic optimal under an indexability condition [Whi88, WW90].
[LAV15, AJN17, Aal24] show the optimality of Whittle index for certain multiclass queueing systems
with abandonment. However, Whittle index can be difficult to compute [AM22] and the indexa-
bility condition can be hard to verify [BNM00]. Later work develops indices based on Lagrangian
duals [BNM00, BS20, Ver16, ABS24]; however, the algorithms require a hard-to-verify condition
called Uniform Global Attractor Property (UGAP) to be asymptotically optimal [HXCW23]. Re-
cent work has devised non index-based algorithms with asymptotic optimality without the UGAP
assumption [HXCW23, HXCW24b, HXCW24a, GGY24]. Concurrent to our work, [LGHS25] shows
how scheduling in a multi-class queueing system with convex holding cost translates into a rest-
less bandit problem and designs a heuristic algorithm based on Whittle index. They demonstrate
that their algorithm has numerically improved performance, though no theoretical guarantee is
given. Our work contributes to this literature by showing that an index-based algorithm can still
be asymptotic optimal without the UGAP assumption if, when activated, an arm stops incurring
any cost and, when not activated, evolves according to a tree-based Markov chain.
Techniques on showing steady-state optimality.
Existing work in the analysis of index-
based scheduling algorithms mostly focuses on analyzing a fluid version of the stochastic system
[HCD22, LSZZ20] or establishing “fluid optimality” [AGS10], i.e., fixing a time horizon T the
algorithm becomes optimal as the system size N goes to ∞; see [PW22] for a general treatment for
fluid analysis of scheduling algorithms in a multi-class multi-server system. Our work differs from
these studies in two aspects: first, our system is discrete-time; second and more importantly, we
bound the steady state (T →∞) gap for the stochastic system for any system size N. This requires
new analytical tools as discussed in [AGS11]. We achieve this via the drift method. Building on tools
from [Haj82, BGT01], the drift method was established in [Sto04, ES12, MS16] on showing heavy-
traffic optimality of the MaxWeight algorithm where the system size is fixed but the load scales to
a critical point. Our work is closer to the literature of using drift method to analyze load balancing
algorithms in a continuous-time many-server regime; see e.g. [Yin17, LY20, WZS20, VCM23]. Our
contribution is extending techniques from this literature to a discrete-time setting where the arrival
intensity per period scales to infinity. This requires the development of a new geometric tail bound
(see the discussion below Lemma 4.9).
Content moderation.
Our work contributes to the recent effort of using AI techniques to pre-
serve integrity in social media platforms [HCFM+22]. Given the large volume of content to moder-
ate, a salient challenge is to develop automated systems that detect policy-violating content with
high accuracy [GBK20]. Building an accurate machine learning model to moderate content re-
quires careful feature design and selection of data [HCFM+22]. Separate machine learning models
are available for different violation types [ABB+22] and rely on a large range of features such as
image caption [ZLS+16], temporal interactions between users [NVH20], embedding of comments
[DZM+15], and users’ writing styles [CZZX12]. Recently large language models (LLM) have shown
promising results for automating content moderation [KAD24].
Content moderation in social media platforms necessarily combines AI with human reviewers for
7


--- Page 8 ---
efficiency and accuracy [LW24]. Focusing on the interface between AI and humans, [ABB+22] apply
online learning to decide, based on risk scores from multiple AI models, which content should be
prioritized for human reviews. [LW24] abstract the content moderation pipeline into classification,
admission, and scheduling decisions and propose a near-optimal algorithm that balances classifica-
tion error and delay in human reviews. Focusing on the human review system, [MSA+21] propose
a simulation framework that allows the platform to evaluate the impact of different routing and
capacity decisions. Given that social media platforms rely on global labor for content moderation
[Rob19], [AKZ+23] study how to fairly allocate content moderation workload to different review
teams. The work closest to ours is [LNZ24], who extends the cµ−rule to develop an index-based
scheduling algorithm accounting for the impact of prediction errors on content holding costs. Their
algorithm is heavy-traffic optimal under the assumption of known and convex holding costs. As
discussed above, the holding cost of a job in content moderation does not satisfy this assumption
as it is proportional to its uncertain (and non-convex) view trajectory. Our work addresses this
complexity by designing a near-optimal index-based scheduling algorithm handling uncertain and
non-convex holding costs.
2
Model
Uncertain holding cost trajectory.
We model the uncertain nature of jobs’ holding cost tra-
jectory by a known Markov chain. The Markov chain has a finite state space S, a length L, a
cost vector c = (c(i))i∈S with c(i) > 0 for any i ∈S, and a transition kernel P = (P(i, k))i,k∈S
denoting the probability of transitioning from a state i to another state k. We assume the Markov
process has a tree structure,2 such that the state space partitions into L levels of S0, . . . , SL−1.
Each state i ∈Sℓwith ℓ> 0, has a unique parent pa(i) ∈Sℓ−1 such that its transition probability
p(i) ≡P(pa(i), i) > 0 and P(k, i) = 0 for any k ̸= pa(i). Let ch(i) denote the set of children states
for state i, i.e., ch(i) = {k ∈S : pa(k) = i}. We allow P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k) < 1; in that case, state i has
probability 1 −P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k) to transition into an empty state ⊥after which no future cost will
incur, i.e., the job abandons the system. Letting θ = mini∈S 1 −P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k) be the minimum
abandonment probability across states, we assume throughout this paper that θ > 0. Since the
Markov chain is a tree, there is a unique state in S0, which we call the root and denote by r ∈S0.
For the root node we set p(r) = 1.
A discrete-time queueing system.
Given a system size N, normalized arrival rate λ ∈(0, 1)
and service rate µ ∈(0, 1], the queueing system operates in periods {1, 2, . . .}.3 Initially there is no
waiting job in the system. For a period t ≥1, the following events happen.
1. Server capacity: A random number of servers R(t) are available with R(t) ∼Bin(N, µ).
2. Service decision: Observing the states of waiting jobs, the system selects a set R(t) of jobs
from the the queue Q(t) of jobs waiting for service, which satisfies R(t) ⊆Q(t) and |R(t)| ≤
R(t). Selected jobs leave the system without incurring any cost.
2A tree Markov chain can model any stochastic process by defining states as the observed history. Although the
number of states can be exponential in the state space of the original stochastic process, our guarantees will not scale
with the number of states.
3We assume λ < 1 so that in each period the system has nonzero probability to see no arrival.
8


--- Page 9 ---
3. Holding cost: For all remaining jobs waiting for service, they incur a holding cost. Denote by
Sj(t) ∈S the random but observable state of a job j in period t. The total cost incurred in
this period is P
j∈Q(t)\R(t) c (Sj(t)) .
4. Transition: Any remaining job j ∈Q(t)\R(t) transitions into a new state Sj(t+1) following
the transition kernel P(Sj(t), Sj(t + 1)). A job transitioning into the empty state ⊥implies
that it abandons, i.e., it leaves the system without getting service.
5. Arrivals: A set of new jobs A(t) arrive, with cardinality of A(t) being A(t). Further, A(t) is
a binomial distribution Bin(N, λ) with λ > 0 being the normalized arrival rate. All new jobs
have the same initial state, i.e., the root node of the Markov chain. Thus, Sj(t + 1) = r for
any new job j ∈A(t).
6. Queue update:
The queue of waiting jobs for the next period is then Q(t + 1) = {j ∈
Q(t) \ R(t): Sj(t + 1) ̸=⊥} ∪A(t).
A scheduling algorithm ALG selects the set R(t) of jobs for servers to work on in each period t.
We say that an algorithm ALG is feasible, if the selection is only based on the historical observed
information {R(τ), Q(τ), {Sj(τ)}j∈Q(τ)}τ≤t ∪{R(τ), A(τ)}τ<t, model primitives N, λ, µ, and the
Markov chain of jobs, including the cost of each state and the transition kernel. However, the
algorithm cannot use future information including the future available servers, the future number
of arrivals, and the future states of jobs.
Objectives.
Let Q(t, ALG) be the set of jobs in queue and R(t, ALG) be the selected set of
jobs for service under an algorithm ALG in period t. We want to select a feasible algorithm that
minimizes the long-run average holding cost defined by
C(ALG) = lim sup
T→∞
1
T E


T
X
t=1
X
j∈Q(t,ALG)\R(t,ALG)
c(Sj(t))

,
(1)
where the expectation is taken over the randomness in (i) server capacity R(t), (ii) algorithm’s
service decision, (iii) job transitions, and (iv) arrivals A(t). Letting the set of feasible algorithms
be Π, minimizing the long-run average holding cost is equivalent to minimize the regret, which is
the increase in cost compared to an optimal feasible algorithm:
Reg(ALG) = C(ALG) −
inf
ALG′∈Π C(ALG′).
(2)
Our goal is to design a scheduling algorithm with small regret. To formalize this goal, we resort
to asymptotically optimal algorithms.
Specifically, varying the system size N gives a sequence
of queueing systems. For each system, an algorithm ALG has a corresponding long-run average
holding cost C(N, ALG) and regret Reg(N, ALG). An algorithm ALG is asymptotically optimal
if its regret is diminishing with respect to the system size: i.e.,
1
N Reg(N, ALG) →0 as N →∞.
Notation.
To ease the exposition of jobs’ tree Markov chain, we introduce the following notation:
for a state i ∈S, its ancestor set Anc(i) includes states on the unique path from the root r to state i
(both included). The subtree of a state i, Sub(i), refers to all states k such that i is an ancestor
of k, i.e., i ∈Anc(k). We also write Sub(X) to denote the subtree of a set of states X such that
Sub(X) = S
i∈X Sub(i). Similarly, Anc(X), pa(X), ch(X) denote the (unioned) set of ancestors,
9


--- Page 10 ---
parents and children for states in X. Throughout this paper, we use R to denote the set of real
numbers, R≥0 to denote the set of non-negative real numbers, and RS
≥0 to denote the set of non-
negative vectors defined over set S. For any real value x, (x)+ denotes max(x, 0). If x is a positive
integer, we use [x] to denote the set {1, . . . , x}. We use the notation ⊥to denote an empty state
and view {⊥} as an empty set ∅with no element. We include a table of notation in Appendix A
for frequently used notation in this paper.
3
Markovian Ski-Rental, Fluid Relaxation, and Our Algorithm
This section presents our algorithm Opportunity-adjusted Remaining Cost (OaRC) that
achieves asymptotic optimality. We first give intuition of the algorithm via the connection between
our problem and a Markovian ski-rental problem in Section 3.1. Solving the ski-rental problem
requires the input of a suitable capacity price, which we address in Section 3.2 by analyzing the
dual of a linear program. Section 3.3 gives the full algorithm description of OaRC and its guarantee.
3.1
Intuition: Markovian ski-rental
To provide the intuition behind OaRC, we focus on a warm-up setting where, instead of a capacity
constraint R(t) for each period, there is a cost γ that the algorithm pays for each job it selects
to serve. In this warm-up setting, each job is independent of other jobs and follows a Markovian
ski-rental problem. In typical ski-rental, a skier who is going to ski for an uncertain number of
days, makes daily decisions on whether to pay a fixed cost of buying equipments or to pay a unit
cost of renting them. Our setting is a Markovian version of this problem as, in every period, the
algorithm can either pay a fixed cost γ to serve a job (buying) or pay state-dependent cost c(i) if
the job is in state i (renting). Formally, suppose there is a job whose initial state is S1 = i but its
future states S2, S3, . . . are uncertain. In a period τ, the algorithm can pay an upfront cost γ to
stop the job from incurring any further cost or do nothing. In the latter case, the job incurs a cost
c(Sτ) and transitions into the next state according to the Markov chain in Section 2.
We can minimize the total cost of a job via the following dynamic program: letting V (γ, i) be
the cost-to-go function for state i, the Bellman equation gives:
V (γ, i) = min
n
γ, c(i) + V f(γ, i)
o
where V f(γ, i) =
X
k∈ch(i)
P(i, k)V (γ, k).
(3)
In the minimization problem, the term γ corresponds to the cost of serving a job, and the term
c(i) + V f(γ, i) represents the cost of not serving it, which involves both the known instantaneous
cost c(i) and the expected future cost V f(γ, i).
The cost of not serving a job, c(i) + V f(γ, i), naturally gives an index measuring the value of
serving each job, which motivates OaRC. Specifically, given a suitable capacity price γ⋆capturing
the cost of serving a job, the algorithm assigns, in each period, an index to each waiting job with
state i, which adjusts to the opportunity of serving the job in the future:
IndexOaRC(i) = c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i).
(4)
The index has two components. The first component is the instantaneous prevented cost, i.e., serving
a job prevents its cost for this period, which is certain and equal to c(i) for a job with state i. The
10


--- Page 11 ---
second component is the future prevented cost V f(γ⋆, i), i.e., serving a job also prevents its future
cost. However, this cost is uncertain as the job can transition to different states. The key novelty
of our algorithm is to calculate this future uncertainty via the cost-to-go function derived in (3).
Therefore, even if the job can have very high future cost, OaRC may not act now; instead, it may
wait until the uncertainty gradually realizes, adjusting for the opportunity to serve this job later.
Implementing OaRC requires finding a suitable capacity price γ⋆, which we explore next.
3.2
Computing the capacity price: a fluid linear program and its dual
To correctly price the capacity, we consider a fluid version of the problem, which removes random-
ness in the arrival and service process. To that end, for a job state i ∈S, let qi be the normalized
fluid queue length of state-i jobs which approximates the number of waiting jobs of state i at the
beginning of a period. Moreover, let νi be the normalized fluid number of served state-i jobs. That
is, one expects Nqi ≈|{j ∈Q(t): Sj(t) = i}| and Nνi ≈|{j ∈R(t): Sj(t) = i}| when the system
size is N. Defining the (fluid) queue-length decision variable q = (qi)i∈S and the (fluid) service
decision variable ν = (νi)i∈S, we obtain (OriginalFluid), which we explain next.
The objective of (OriginalFluid) corresponds to the long-run average holding cost defined in (1)
where each state-i job that is in the queue and not served, captured by the term qi −νi, contributes
cost c(i). The constraints in (OriginalFluid) represent the transition constraint and the capacity
constraint. The transition constraint requires that the number of state-i jobs in a period is (in
expectation) equal to the number of unserved state-pa(i) jobs in the last period multiplied by
the probability of state pa(i) transitioning into state i. The capacity constraint requires that an
algorithm cannot serve more jobs than what are currently waiting or the available capacity.
C⋆=
min
q,ν∈RS
≥0
X
i∈S
c(i)(qi −νi)
s.t. qr = λ,
qi = (qpa(i) −νpa(i))P(pa(i), i), ∀i ∈S \ {r}
νi ≤qi ∀i ∈S
X
i∈S
νi ≤µ.
(OriginalFluid)
C⋆= λcf(r) −max
ν∈RS
≥0
 X
a∈S
νacf(a)
!
s.t.
X
a∈Anc(i)
νa · π(i)
π(a) ≤λπ(i), ∀i
X
i∈S
νi ≤µ.
(SimplerFluid)
We reformulate (OriginalFluid) into (SimplerFluid) which only contains the service decision
variable. To do so, recalling that Anc(i) denotes the set of ancestors of a state i (including i), let
π(i) = Q
k∈Anc(i) p(k) be the probability of a job passing state i if not served in the meantime. The
transition constraint in (OriginalFluid) implies that, given a service decision variable ν, the queue
decision variable q is
qi = λπ(i) −
X
a∈Anc(i)\{i}
νa · π(i)
π(a).
(5)
To intuitively understand this equation, the term λπ(i) captures the amount of state-i jobs if there
is no service applied to any job whose state is an ancestor of state i (herein referenced to an ancestor
job). The second term P
a∈Anc(i)\{i} νa · π(i)
π(a) captures the expected amount of served ancestor jobs
that would have become state-i jobs if they had not been served, since π(i)
π(a) is the probability of
11


--- Page 12 ---
a job becoming state i conditioning on it being state a. As a result, the second term subtracts
all jobs that were served in states prior to i and therefore never reached i. Combining it with
the requirement that νi ≤qi and qr = λ, the constraints in (OriginalFluid) are equivalent to the
constraints in (SimplerFluid) because
νi ≤qi ⇔νi ≤λπ(i) −
X
a∈Anc(i)\{i}
νa · π(i)
π(a) ⇔
X
a∈Anc(i)
νa · π(i)
π(a) ≤λπ(i).
(6)
Moreover, the objective of (OriginalFluid) becomes
X
i∈S
c(i)(qi −νi) =
X
i∈S
c(i)

λπ(i) −
X
a∈Anc(i)
νa · π(i)
π(a)

= λ
X
i∈S
π(i)c(i) −
X
a∈S
νa
X
i∈Sub(a)
c(i) · π(i)
π(a),
(7)
where we recall that Sub(a) is the subtree of state a. We define cf(a) = P
i∈Sub(a) c(i) · π(i)
π(a) as the
expected future cost of a job conditioning on it being in state a. The objective of (OriginalFluid)
then becomes the same as the one of (SimplerFluid). Hence, the two programs are equivalent.
Given that the term λcf(r) in (SimplerFluid) is a constant, we translate the objective of
(SimplerFluid) to P ⋆= λcf(r) −C⋆, which corresponds to the maximum prevented cost in the
objective of(SimplerFluid) and is the objective for a linear program. With the state duals β ∈RS
≥0
corresponding to the duals of the first constraint in (SimplerFluid) and the capacity dual γ ≥0
being the dual of the second constraint in (SimplerFluid), the dual problem of P ⋆is given by
D⋆= minγ≥0 D⋆(γ), where
D⋆(γ) = min
β∈RS
≥0
λ
X
i∈S
π(i) · βi + µ · γ
s.t.
γ +
X
i∈Sub(a)
βi · π(i)
π(a) ≥cf(a), ∀a ∈S.
(Dual)
Intuitively, the dual γ corresponds to the capacity price in the Markovian ski-rental problem (Sec-
tion 3.1). Indeed, we also show that the optimal state duals closely connect with the cost of not
serving a job given a capacity price γ, c(i) + V f(γ, i), in (3). The below result (shown in Ap-
pendix B.1) shows that c(i) + V f(γ, i) is related to an optimal state dual. Moreover, there is a
clean form of D⋆(γ) that OaRC later relies on.
Lemma 3.1. For the dual program D⋆(γ), (i) it has an optimal solution β⋆(γ) with β⋆
i (γ) =
max

0, c(i) + V f(γ, i) −γ
	
and (ii) D⋆(γ) = µ · γ + λ
 cf(r) −V (γ, r)

.
Connection between the fluid relaxations and the two canonical algorithmic principles.
The two equivalent optimization problems provide natural motivations for the two canonical algo-
rithmic principles in the literature (discussed in Section 1), which respectively solve (OriginalFluid)
and (SimplerFluid) greedily without considering the job state transitions.
• The instantaneous cost principle (i.e. the cµ-rule) schedules jobs with the highest current
cost c(i) which ostensibly minimizes the objective of (OriginalFluid) by allocating service
capacity to those states with highest instantaneous cost c(i). It is however suboptimal because
it ignores the impact of service on queue length q through the transition equation.
12


--- Page 13 ---
• The expected remaining cost principle (i.e., the cµ/θ-rule) seeks to optimize (SimplerFluid)
as it allocates capacity to those states a with highest expected remaining cost cf(a). However,
the first constraint in (SimplerFluid) implies that allocating capacity to a state a also limits
the demand (number of jobs) for a future state i in the substree of a. Not considering such
externalities is suboptimal because, as in Figure 1, it may be better to delay the capacity
for a new Video job to a RedVideo job, whose uncertainty is resolved and we can avoid
wasting capacity in serving a Video job that is indeed a BlueVideo job.
3.3
The index algorithm OaRC and its guarantee
Our algorithm OaRC (Algorithm 1) consists of an offline training component and an online schedul-
ing component. In the offline training component, OaRC computes the optimal capacity dual γ⋆
with the following single-variable optimization problem:
γ⋆∈arg min
γ≥0 {µ · γ −λV (γ, r)} .
This problem gives the optimal capacity dual γ⋆by the form of D⋆(γ) in Lemma 3.1. A subroutine
of solving γ⋆is the calculation of the cost-to-go functions V (γ, ·) and V f(γ, ·) given γ. Compu-
tationally, they are solvable with time complexity linear in |S| via the Bellman equation (3) and
the tree structure of the Markov chain. In practice, we rely on approximate dynamic programming
techniques that Section 5 further discusses. The output of the training component is an index for
any state i as in (4): IndexOaRC(i) = c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i). In the online scheduling component, OaRC
operates as an index algorithm. For a period t, OaRC assigns to each waiting job j ∈Q(t) an index
IndexOaRC(Sj(t)) based on its current state and serves jobs in a decreasing order of their indices.
Technically, two states can have the same indices and we assume a consistent tie-breaking rule such
that the algorithm always prioritizes one state over the other state. A consistent tie-breaking rule
can be, e.g., assigning a unique identifier to each state and comparing the identifier for two states
with the same indices.
Algorithm 1: Opportunity-adjusted Remaining Cost (OaRC)
Data: cost vector c and transition probability P; Normalized arrival and service rates λ, µ
/* Offline training
*/
1 Solve γ⋆= arg minγ≥0 {µγ −λV (γ, r)} and V f(γ⋆, ·) by (3)
/* Online scheduling
*/
2 for t = 1 to T do
3
Observe the set of waiting jobs Q(t) and the random services R(t)
4
Assign to each job j ∈Q(t) an index IndexOaRC(Sj(t))
5
Serve the R(t) jobs from Q(t) with highest indices using a consistent tie-breaking rule
6
Incur cost of unserved jobs and observe new arrivals
Our main result for OaRC is as follows. Let cmax = maxi∈S ci be the maximum instantaneous
cost. Recall that the transition probability from every state to the empty state is non-zero, i.e., for
some θ > 0, P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k) ≤1 −θ for any state i. The algorithm OaRC enjoys a ˜O(
√
N) regret
bound when the system size is N, implying that it is asymptotically optimal.
Theorem 1. OaRC is asymptotically optimal. In particular, for any system size N ≥1, the regret
is Reg(N, OaRC) ≤cmaxU

L, θ, ln(N)
√
N where U

L, θ, ln(N)

= 1610θ−2L1.5 ln2(55NL).
13


--- Page 14 ---
In addition to establishing asymptotic optimality of OaRC, the regret bound in Theorem 1
shows two more appealing properties of OaRC.
First, the regret bound is independent of the
size of the state space |S|. This is favorable in practice where the state of a job can incorporate
contextual information; see e.g. [HKL+21] and (19) in our numerical section. Second, the bound is
non-asymptotic and meaningful for a finite N. For example, focusing on the joint dependence on
L and N, the regret bound in Theorem 1 is ˜O(L1.5√
N). As a result, the bound gives a non-trivial
upper bound for the regret when N ⪆˜O(L3).
Remark 1. With small modification to our analysis in Section 4, we show in Appendix B.14
an alternative regret bound Reg(N, OaRC) ≤O(θ−3.5 ln2(NL)
√
N), which only logarithmically
depends on the maximum level L. Therefore, as long as each job has a minimum probability to
abandon the system, OaRC is efficient even if a job can stay in the system for very long periods.
4
Analysis
The proof of Theorem 1 contains four components. The first component identifies a fluid solution
to (OriginalFluid) from any (state) priority algorithm Prio(o) which, given an ordered list o of
states, serves jobs based on this ordering. Applied with a consistent tie-breaking rule, OaRC is
such a priority algorithm. The second component of the proof is showing that the fluid solution
corresponding to OaRC is indeed an optimal solution to (OriginalFluid). The third component of
the proof shows that the long-run average holding cost of a priority algorithm is upper bounded by
the (fluid) cost of the corresponding fluid solution in (OriginalFluid) (scaled by the system size N),
plus a term that is of the order of
√
N ignoring poly-logarithmic factors. The last component shows
that the optimal value of (OriginalFluid) scaled by N indeed lower bounds the long-run average
holding cost of any feasible algorithm.
This section structures as follows. As a warm up, Section 4.1 constructs a fluid solution for any
priority algorithm and motivates it via a water-filling argument. Section 4.2 presents key lemmas
and the full proof of Theorem 1. Section 4.3 shows that the constructed fluid solution of OaRC
is optimal to (OriginalFluid). Section 4.4 bounds the long-run average holding cost of a priority
algorithm by the cost of its constructed fluid solution.
4.1
Corresponding fluid solutions of priority algorithms
Our analysis starts by constructing a fluid solution for any priority algorithm. This fluid solution
provides guidance on how the stochastic system would look like when the scheduling decisions follow
the given priority algorithm. Formally, a priority ordering o = (o1, . . . , o|S|) ranks states in S from
highest (o1) to lowest priorities (o|S|) and specifies a priority algorithm Prio(o). In a period t
with queue Q(t) and R(t) available servers, the algorithm serves jobs in the order prescribed by o.
Letting Qi(t) be the number of state-i jobs in Q(t) and o−1(i) be the position of state i in the
priority ordering, the number of served state-i jobs, denoted by Ri(t), is equal to
Ri(t) = min

Qi(t),

R(t) −
o−1(i)−1
X
h=1
Qo(h)(t)


+
.
(8)
That is, the number of served state-i jobs is the minimum between the number of waiting state-i
jobs Qi(t) and the remaining available servers after serving jobs with states of higher priorities.
14


--- Page 15 ---
1
2
4
3
𝟎. 𝟖, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟐
Initial
Fill state 2
Fill state 3
Fill state 5
Fill state 4
5
𝟎. 𝟖, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟐
(𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎)
(𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎)
𝟎. 𝟖, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟐
(𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎)
𝟎. 𝟖, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟐
(𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎)
𝟎. 𝟖, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎. 𝟏, 𝟎. 𝟏
(𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟒, 𝟎, 𝟎. 𝟐, 𝟎. 𝟏, 𝟎)
𝒒𝒐:
𝝂𝒐:
𝟎. 𝟓
𝟎. 𝟓
𝟎. 𝟓
𝟎. 𝟓
6
𝟎. 𝟓
1
2
4
3
5
6
1
2
4
3
5
6
1
2
4
3
5
6
1
2
4
3
5
6
Figure 2: An example for the water-filling procedure of constructing (qo, νo). There are six states,
S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} with transition probability as given in the leftmost figure. The arrival rate and
service rate are λ = 0.8 and µ = 0.7. The priority ordering is (2, 3, 5, 4, 6, 1). States with strips are
blocked states (State 2 is fully, State 5 is partially). State 4 is the partially-served state and State
6 is a partially-reduced state. State 3 is an empty state and State 1 is a un-reduced state.
Index-based algorithms, including cµ−rule, cµ/θ−rule, and OaRC, are priority algorithms as long
as they use consistent tie-breaking rules. The priority ordering of an index-based algorithm orders
states with decreasing indices and breaks tie with the consistent tie-breaking rule.
Under any priority algorithm, the queueing system has a stationary distribution. Formally,
letting the system state in period t be (Q(t), R(t)) with Q(t) = (Qi(t))i∈S, the system evolves as
a discrete-time Markov chain. Restricting to system states reachable from the initial empty queue
(Qi(1) = 0 for any i), the below lemma (proved in Appendix B.2) shows that the Markov chain for
system states is aperiodic and irreducible. Since it also has finitely many states, it has a unique
stationary and limiting distribution by [HB13, theorem 9.4], which we denote by (Q(∞), R(∞)).
Lemma 4.1. Restricting to system states reachable from (Q(1) = 0, R(1) = n) for some n ∈[N],
the system states form an aperiodic, irreducible, and finite Markov chain.
A first step of understanding the long-run average holding cost of Prio(o) is guessing the mean
(or informally equilibrium) of Q(∞) and R(∞) = limt→∞R(t). The latter exists because R(t) is
a function of Q(t) and the binomial random variable R(t) in (8). We denote the equilibrium of a
priority algorithm Prio(o) by qo = (qo
i )i∈S and νo = (νo
i )i∈S.
Our construction of the equilibrium (qo, νo) simulates a water-filling procedure for Prio(o).
To give intuition, we follow Figure 2 for a concrete example with six states S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} and
a priority ordering o = (2, 3, 5, 4, 6, 1). The arrival rate is λ = 0.8 and the service rate is µ = 0.7.
A state-1 job has equal probability to evolve to a state-2 or state-4 job. A state-2 job has equal
probability to evolve to a state-3 job or abandon. A state-4 job has equal probability to evolve to
a state-5 or state-6 job. Jobs of states 3, 5 or 6 abandon if not getting served. The water-filling
procedure serves jobs based on the priority ordering o. Initially no state receives service and thus
qo
i = λπ(i) and νo
i = 0 for any i. Following the priority, the procedure works as follows:
• First, it fills state 2. Since µ = 0.7 and qo
2 = 0.4, it has enough capacity to serve all state-2
jobs by setting νo
2 = 0.4. This also has downstream effect: there will be no more state-3 jobs
as all state-2 jobs are served. Therefore qo
3 becomes zero.
• Second, it fills state 3. However, there is no state-3 job and thus it consumes no service.
• Third, it fills state 5. Filling it is similar to the case for state 2 since the remaining service
rate is 0.7 −0.4 = 0.3 and qo
5 = 0.2. It increases νo
5 = 0.2 to serve all state-5 jobs.
15


--- Page 16 ---
• Fourth, it fills state 4. Unlike the above steps, the remaining service rate 0.7−0.4−0.2 = 0.1
is insufficient to serve all state-4 jobs as qo
4 = 0.4 > 0.1. One intuitive step would be to set
νo
4 = 0.1 as that is the remaining capacity. However, this ignores the downstream effect of
serving state 4 on state 5. Specifically, serving one state-4 job reduces the (expected) number
of state-5 jobs by half, which increases the service rate available to serve state-4 jobs. As a
result, setting νo
4 = 0.2 reduces qo
5 from 0.2 to 0.1 and thus we only need νo
5 = 0.1 to serve
all state-5 jobs. It then leaves a capacity of 0.7 −0.4 −0.1 = 0.2 = νo
4 for state 4.
• Finally, since no capacity remains after the last step, states 1 and 6 receive no service.
To formalize the above water-filling procedure, we introduce the notion of top sets. For a set
of states X, serving its top set, Top(X), ensures service of all states in X with minimum capacity.
Given that the Markov chain is a rooted tree, the top set is defined as the unique set such that
(i)Top(X) ⊆X;
(ii)X ⊆Sub(Top(X));
(iii)k ̸∈Sub(i),
∀i ̸= k ∈Top(X).
(9)
The first and third conditions ensure that Top(X) is a minimum subset of X while the second
condition ensures that X is inside this subset’s subtree Sub(Top(X)).
Top sets enable a succinct construction of the equilibrium (qo, νo). Recall that the probability of
a job passing state i is π(i) = Q
k∈Anc(i) p(k). Let m ∈{0, . . . , |S|} be the maximum position in the
ordering o such that the service rate µ is sufficient to serve all states in Top(o[m]) where the notation
oH denotes the set {oh : h ∈H}. Formally, m is the maximum position with P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ.
If the inequality is strict and m < |S|, let p = om+1 be the (only) state that is partially served.
Otherwise, we let p =⊥. The water-filling procedure prescribes an equilibrium based on six types
of states (labeled as in Figure 2):
(T-1) An un-reduced state, i ∈S \ Sub(p) \ Sub(o[m]), is such that neither its ancestors nor itself
receives any service. This implies that qo
i = λπ(i) and νo
i = 0.
(T-2) A fully-blocked state, i ∈Top(o[m]) \ Sub(p), is such that it receives full service but its
ancestors receive no service. This implies that qo
i = νo
i = λπ(i).
(T-3) An empty state, i ∈Sub(o[m]) \ Top(o[m]), has an ancestor in Top(o[m]). This implies that
qo
i = νo
i = 0.
(T-4) the unique partially-served state p receives non-zero service but is not fully served. Given
that none of its ancestor is served, qo
p = λπ(p). Accounting for the downstream effect that
serving state p has on decreasing the required service of its subtree, νo
p =
µ−λ P
i∈Top(o[m]) π(i)
κ
where κ is the degeneracy parameter defined by
κ = 1 −
X
i∈Top(o[m])∩Sub(p)
π(i)/π(p).
(10)
The degeneracy parameter κ must be positive as otherwise we can set m to include p. If
p =⊥, we define κ = +∞, so νo
p = 0.
(T-5) A partially-blocked state, i ∈Top(o[m])∩Sub(p), receives full service but has a partially-served
ancestor. This implies qo
i = νo
i = λπ(i) −νo
pπ(i)/π(p).
(T-6) A partially-reduced state, i ∈Sub(p) \ {p} \ Sub(o[m]), does not receive any service but has a
partially-served ancestor. This implies qo
i = λπ(i) −νo
pπ(i)/π(p) and νo
i = 0.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Summarizing the above, blocked states (either fully or partially) form the set Top(o[m]). Empty
states are those in the subtree of blocked states.
The partially-served state is p and the un-
reduced states are all the remaining states, i.e., those not in the subtree of o[m] and p. The below
result (proved in Appendix B.3) verifies that (qo, νo) is feasible to (OriginalFluid) and that the
equilibrium uses all capacity when the partially-served state is non-empty.
Lemma 4.2. The equilibrium (qo, νo) is feasible to (OriginalFluid). Moreover, if the partially-
served state p ̸=⊥, then P
i∈S νo
i = µ.
As discussed above, OaRC is a priority algorithm. We denote its equilibrium, obtained by
taking o to be its priority ordering of states, by (qOaRC, νOaRC).
4.2
Proof of Theorem 1
This section lists three key lemmas and presents the proof of Theorem 1. The first lemma shows
that the equilibrium of OaRC is an optimal solution to (OriginalFluid).
Lemma 4.3. The equilibrium of OaRC has optimal fluid cost: P
i∈S ci(qOaRC
i
−νOaRC
i
) = C⋆.
The second lemma shows that the long-run average holding cost for any priority algorithm is
within ˜O(
√
N) to the (fluid) cost of its equilibrium (as in the objective of (OriginalFluid)). Recall
that θ = mini∈S

1 −P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k)

is the minimum abandonment probability of every state.
Recall the following quantity which is a polynomial of ln(N) with constants depending on L, θ:
U(L, θ, ln(N)) := 1610θ−2L1.5 ln2(55NL).
(11)
Lemma 4.4. If θ > 0, then for any priority ordering o and system size N, its long-run average
holding cost is upper bounded by C(N, Prio(o)) ≤N P
i∈S ci(qo
i −νo
i ) + cmaxU(L, θ, ln(N))
√
N.
The last lemma shows that the optimal fluid cost in (OriginalFluid) lower bounds the long-run
average holding cost of any feasible algorithm.
Lemma 4.5. For any system size N and feasible algorithm ALG, the fluid LP (OriginalFluid)
lower bounds the long-run average holding cost cost by C(N, ALG) ≥NC⋆.
Sections 4.3 and 4.4 prove Lemmas 4.3 and 4.4 respectively. We defer the proof of Lemma 4.5
to Appendix B.4 as it follows a standard argument.
Proof of Theorem 1. Since OaRC is a priority algorithm, for any system size N,
Reg(N, OaRC) = C(N, OaRC) −
inf
ALG∈Π C(N, ALG)
Lemma 4.5
≤
C(N, OaRC) −NC⋆
Lemma 4.4
≤
N
X
i∈S
ci(qOaRC
i
−νOaRC
i
) + cmaxU(L, θ, ln(N))
√
N −NC⋆
Lemma 4.3
=
NC⋆+ cmaxU(L, θ, ln(N))
√
N −NC⋆= cmaxU(L, θ, ln(N))
√
N.
17


--- Page 18 ---
4.3
Optimality of OaRC’s fluid cost (Lemma 4.3)
Recall that γ⋆is the optimal capacity dual with the lowest D⋆(γ) in (Dual).
Complementary
slackness characterizes whether a feasible service decision vector ν is optimal for (SimplerFluid) in
the below lemma. The proof follows a standard argument and is provided in Appendix B.6.
Lemma 4.6. Given a service decision vector ν that is feasible to (SimplerFluid), it is optimal if
and only if the following three conditions hold:
(C-1) P
i∈S νi = µ when γ⋆> 0;
(C-2) if c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) > γ⋆, then qi = νi where qi is defined by (5);
(C-3) if c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) < γ⋆for state i, then νi = 0.
Proof sketch of Lemma 4.3. The proof partitions states into three classes, SHi, SEq, SLo, based on
whether their indices are higher than, equal to, or less than γ⋆. For any priority ordering o that
ranks these three classes of states in order, the proof then verifies the three conditions in Lemma 4.6
for νo, establishing its optimality to (SimplerFluid). The proof finishes by noting that the priority
ordering of OaRC is such an ordering. We verify the three conditions of Lemma 4.6 as follows:
• For (C-1), this is true by our construction of νo, which allocates capacity to states whenever
it is possible. If there is remaining capacity after serving all states, it implies that γ⋆= 0 as
the capacity constraint is not tight.
• For (C-2), it is equivalent to show qo
i = νo
i for any i ∈SHi. We show that there is sufficient
capacity to serve all states in SHi and thus any state in SHi must be fully-blocked (T-2),
partially-blocked (T-5) or an empty state (T-3), which establishes (C-2) by our construction.
• For (C-3), it is equivalent to show νo
i = 0 for any i ∈SLo. To do so, we show that if this is
not the case for o, then the set of states served by any optimal capacity allocation ν⋆must
be a subset of that served by νo, which implies the optimality of νo.
The full proof of Lemma 4.3 is provided in Appendix B.5.
4.4
Gap between the stochastic and fluid cost (Lemma 4.4)
The key idea of Lemma 4.4 is to show Qi(∞)−Ri(∞) ≈qo
i −νo
i for any priority algorithm Prio(o).
That is, the limiting distribution in the stochastic system closely mimics the equilibrium for the
fluid system. Throughout this section, we fix a priority ordering o and focus on a system with a
scheduling algorithm Prio(o) that selects R(t) based on (8). To ease notation, let Zi(t) = Qi(t) −
Ri(t) be the random variable of remaining state-i jobs after service in period t and zo
i = qo
i −νo
i
be the corresponding fluid equilibrium. We also use Z(t) and zo to denote the associated vectors.
Recall from Section 4.1 that m is the maximum position such that the service rate µ is sufficient
to serve all states in Top(o[m]): P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ. If the inequality is strict and m < |S|,
we denote the partially-served state by p = om+1 and if not, p =⊥. Using the structure of zo
(Section 4.1), our proof of Lemma 4.4 splits into two components showing that Zi(∞) ≈0 for any
i ∈o[m] and that Zp(∞) ≈zo
p.
18


--- Page 19 ---
Fully serving blocked states and their subtree.
Our core result is that Zi(∞) ≈0 for any
i ∈o[m] since the equilibrium satisfies zo
i = 0. This result is not trivial: although by the definition
of o[m], the service rate µ satisfies P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ, the priority algorithm Prio(o) may not
simply use all available service to states in Top(o[m]). This is because some states in o[m]\Top(o[m])
can have higher priority than those in Top(o[m]).4 Our key insight is that, although these states
can have higher priority, their steady-state number of jobs is close to zero. As a result, the priority
algorithm has enough capacity to serve nearly all jobs of states in Top(o[m]). This implies, in the
steady state, that almost no remaining job is in o[m] since the state of a job must first be in
Top(o[m]) in order to be in o[m] \ Top(o[m]).
We leverage state space collapse (SSC) to formalize the above intuition. Formally, fix a pa-
rameter δ ∈(0, e−1) that we later tune. The following result establishes state space collapse: the
steady-state number of remaining jobs in o[m] and its subtree is with high probability close to zero.
Lemma 4.7. If the minimum abandonment probability θ > 0, then
P



X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(∞) > 40θ−1√
NL ln2 1
δ


≤49NLδ2 ln 1
δ .
The proof relies on a few results. The first result shows that the number of waiting jobs with
states in any set X and any period t is at most Nλ P
i∈X π(i) + ˜O(
√
N) with high probability.
Lemma 4.8. For any t ≥1, set of states X ⊆S and δ ∈(0, 1/e], the queue length P
i∈X Qi(t) is
almost surely upper bounded by N min(L, |X|). Moreover, it has a high probability upper bound:
P
(X
i∈X
Qi(t) ≤Nλ
X
i∈X
π(i) + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ
)
≥1 −δ2.
The intuition behind this result is that without any service, the expected number of jobs with
states in X is equal to Nλ P
i∈X π(i) and accounting for service should not increase this number.
The difficulty in proving this result is that the numbers of jobs in different states are correlated
with each other and thus typical concentration bounds do not immediately apply. We address this
issue in its proof (Appendix B.7) by considering a system with no job departures, which makes jobs
uncorrelated with each other and allows the use of concentration bounds.
The second result is a new geometric tail bound for a Lyapunov function, showing that: if with
high probability, a Lyapunov function has (i) bounded increase and (ii) negative drift when it is
high enough, then the steady-state value of this function decays geometrically fast.
Lemma 4.9. Consider a discrete-time Markov chain {X(t)}t≥1 with a state space X and a limiting
distribution.
Suppose there is an event G, a Lyapunov function Φ: X →R≥0, and constants
ε, vwhp, vmax, B, ∆≥0 with ∆≤vwhp, such that P{X(∞) ∈Gc} ≤ε, E [Φ(X(∞))] < +∞, and ∀t,
(i) for any x ∈G, P{Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≥vwhp|X(t) = x} ≤ε;
(ii) for any x ∈G with Φ(x) ≥B, P{Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≥−∆|X(t) = x} ≤ε.
(iii) Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤vmax almost surely.
4For example, if the priority ordering is (3, 2, 5, 4, 6, 1) in Figure 2, then o[m] is {3, 2, 5} and Top(o[m]) = {2, 5}.
However, state 3 ∈o[m] \ Top(o[m]) has a higher priority than both 2 and 5.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Then for any integer ℓ≥0, the steady-state Lyapunov function satisfies
P{Φ(X(∞)) > B + 2vwhpℓ} ≤

vwhp
vwhp + ∆
ℓ+1
+ 6(ℓ+ 1)εvmax
vwhp
.
Although similar bounds exist in the literature (e.g. [BGT01, theorem 1] and [WZS20, lemma
4.6]), they do not distinguish between vwhp (a high probability bound on the increase in Lyapunov
function) and vmax (an almost sure upper bound on the increase). When we scale the system size
N to infinity, these two quantities can be substantially different (
√
N versus N) and our bound
yields better guarantee than the one implied by [BGT01, theorem 1], which was not designed for
such an asymptotic regime. The proof of Lemma 4.9 refines the proof of [BGT01, theorem 1] and
is given in Appendix B.8.
Proof sketch of Lemma 4.7.
Letting the system state be X(t) = (Q(t), R(t), Q(t + 1)), the
proof (formalized in Appendix B.10) is by showing the below Lyapunov function has negative drift:
Φ(X(t)) =
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(t) =
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
(Qi(t) −Ri(t))
where Qi(t) is the number of state-i jobs at the beginning of a period t and Ri(t) is the number of
served state-i jobs in period t. The drift of Φ(X(t)) consists of a positive and a negative part:
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) =
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Qi(t + 1) −


X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Ri(t + 1) +
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(t)

.
(12)
Assuming that the available service R(t+1) is close to Nµ (which is true by a concentration bound
up to a
√
N term) and given that states in o[m] have higher priority than states in S \ o[m], the
service allocated to serve jobs with states in Sub(o[m]) is around Nµ unless there are fewer such
jobs. In the latter case, the drift in (12) must be negative as the first two terms cancel out. In the
former case, let T = Top(o[m]), the top set of states in Sub(o[m]). (12) gives
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≲
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Qi(t + 1) −Nµ −
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(t)
=
X
i∈T
Qi(t + 1) −Nµ
|
{z
}
(service)
+
X
i∈Sub(o[m])\T
Qi(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(t)
|
{z
}
(abandonment)
.
The (service) term is non-positive because the service rate is sufficient to serve all jobs in T :
X
i∈T
Qi(∞) ≲Nλ
X
i∈T
π(i) ≤Nµ,
(13)
where the first inequality is by Lemmas 4.8 and the second inequality uses the definition of m which
is the maximum position that allows all jobs in T to be served in expectation.
In addition, the (abandonment) term is (with high probability) negative because (1) any job
with states in Sub(o[m]) \ T in period t + 1 must be a remaining job with states in Sub(o[m]) in
20


--- Page 21 ---
period t; (2) a remaining job in period t has probability at least θ to abandon the system. These
combined suggest that (abandonment) ≲−θ P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(t).
As a result, we can upper bound the drift Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≲−θΦ(X(t)). The proof of
Lemma 4.7 formalizes this via the below lemma (proved in Appendix B.9) and applies Lemma 4.9
to translate the drift bound into a high probability bound on the Lyapunov function.
Lemma 4.10. There exists an event G, such that: (i) P{X(∞) ∈G} ≥1 −2δ2 and (ii) for any t,
conditioning on X(t) ∈G, with probability at least 1 −δ2, the drift satisfies
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤−θΦ(X(t)) + 5
√
NL ln 1
δ .
(14)
Moreover, for any t, Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤NL almost surely.
Bounding the number of jobs in the partially-served state and its subtree.
We show
that if the number of remaining jobs in o[m] is small, the expected number of remaining jobs in the
partially-served state, E [Zp(∞)], is not much larger than its fluid correspondence Nzo
p. The proof
of Lemma 4.7 does not apply to the partially-served state because Inequality (13) does not hold
beyond the maximum position m that allows all jobs in Top(o[m]) to be served (in expectation).
That said, for the partially-served state, it suffices to bound the expectation of the remaining number
of jobs rather than provide a high probability guarantee. This is because unlike those fully-served
states, there is no downstream effect of serving the partially-served state, as it is the last state that
would get capacity in the priority ordering o. The proof of Lemma 4.11 is in Appendix B.11.
Lemma 4.11. If there exists ˜U such that P{P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞) ≤˜U
√
N} ≥N−1
N , then E [Zp(∞)] ≤
Nzo
p + 4
√
NL ln N+ ˜U
√
N+3
θ
.
Combining the pieces.
The final component in the proof of Lemma 4.4 is the below lemma. Fol-
lowing Lemma 4.11, this lemma shows that if there is a high-probability bound on P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞),
then it implies a bound on the difference between a priority algorithm’s long-run average holding
cost and its equilibrium’s fluid cost.
Lemma 4.12. If there exists ˜U such that P{P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞) ≤˜U
√
N} ≥N−1
N , then the cost dif-
ference C(N, Prio(o))−N P
i∈S ci(qo
i −νo
i ) is upper bounded by 10cmaxLθ−1 √
LN ln N + ˜U
√
N

.
Proof sketch of Lemma 4.12. The proof (provided in Appendix B.12) uses the fact that the long-
run average holding cost of Prio(o) is equal to C(N, Prio(o)) = P
i∈S ciZi(∞). As a result,
recalling that zo
i = qo
i −νo
i is the fluid remaining number of jobs, the expected difference between
C(N, Prio(o)) and the fluid cost of the equilibrium N P
i∈S cizo
i is
C(N, Prio(o)) −N
X
i∈S
cizo
i =
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
fully served
+
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
partially served
+
X
i∈S\Sub(o[m])\Sub(p)
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
never served
.
The proof proceeds by bounding each of the three terms:
21


--- Page 22 ---
• For the first term (fully served), zo
i = 0 for i ∈Sub(o[m]) as such a state is fully-blocked
(T-2), empty (T-3), or partially-blocked (T-5). Moreover, the lemma assumption yields that
E
hP
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞)
i
is at most ˜O(
√
N), and thus the first summation is at most ˜O(
√
N).
• for the second term (partially served), observe that Sub(p) \ Sub(o[m]) include both the
partially-served state p (T-4)) and those partially-reduced states (T-6). For any such state
i, zo
i = zo
p · (π(i)/π(p)) by construction. Moreover, the expected number of remaining jobs
satisfies E [Zi(∞)] ≤E [Zp(∞)] · (π(i)/π(p)) by induction. The second term is thus upper
bounded by
cmax


X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
π(i)/π(p)

 E [Zp(∞)] −Nzo
p

= ˜O(
√
N),
which uses Lemma 4.11 to bound E [Zp(∞)] −zo
p.
• for the last term (never served), any i ∈S \ Sub(o[m]) \ Sub(p) is an un-reduced state (T-1)
with zo
i = λπ(i). Since E [Zi(∞)] ≤Nλπ(i), which is the expected number of state-i jobs
assuming no service, the last summation is at most zero.
The complete proof of Lemma 4.4 is given in Appendix B.13. It takes a suitable δ for the bound
in Lemma 4.7 and applies Lemma 4.12.
5
Data-Driven Application to Content Moderation
With a focus on content moderation, this section evaluates the operational benefit of designing a
scheduling algorithm incorporating uncertain holding costs. The key takeaway from our simulations
on synthetic and real data is that a practical implementation of our algorithm, called HOaRC, has
the potential to drastically improve the efficiency of typical heuristics employed by social media
platforms. Our results demonstrate that HOaRC reduces the policy-violating views by 2.6% to
8.5% compared to these heuristics across various settings and datasets. Another way to quantify the
efficiency gain is through the reviewer-hour savings where we demonstrate 7.8% to 25% reduction
in the number of needed reviews to prevent the same amount of policy-violating views.
We organize this section as follows. Section 5.1 instantiates our model to the human review
system in content moderation. Section 5.2 describes the set-up of our simulation and three heuris-
tics employed by social media platforms. Section 5.3 gives a practical implementation of OaRC
(Algorithm 1) with hindsight approximation and machine learning. Sections 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6 evalu-
ate the effectiveness of various algorithms for moderating ads, posts, and videos with synthetic and
real datasets. Section 5.7 showcases the robustness of our algorithm to uncalibrated predictions.
5.1
Instantiating our model to content moderation
Our model captures the scheduling component of a human review system in content moderation,
which typically operates as an AI-human pipeline (see [LW24]). To evaluate our algorithm in an
environment similar to a practical content moderation system, we consider the below setting.
22


--- Page 23 ---
Over a fixed time horizon (e.g., one week), new pieces of content are enqueued into the human
review system after user reporting or AI filtering. A content j is characterized by two quantities:
(i) an indicator Violating(j) ∈{0, 1} on whether the content violates the platform’s policy and
(ii) a view function CumView(j, t) denoting the cumulative number of views this content will
receive if left uninterrupted on the platform for t time units after its creation (e.g., hours).
Both the violation indicator and the view function are unknown when a content is enqueued.
Letting τ(j, T) be the time until a human review or the end of the horizon T for content j, we
consider the objective of minimizing policy-violating views created by all enqueued content:
ViolatingViews(T) =
X
any enqueued content j
Violating(j) × CumView(j, τ(j, T)).
(15)
We cannot directly work with policy-violating views in our model because we assume knowing the
cost of a content in each period that has passed but whether a content is violating is unknown until
a human review. Rather, replacing the actual violation of content j with a predictor pViolating(j),
our objective in (1) is equivalent to minimizing a predicted policy-violating view metric:
pViolatingViews(T) =
X
any enqueued content j
pViolating(j) × CumView(j, τ(j, T)).
(16)
That is, we assume that, when a content arrives, this content comes with a (predicted) probability
that it is policy-violating. Such a prediction is available and widely applied in existing content
moderation systems, see e.g. [ABB+22] for Meta and [Cha23] for LinkedIn.
We thus consider the following instantiation of the model for content moderation. The system
operates in discrete periods. A job in this system corresponds to an enqueued content piece. The
cost for content j at time t, which is c(Sj(t)) in our model, is defined by c(Sj(t)) = pViolating(j) ×
View(j, t) where View(j, t) is the number of views content j gets in period t. Here the state Sj(t)
captures any existing information for content j, including, for example, the predicted probability
of policy-violating pViolating(j) and the number of views in the last few periods. In each period, a
random number of human reviewers become available to review content and a random number of
new content arrives into the system. Minimizing the cost defined in (1) is equivalent to minimizing
a long-run average of the predicted policy-violating view metric in (16).
To evaluate the policy-violating views prevented by the human review system, existing practice
has also considered the notion of Integrity Value (IV) [ABB+22], defined by
IV(T) =
X
any reviewed content j
Violating(j) × predicted remaining views of content j.
(17)
That is, it evaluates the counterfactual number of remaining views for a policy-violating content
had it not been reviewed by a human. If IV instead used the actual remaining views of a content
j, then maximizing IV would be equivalent to minimizing the policy-violating view metric in (15).
That said, when a policy-violating content is reviewed and removed, its counterfactual remaining
views is unobservable, which is why IV uses the observable predictions.
23


--- Page 24 ---
0
50
100
0
250000
500000
Cumulative Views
Synthetic Ads
0
100
200
Time period
0
2000
4000
Synthetic UGC
0
100
200
0
2
4
1e8
YouTube Video
Figure 3: View trajectories of five content pieces with highest cumulative views in the three datasets
5.2
Simulation Set-Up
The simulation assumes an offline dataset D. For each content j in the dataset we have access to: (i)
a predicted probability of violation pViolating(j); (ii) ground-truth information of actual violation
Violating(j); (iii) ground-truth trajectory of number of views View(j, d) denoting the number of
views for content j in the d−th period since its creation. Specifically, given a maximum length L
of content’s view trajectory (which can be different from the time horizon T), the dataset is of the
form
{pViolating(j), Violating(j), (View(j, d), d ≤L)}j∈D .
(18)
We randomly and equally partition the dataset into a training set Dtrain and a test set Dtest as
our algorithm requires an offline training component. Except for Section 5.7, where we explore
the impact of uncalibrated pViolating, the predictions pViolating in the synthetic datasets are all
calibrated such that the ground truth actual violation Violating(j) is sampled from an independent
Bernoulli random variable with mean pViolating(j) for any content j. The distribution of view
trajectories is at the core of our simulation. To evaluate our algorithm in different business settings,
we focus on a synthetic dataset for ads content in Section 5.4 and a synthetic dataset for UGC
content in Section 5.5. In Section 5.6, we use a real-world dataset containing view trajectories
of YouTube videos to further substantiate our findings. As an example, Figure 3 illustrates the
uncertainty in view trajectories from these three settings via the five trajectories with the highest
cumulative views in the corresponding training sets.
Simulating a scheduling algorithm.
Given a scheduling algorithm ALG, the simulation eval-
uates its performance via the policy-violating views metric (defined in (15)). Each run contains
T = 500 periods where the events in Section 2 happen in order for a period t:
1. Server capacity: a random number of reviewers R(t) ∼Bin(N, µ) become available;
2. Service decision: the algorithm selects a subset of size R(t) from the content enqueued for
human review;
3. Holding cost: non-reviewed content j incur policy-violating views Violating(j)×View(j, d(j, t))
where d(j, t) is the number of time periods since the arrival of content j on time platform;
4. Transition: non-reviewed contents deterministically transition with d(j, t + 1) = d(j, t) + 1;
5. Arrivals: a random number A(t) ∼Bin(N, λ) of new contents is sampled i.i.d. from Dtest;
6. Queue update: the queue consists of the union of non-reviewed and new content. If d(j, t+1) >
L for a content j, the content leaves the queue because it will no longer incur any views. In
our model, this means that the content transitions to the empty state.
24


--- Page 25 ---
The simulation takes N = 1000 and λ = 0.1. The service rate µ varies by µ = λ × review ratio
with the review ratio ranging from 1% to 20%. This parameter, review ratio, captures the per-
centage of enqueued content that can be human reviewed on average. We restrict the review ratio
up to 20% to focus on an overloaded human review system motivated by the fact that signifi-
cantly more content is created than the amount humans can review on social media platforms. The
policy-violating views of an algorithm is averaged over 10 independent runs.
Baseline algorithms.
Each setting simulates a practical version of our OaRC algorithm (details
in Section 5.3) and three heuristic algorithms. All heuristics assign indices to waiting jobs and
review the jobs with the highest indices. The three index heuristics are:
• pViolating scheduling (pViolating): the index for content j in period t is Indexpv(j, t) =
pViolating(j); this heuristic has been deployed for content moderation at LinkedIn [Cha23].
• Velocity scheduling (Velocity):
the index for content j in period t is Indexve(j, t) =
pViolating(j)×View(j, d(j, t)−1), i.e., the probability of being policy-violating multiplied by
the number of views in the last period. This heuristic has been deployed at Meta [ABB+22].
• predicted IV (pIV) scheduling (pIV): the index of content j for period t is IndexpIV (j, t) =
pViolating(j)×predicted remaining views of content j from period t, i.e., a prediction for the
content’s IV (17). This heuristic was considered in [MSA+21], which documented a simulator
for Meta’s content moderation system. Different from the above two heuristics, pIV requires
an additional prediction model for future views, which we elaborate in Section 5.3.
One can view Velocity as a practical implementation of the generalized cµ-rule [VM95] as it
prioritizes content with largest increase in holding cost, approximated by the views this content got
in the last period. Similarly, pIV follows the same idea of the cµ/θ-rule [AGS10] by prioritizing
content with largest remaining holding cost. Both are canonical scheduling algorithms from the
literature handling heterogeneous job holding costs (as discussed in Section 1).
5.3
Practical implementation of our algorithm
The first step of implementing OaRC is identifying a state definition of content capturing its view
trajectory. We encode the state Sj(t) for a content j in period t by a six-dimensional vector:
Sj(t) =

pViolating(j), d(j, t), CumView(j, t −1), (View(j, d(j, t) −k))k∈{1,2,3}

,
(19)
corresponding to the probability of the content being policy-violating, the number of periods since
its creation, its total views before this period, and the per-period view in the last three periods. In
practice, the state can also incorporate static features of content (such as who created the content)
and dynamic features (such as number of likes and shares); see, e.g., [RXS+17, HKL+21] and the
references therein for the literature studying the prediction of content view trajectory.
With the state representation, the next step is to solve for γ⋆and the cost-to-go function
V f(γ⋆, ·). Fixing γ, the cost-to-go function V f(γ, ·) is solvable via standard value-function based
reinforcement learning (RL) algorithm such as deep Q-learning [MKS+15]. However, such an RL
algorithm is difficult to train in content moderation given the billions of pieces of new content being
created per day. Moreover, OaRC requires solving for γ⋆on top of solving the cost-to-go function.
25


--- Page 26 ---
We thus explore a hindsight approximation version of OaRC, which we call HOaRC and is
motivated by [SFC+23]. Recall from Section 3.1 that the cost-to-go function V f(γ, i) represents
the minimum expected future cost of a Markovian ski-rental problem, conditioning on an initial
state S1 = i. In its definition (3), the future cost trajectory is unknown through the uncertainty in
future states S2, . . . , SL where we recall from Section 2 the single-job Markov chain is a tree with at
most L levels. Now suppose instead that we do know the future state trajectory is Sk = sk, k ≤L
and thus the future cost trajectory is c(s2), . . . , c(sL). The hindsight minimum cost is equal to
min(γ, c(s2)+. . .+c(sL)) since the optimal action is to buy at a cost of γ if the total future renting
cost is higher than this buying cost, or the optimal action is to always rent. A hindsight cost-to-go
function is the expectation of the hindsight minimum cost, defined by
˜V (γ, i) = ES2,...,
"
min
 L
X
ℓ=2
c(Sℓ), γ
!  S1 = i, Sk+1 ∼P(Sk, ·), ∀k
#
.
Recall that when we instantiate our model for content moderation the cost c(Sj(t)) for a con-
tent j in period t corresponds to pViolating(j) × View(j, d(j, t)). Putting aside pViolating(j) and
assuming the cost for a content in a period is equal to its number of views in that period, the above
hindsight cost-to-go function ˜V leads to a simple offline training procedure. In particular, given the
training set Dtrain, for each content j let ˆs(j, τ) be the state representation of the view trajectory
of content j in the τ−th period and futureView(j, τ) be its future views after the τ−th period, i.e.,
futureView(j, τ) = PL
k=τ+1 View(j, k). We train a regression model for any given γ by
Mγ = Regression (ˆs(j, τ) →min {γ, futureView(j, τ)} : j ∈Dtrain, 1 ≤τ ≤L) ,
(20)
i.e., given the current state s of a content, the regressor outputs Mγ(s), which predicts the expec-
tation of the minimum between γ and the future number of views. In our implementation, we fit
an XGBoost regressor [CG16] with maximum depth equal to 10 and number of estimators equal
to 100.
When γ is set sufficiently large, Mγ predicts the future views of a content, which is what we use
for pIV scheduling in Section 5.2. For Algorithm 1, we need to set a suitable γ⋆. This can be done
by viewing γ⋆as a hyper-parameter to tune. In our simulation, we take γ⋆to be the 99%-percentile
of contents’ total views in the training set Dtrain.
Summarizing HOaRC, it takes as input a hyper-parameter γ⋆and train a regression model
M(γ⋆) according to (20). Then similar to (4), the index for content j in period t is given by
IndexHOaRC(j, t) = pViolating(j) × [View(j, d(j, t) −1) + Mγ⋆(ˆs(j, d(j, t)))] .
When γ⋆= 0, the index becomes the same as that of Velocity. Alternatively, if γ⋆= ∞, the index
behaves like pIV though it also considers the views in the last period. Tuning γ⋆seeks a balance
between the accurate instantaneous view information and the uncertain future view information.
5.4
Simulations on ads content with synthetic data
Our first setting focuses on content moderation of online ads. In social media platforms, advertisers
typically set up campaigns specifying a) a set of ads in the campaign, b) a metric they want to
optimize (such as click-through rate), c) budget to be spent on the campaign, and d) time duration
over which the campaign runs. From the set of ads in the campaign, the platform attempts to
26


--- Page 27 ---
identify the best performing ad(s) (as per the specified metric) and then spends most of the budget
on this set of ads. Ad platforms typically use exploration-exploitation techniques to find the best
ads [CKRU08, SBF17]. Hence, apriori, the view trajectory of an ad is uncertain. All ads tend to get
some views in the initial (exploration) period whereas later, only the set of chosen best performing
ads get most of the views. Further, after the exploration period, the views on the best performing
ads are typically stable over time due to pacing algorithms used by ad platforms [AGWY14].
Data generation.
Motivated by the above discussion, we create a synthetic dataset of ads as
follows. The training set and test set are generated in the same manner, but with different initial
random seed. For each dataset, there are 5, 000 campaigns. Each campaign has 5 ads. Denoting
the k−th ad of campaign u by ad (u, k), the training (test) dataset Dtrain (Dtest) consists of
5, 000 × 5 = 25, 000 contents where a content j is an ad (u, k) for some u ≤5, 000 and k ≤5.
The policy-violating probability pViolating((u, k)) is identical across all ads of the same campaign,
which is sampled from a Beta(1, 3) distribution. The actual violation Violating((u, k)) of an ad is
an i.i.d. Bernoulli random variable with mean pViolating((u, k)).
To generate the view trajectory of ads, a campaign u has a random variable Xu sampled from a
Pareto distribution with a shape parameter 0.8, which captures the campaign’s per-period budget.
An ad (u, k) has a mean reward (e.g. click-through rate) ru,k sampled from a Beta(1, 5) distribution.
Over a horizon of L = 100 periods, the platform seeks to identify an ad from this campaign with the
highest mean reward, which is a multi-armed bandit problem. We implement the UCB1 algorithm
[ACF02] for this purpose assuming that ad (u, k) has a Bernoulli reward with mean ru,k when
promoted (pulled) by the platform. The number of views ad (u, k) will get for the d−th period,
i.e., View((u, k), d) in the dataset (18), is equal to a Poisson random variable with rate Xu if this ad
is promoted for period d; and 0 otherwise. As illustrated in the first plot of Figure 3, the synthetic
view trajectories for ads with the highest number of views grow roughly linearly. This reflects the
characteristic of ad view trajectories where the ad identified as the best performing eventually gets
a stable number of views in every period due to the platform’s pacing algorithm.
Simulation results.
Recall that the review ratio r = µ/λ captures the average fraction of
enqueued contents that can be reviewed by human reviewers. Varying the review ratio r ∈R =
{0.01 + 0.005k: 0 ≤k < 40}, Figure 4 shows the effectiveness of HOaRC compared to the three
heuristics considered in Section 5.2.
Letting ViolatingViews(ALG, r) be the number of policy-
violating views for algorithm ALG when the review ratio is r, the left plot in Figure 4 plots the
percentage of reduced policy-violating views by using HOaRC, i.e., 1 −ViolatingViews(HOaRC,r)
ViolatingViews(ALG,r)
for
ALG ∈{pViolating, Velocity, pIV} and different review ratio r.
From the plot, HOaRC
consistently has fewer policy-violating views than the other heuristics across the range of review
ratios. Moreover, using HOaRC reduces the total policy-violating views under pViolating by
54% to 85%, and that under pIV or Velocity by 2.6% to 23.7%, depending on the review ratio.
To highlight how such prevalence reduction effort translates into reviewer-hour savings for a
platform, the right plot in Figure 4 shows the percentage of reviewer-hour savings by using HOaRC.
That is, for an algorithm ALG and a review ratio r, we find the minimum review ratio r′ from
the list R such that ViolatingViews(HOaRC, r′) ≤ViolatingViews(ALG, r) and then show 1 −r′
r .
This quantity captures the reduction in capacity (thus capturing reviewer-hour savings) to achieve
the same amount of policy-violating views when we switch from an algorithm ALG to HOaRC. In
the ads setting, HOaRC demonstrates 33% to 95% reviewer-hour savings compared to pViolating,
or 9% to 45% reviewer-hour savings compared to pIV and Velocity.
27


--- Page 28 ---
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
0
20
40
60
80
Reduced policy-violating views (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
0
20
40
60
80
100
Reviewer-hour savings (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
Figure 4: Ads: reduced policy-violating views (%) and reviewer-hour savings by HOaRC
5.5
Simulations on user-generated content with synthetic data
This section evaluates different scheduling algorithms on content moderation of UGC, i.e., content
generated and shared by social media users. The view patterns of UGC can be very different from
that of online ads for which the platform exhibits more control. To capture the unique nature
of UGC, this section generates synthetic view trajectory based on Hawkes processes, which have
been widely utilized to model view trajectories of UGC [RXS+17, HKL+21]. To further substantiate
findings in this sub-section, the next sub-section considers a real dataset from [RXS+17] on YouTube
videos.
Data generation.
For both the training and test datasets, we generate the view trajectory of
20, 000 pieces of content by a Hawkes process with exponentially decaying kernels motivated by
[HKL+21], which describes a prediction model for views of Facebook posts. In our synthetic dataset,
a content j has a hyper-parameter αj sampled uniformly from [0.8, 2] dictating the rate of decay
of its views. With one view in the first period, the number of views in the d−th period, View(j, d)
for 2 ≤d ≤200, is a Poisson random variable with mean given by
min
(
5000,
d−1
X
d′=1
 1 + Yd′,d

View(j, d′)e−αj(d−d′)
)
,
(21)
where Yd′,d is a Pareto random variable with scale 4/αj, and we cap the value by 5000 to prevent
the view from blowing up. An intuitive understanding of (21) is that each view in a past period
d′ activates new views (e.g., produces new shares of the post) in period d with an exponentially
decaying probability. When an old view activates, the number of new views it prompts follows a
Pareto distribution. This is motivated by the observation that certain combinations of power-law
distributions approximate the node degree distribution of social networks [GKBM10]. See Figure 3
for examples of view trajectories in this synthetic dataset. Finally, the probability of policy-violating
pViolating(j) is sampled from a Beta(αj + 4/αj, 6) distribution.5
Simulation results.
As in Figure 4, Figure 5 show the percentage of reduced policy-violating
views and reviewer-hour savings when using HOaRC instead of existing heuristics. Other than
for a very small review ratio (r < 2%), HOaRC consistently outperforms existing heuristics with
5With the above data generation procedure, we allow the probability of a piece content being policy-violating to
be correlated with its view trajectory. This reflects the possibility that some inherent features of a content can impact
both its probability of being policy-violating and its number of views.
28


--- Page 29 ---
1.5% to 19% reduction in policy-violating views and 10% to 43% reduction in reviewer hours for
the synthetic UGC setting.
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Reduced policy-violating views (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
0
20
40
60
80
100
Reviewer-hour savings (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
Figure 5: UGC: reduced policy-violating views (%) and reviewer-hour savings by HOaRC
5.6
Simulations on YouTube video data
The next setting we explore is content moderation for video content. Different from the previous
two sub-sections, which synthetically generate content view trajectory, we use the Active dataset
from [RXS+17] which contains daily number of views of certain YouTube videos.
Data description.
We provide a general discussion of the Active dataset, and refer the readers
to [RXS+17] for the detailed data collection process. The dataset contains 14, 041 YouTube videos.
Each video comes with a vector of daily number of views, the daily number of times it is tweeted
or shared, and video features such as the category and duration of this video. For the purpose
of our analysis, we only use the daily number of views. The dataset tracks the daily views for a
minimum of 119 days and a maximum of 237 days among these videos. The maximum number of
total views is 509, 245, 784 and the minimum is 18. See Figure 3 for examples of view trajectories
of these videos.
We generate a dataset of the form (18) for our simulation as follows. The dataset contains all
videos in the Active dataset and uses the daily number of views as View(j, t) for a video j and a
period t ≤L = 237. We fill the views by zero if the original dataset does not include enough days
of views for a video. The probability of policy-violating pViolating(j) is a uniform random variable
in [0, 1]. We equally and randomly separate the dataset into a training and a test set.
Simulation results.
Figure 6 shows our simulation results based on the Active dataset on
YouTube videos. HOaRC substantially outperforms pViolating and shows 3.2% to 8.5% reduc-
tion in policy-violating views or 7.8% to 25% reviewer-hour savings when compared to pIV or
Velocity and when the review ratio is at least 3%. The results are similar to what we observe in
the previous two synthetic simulations (Sections 5.4 and 5.5).
5.7
Robustness check: The impact of uncalibrated predictions
In Sections 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6, the ground truth violation of content j, Violating(j), is generated as a
Bernoulli random variable with mean pViolating(j). This assumes that the predicted probability
29


--- Page 30 ---
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
10
20
30
40
50
60
Reduced policy-violating views (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Review ratio
0
20
40
60
80
100
Reviewer-hour savings (%)
pIV
pViolating
velocity
Figure 6: YouTube data: reduced policy-violating views (%) and reviewer-hour savings by HOaRC
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Maximum calibration error 
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
Policy-violating views
1e6
Synthetic Ads, Review ratio = 0.05
pIV
HOaRC
velocity
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Maximum calibration error 
45500
46000
46500
47000
47500
48000
48500
Policy-violating views
Synthetic UGC, Review ratio = 0.05
pIV
HOaRC
velocity
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Maximum calibration error 
1.06
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.14
1.16
Policy-violating views
1e10
YouTube Video, Review ratio = 0.05
pIV
HOaRC
velocity
Figure 7: Policy-violating views when the maximum calibration error varies (5% review ratio)
of policy violation is well calibrated [DF83]. In practice, such an assumption often fails to hold true
due to non-stationarity in content trends; see the discussion in [ABB+22].
To study the robustness of our algorithm to uncalibrated predictions of policy-violating prob-
ability, we apply perturbed values of pViolating(j) when simulating the scheduling algorithms.
Specifically, the actual violation of content j, Violating(j) is still generated as a Bernoulli random
variable with mean pViolating(j). Then for a given maximum calibration error ε, which varies in
{0.03·k : 0 ≤k < 10}, the prediction for content j has a calibration error ej that is i.i.d. generated
from a uniform random variable [−ε, ε]. We simulate each scheduling algorithm with a perturbed
version of the policy-violating probabilities,
^
pViolating(j), which is equal to pViolating(j) + ej
clipped within [0, 1]. The review ratio is set as 5%.
Figure 7 shows the policy-violating views of the considered scheduling algorithms as a function
of the maximum calibration error ε for the same datasets considered in Sections 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6.
Note that we do not include pViolating as its policy-violating views is substantially higher than
the others. A few observations follow from the figure. First, the policy-violating views of any
algorithm generally increase with the maximum calibration error. Moreover, Velocity suffers the
most from increase in calibration error as compared to the other two algorithms, which is evident
in the synthetic UGC and YouTube video settings. Finally, the performance gain of our algorithm,
HOaRC remains consistent across different ε, supporting the robustness of HOaRC to calibration
error.
30


--- Page 31 ---
6
Conclusion
In this paper we consider the problem of scheduling with uncertain holding costs, which arises in
content moderation for social media platforms. Unlike existing approaches that either optimize
based on the instantaneous or the expected remaining holding cost, we design an algorithm that
adjusts to the opportunity of serving a job in the future once its uncertainty partly resolves. Our
algorithm is asymptotically optimal and outperforms existing approaches. On the analytical front,
our result relies on two key contributions: (a) a complete characterization of the fluid equilibrium
for any priority algorithm when the Markov chain forms a tree and (b) a new tail bound that
separates high-probability and almost-sure upper bounds on the drift of a Lyapunov function.
Our work opens up several interesting directions to further improve the operational efficiency
of content moderation in social media platforms:
• Our model assumes access to the Markov chain of jobs (that depends on the full view tra-
jectory of jobs). In practice, the future view trajectory of jobs that are removed from the
platform is unobservable. Designing a scheduling algorithm that can sufficiently learn the
view trajectories despite this censored feedback is an intriguing open direction.
• Our algorithm assumes perfect knowledge of the underlying Markov chain. On the other
hand, the instantaneous-cost based algorithmic principle (the cµ−rule) does not require such
information. Designing an index-based algorithm that achieves the Pareto frontier between
these two scenarios and adjusts to the potential estimation error is an interesting open ques-
tion. Questions of similar flavor have been studied in the learning-augmented literature with
respect to errors in cost-to-go functions [GM22, LLRW23] and scheduling [MD22, SGM22].
• Our model and algorithm require stationary arrival patterns and review capacity. The optimal
capacity dual γ⋆depends on both the arrival rate λ and the service rate µ. However, in
practice, the availability of human reviewers may fluctuate over time [MSA+21] and the
platform can have time-varying influx of content. This means that the capacity dual needs
to adapt to such changing patterns. Designing a scheduling algorithm that accounts for such
non-stationarity is a theoretically challenging and practically important open question.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by an MIT-Meta Sponsored Research Agreement.
References
[AAA+12] Mustafa Akan, Oguzhan Alagoz, Baris Ata, Fatih Safa Erenay, and Adnan Said. A
broader view of designing the liver allocation system. Operations research, 60(4):757–
770, 2012. 6
[Aal24] Samuli Aalto. Whittle index approach to multiserver scheduling with impatient cus-
tomers and dhr service times. Queueing Systems, 107(1):1–30, 2024. 7
[ABB+22] Vashist Avadhanula, Omar Abdul Baki, Hamsa Bastani, Osbert Bastani, Caner Goc-
men, Daniel Haimovich, Darren Hwang, Dima Karamshuk, Thomas Leeper, Jiayuan
31


--- Page 32 ---
Ma, Gregory Macnamara, Jake Mullett, Christopher Palow, Sung Park, Varun S Ra-
jagopal, Kevin Schaeffer, Parikshit Shah, Deeksha Sinha, Nicolas Stier-Moses, and
Peng Xu. Bandits for online calibration: An application to content moderation on
social media platforms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.06516, 2022. 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 23, 25,
30
[ABS24] Konstantin Avrachenkov, Vivek S Borkar, and Pratik Shah. Lagrangian index policy
for restless bandits with average reward. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12641, 2024. 7
[ACF02] Peter Auer, Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. Finite-time analysis of the multi-
armed bandit problem. Machine learning, 47:235–256, 2002. 27
[ADVS13] Saed Alizamir, Francis De V´ericourt, and Peng Sun. Diagnostic accuracy under con-
gestion. Management Science, 59(1):157–171, 2013. 6
[AGS10] Rami Atar, Chanit Giat, and Nahum Shimkin. The cµ/θ rule for many-server queues
with abandonment. Operations Research, 58(5):1427–1439, 2010. 2, 7, 25
[AGS11] Rami Atar, Chanit Giat, and Nahum Shimkin. On the asymptotic optimality of the
cµ/θ rule under ergodic cost. Queueing Systems, 67:127–144, 2011. 2, 7
[AGWY14] Deepak Agarwal, Souvik Ghosh, Kai Wei, and Siyu You. Budget pacing for targeted
online advertisements at linkedin. In Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD interna-
tional conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pages 1613–1619, 2014. 5,
27
[AIM+15] Mor Armony, Shlomo Israelit, Avishai Mandelbaum, Yariv N Marmor, Yulia Tseytlin,
and Galit B Yom-Tov. On patient flow in hospitals: A data-based queueing-science
perspective. Stochastic systems, 5(1):146–194, 2015. 2
[AJN17] Urtzi Ayesta, Peter Jacko, and Vladimir Novak. Scheduling of multi-class multi-server
queueing systems with abandonments. Journal of Scheduling, 20:129–145, 2017. 7
[AKZ+23] Amine Allouah, Christian Kroer, Xuan Zhang, Vashist Avadhanula, Nona Bohanon,
Anil Dania, Caner Gocmen, Sergey Pupyrev, Parikshit Shah, Nicolas Stier-Moses,
et al. Fair allocation over time, with applications to content moderation. In Proceedings
of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 25–35, 2023. 8
[AM22] Nima Akbarzadeh and Aditya Mahajan. Conditions for indexability of restless ban-
dits and an algorithm to compute whittle index. Advances in Applied Probability,
54(4):1164–1192, 2022. 7
[BGT01] Dimitris Bertsimas, David Gamarnik, and John N Tsitsiklis. Performance of multi-
class markovian queueing networks via piecewise linear lyapunov functions. Annals of
Applied Probability, pages 1384–1428, 2001. 7, 20, 51
[BLM13] St´ephane Boucheron, G´abor Lugosi, and Pascal Massart. Concentration Inequalities:
A Nonasymptotic Theory of Independence. Oxford University Press, 2013. 62
[BM12] Jonah Berger and Katherine L Milkman. What makes online content viral? Journal
of marketing research, 49(2):192–205, 2012. 2
32


--- Page 33 ---
[BM19] Kostas Bimpikis and Mihalis G Markakis. Learning and hierarchies in service systems.
Management Science, 65(3):1268–1285, 2019. 6
[BNM00] Dimitris Bertsimas and Jos´e Ni˜no-Mora. Restless bandits, linear programming relax-
ations, and a primal-dual index heuristic. Operations Research, 48(1):80–90, 2000.
7
[BR16] Achal Bassamboo and Ramandeep Singh Randhawa. Scheduling homogeneous impa-
tient customers. Management Science, 62(7):2129–2147, 2016. 6
[BRW23] Achal Bassamboo, Ramandeep Randhawa, and Chenguang Wu. Optimally scheduling
heterogeneous impatient customers. Manufacturing & Service Operations Manage-
ment, 25(3):1066–1080, 2023. 6
[BS20] David B Brown and James E Smith.
Index policies and performance bounds for
dynamic selection problems. Management Science, 66(7):3029–3050, 2020. 7
[CAD+14] Justin Cheng, Lada Adamic, P Alex Dow, Jon Michael Kleinberg, and Jure Leskovec.
Can cascades be predicted?
In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on
World wide web, pages 925–936, 2014. 2
[CG16] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system.
In
Proceedings of the 22nd acm sigkdd international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 785–794, 2016. 26
[Cha23] Abhishek
Chandak.
Augmenting
our
content
moderation
efforts
through
machine
learning
and
dynamic
content
prioritization,
2023.
https://www.linkedin.com/blog/engineering/trust-and-safety/
augmenting-our-content-moderation-efforts-through-machine-learni.
Accessed on February 24, 2025. 5, 23, 25
[CKR+09] Meeyoung Cha, Haewoon Kwak, Pablo Rodriguez, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Sue Moon.
Analyzing the video popularity characteristics of large-scale user generated content
systems. IEEE/ACM Transactions on networking, 17(5):1357–1370, 2009. 2
[CKRU08] Deepayan Chakrabarti, Ravi Kumar, Filip Radlinski, and Eli Upfal. Mortal multi-
armed bandits. Advances in neural information processing systems, 21, 2008. 5, 27
[CL06] Fan RK Chung and Linyuan Lu. Complex graphs and networks. Number 107. Amer-
ican Mathematical Soc., 2006. 62
[CLH24] Xinyun Chen, Yunan Liu, and Guiyu Hong. An online learning approach to dynamic
pricing and capacity sizing in service systems. Operations Research, 72(6):2677–2697,
2024. 6
[CS61] D.R. Cox and Walter L. Smith. Queues. Methuen, 1961. 2
[CZZX12] Ying Chen, Yilu Zhou, Sencun Zhu, and Heng Xu. Detecting offensive language in
social media to protect adolescent online safety. In 2012 international conference on
privacy, security, risk and trust and 2012 international confernece on social comput-
ing, pages 71–80. Ieee, 2012. 7
33


--- Page 34 ---
[DF83] Morris H DeGroot and Stephen E Fienberg. The comparison and evaluation of fore-
casters. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series D (The Statistician), 32(1-
2):12–22, 1983. 30
[DL10] Douglas G Down and Mark E Lewis. The n-network model with upgrades. Probability
in the Engineering and Informational Sciences, 24(2):171–200, 2010. 6
[DZM+15] Nemanja Djuric, Jing Zhou, Robin Morris, Mihajlo Grbovic, Vladan Radosavljevic,
and Narayan Bhamidipati.
Hate speech detection with comment embeddings.
In
Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, pages 29–30,
2015. 7
[ES12] Atilla Eryilmaz and Rayadurgam Srikant. Asymptotically tight steady-state queue
length bounds implied by drift conditions. Queueing Systems, 72:311–359, 2012. 7
[FHL22] Hu Fu, Qun Hu, and Jia’nan Lin. Stability of decentralized queueing networks beyond
complete bipartite cases. In International Conference on Web and Internet Economics,
pages 96–114. Springer, 2022. 6
[FLW23] Daniel Freund, Thodoris Lykouris, and Wentao Weng. Quantifying the cost of learning
in queueing systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:6532–
6544, 2023. 6
[FLW24] Daniel Freund, Thodoris Lykouris, and Wentao Weng. Efficient decentralized multi-
agent learning in asymmetric bipartite queueing systems.
Operations Research,
72(3):1049–1070, 2024. 6
[FM22] Xinzhe Fu and Eytan Modiano. Optimal routing to parallel servers with unknown
utilities—multi-armed bandit with queues. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking,
31(5):1997–2012, 2022. 6
[GBK20] Robert Gorwa, Reuben Binns, and Christian Katzenbach. Algorithmic content mod-
eration: Technical and political challenges in the automation of platform governance.
Big Data & Society, 7(1):2053951719897945, 2020. 7
[GGY24] Nicolas Gast, Bruno Gaujal, and Chen Yan. Linear program-based policies for rest-
less bandits: Necessary and sufficient conditions for (exponentially fast) asymptotic
optimality. Mathematics of Operations Research, 49(4):2468–2491, 2024. 7
[Gil18] Tarleton Gillespie. Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, content moderation, and
the hidden decisions that shape social media. Yale University Press, 2018. 1
[GKBM10] Minas Gjoka, Maciej Kurant, Carter T Butts, and Athina Markopoulou. Walking
in facebook: A case study of unbiased sampling of osns. In 2010 Proceedings IEEE
Infocom, pages 1–9. Ieee, 2010. 28
[GKM03] Noah Gans, Ger Koole, and Avishai Mandelbaum. Telephone call centers: Tutorial,
review, and research prospects. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management,
5(2):79–141, 2003. 2
[GM22] Noah Golowich and Ankur Moitra. Can q-learning be improved with advice?
In
Conference on Learning Theory, pages 4548–4619. PMLR, 2022. 31
34


--- Page 35 ---
[GT23] Jason Gaitonde and ´Eva Tardos. The price of anarchy of strategic queuing systems.
Journal of the ACM, 70(3):1–63, 2023. 6
[Haj82] Bruce Hajek. Hitting-time and occupation-time bounds implied by drift analysis with
applications. Advances in Applied probability, 14(3):502–525, 1982. 7
[HB13] Mor Harchol-Balter. Performance modeling and design of computer systems: queueing
theory in action. Cambridge University Press, 2013. 15
[HCD22] Yue Hu, Carri W Chan, and Jing Dong.
Optimal scheduling of proactive service
with customer deterioration and improvement. Management science, 68(4):2533–2578,
2022. 2, 6, 7
[HCFM+22] Alon Halevy, Cristian Canton-Ferrer, Hao Ma, Umut Ozertem, Patrick Pantel,
Marzieh Saeidi, Fabrizio Silvestri, and Ves Stoyanov. Preserving integrity in online
social networks. Communications of the ACM, 65(2):92–98, 2022. 1, 2, 7
[HKL+21] Daniel Haimovich, Dima Karamshuk, Thomas J Leeper, Evgeniy Riabenko, and Mi-
lan Vojnovic.
Popularity prediction for social media over arbitrary time horizons.
Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 15(4):841–849, 2021. 2, 5, 6, 14, 25, 28
[HXCW23] Yige Hong, Qiaomin Xie, Yudong Chen, and Weina Wang. Restless bandits with av-
erage reward: Breaking the uniform global attractor assumption. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:12810–12844, 2023. 7
[HXCW24a] Yige Hong, Qiaomin Xie, Yudong Chen, and Weina Wang. Achieving exponential
asymptotic optimality in average-reward restless bandits without global attractor as-
sumption. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17882, 2024. 7
[HXCW24b] Yige Hong, Qiaomin Xie, Yudong Chen, and Weina Wang. Unichain and aperiodic-
ity are sufficient for asymptotic optimality of average-reward restless bandits. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.05689, 2024. 7
[HXLB22] Wei-Kang Hsu, Jiaming Xu, Xiaojun Lin, and Mark R Bell. Integrated online learning
and adaptive control in queueing systems with uncertain payoffs. Operations Research,
70(2):1166–1181, 2022. 6
[JSS24] Huiwen Jia, Cong Shi, and Siqian Shen. Online learning and pricing for service systems
with reusable resources. Operations Research, 72(3):1203–1241, 2024. 6
[KAD24] Deepak Kumar, Yousef Anees AbuHashem, and Zakir Durumeric. Watch your lan-
guage: Investigating content moderation with large language models. In Proceedings
of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, volume 18, pages
865–878, 2024. 7
[KAJS18] Subhashini Krishnasamy, Ari Arapostathis, Ramesh Johari, and Sanjay Shakkottai.
On learning the cµ rule in single and parallel server networks. In 2018 56th Annual
Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), pages
153–154. IEEE, 2018. 6
[KKR01] Anna R Karlin, Claire Kenyon, and Dana Randall. Dynamic tcp acknowledgement and
other stories about e/(e-1). In Proceedings of the thirty-third annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing, pages 502–509, 2001. 4
35


--- Page 36 ---
[KSJS21] Subhashini Krishnasamy, Rajat Sen, Ramesh Johari, and Sanjay Shakkottai. Learning
unknown service rates in queues: A multiarmed bandit approach. Operations research,
69(1):315–330, 2021. 6
[LAV15] Maialen Larra˜naga, Urtzi Ayesta, and Ina Maria Verloop. Asymptotically optimal
index policies for an abandonment queue with convex holding cost. Queueing systems,
81(2):99–169, 2015. 7
[LGHS25] Zhouzi Li, Keerthana Gurushankar, Mor Harchol-Balter, and Alan Scheller-Wolf.
Improving upon the generalized c-mu rule:
a whittle approach.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.10622, 2025. 7
[LLRW23] Tongxin Li, Yiheng Lin, Shaolei Ren, and Adam Wierman. Beyond black-box advice:
Learning-augmented algorithms for mdps with q-value predictions. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:45502–45515, 2023. 31
[LNZ24] Jiung Lee, Hongseok Namkoong, and Yibo Zeng. Design and scheduling of an ai-based
queueing system. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06855, 2024. 8
[LSZZ20] Zhenghua Long, Nahum Shimkin, Hailun Zhang, and Jiheng Zhang. Dynamic schedul-
ing of multiclass many-server queues with abandonment: The generalized cµ/h rule.
Operations Research, 68(4):1218–1230, 2020. 7
[LW24] Thodoris Lykouris and Wentao Weng. Learning to defer in content moderation: The
human-ai interplay. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12237, 2024. 5, 8, 22
[LY20] Xin Liu and Lei Ying. Steady-state analysis of load-balancing algorithms in the sub-
halfin–whitt regime. Journal of Applied Probability, 57(2):578–596, 2020. 7
[MD22] Michael Mitzenmacher and Matteo Dell’Amico. The supermarket model with known
and predicted service times. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
33(11):2740–2751, 2022. 31
[Met22] Meta. The people behind meta’s review teams, 2022. https://transparency.meta.
com/enforcement/detecting-violations/people-behind-our-review-teams/.
Accessed on February 28, 2025. 1, 6
[Met25] Meta. Community standards, 2025. https://transparency.meta.com/policies/
community-standards. Accessed on March 6, 2025. 1
[MKS+15] Volodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness,
Marc G Bellemare, Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg
Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning. nature,
518(7540):529–533, 2015. 25
[MS04] Avishai Mandelbaum and Alexander L Stolyar. Scheduling flexible servers with convex
delay costs: Heavy-traffic optimality of the generalized cµ-rule. Operations Research,
52(6):836–855, 2004. 2
[MS16] Siva Theja Maguluri and R Srikant. Heavy traffic queue length behavior in a switch
under the maxweight algorithm. Stochastic Systems, 6(1):211–250, 2016. 7
36


--- Page 37 ---
[MSA+21] Rahul Makhijani, Parikshit Shah, Vashist Avadhanula, Caner Gocmen, Nicol´as E.
Stier-Moses, and Juli´an Mestre. Quest: Queue simulation for content moderation at
scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.16816, 2021. 5, 8, 25, 31
[MX16] Laurent Massouli´e and Kuang Xu. On the capacity of information processing systems.
In Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1292–1297. PMLR, 2016. 6
[NM23a] Quang Minh Nguyen and Eytan Modiano. Learning to schedule in non-stationary
wireless networks with unknown statistics. In Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth In-
ternational Symposium on Theory, Algorithmic Foundations, and Protocol Design for
Mobile Networks and Mobile Computing, pages 181–190, 2023. 6
[NM23b] Jos´e Ni˜no-Mora. Markovian restless bandits and index policies: A review. Mathemat-
ics, 11(7):1639, 2023. 7
[NRLP12] Michael J Neely, Scott T Rager, and Thomas F La Porta.
Max weight learning
algorithms for scheduling in unknown environments. IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, 57(5):1179–1191, 2012. 6
[NVH20] Nima Noorshams, Saurabh Verma, and Aude Hofleitner. Ties: temporal interaction
embeddings for enhancing social media integrity at facebook. In Proceedings of the
26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining,
pages 3128–3135, 2020. 7
[Pin12] Michael L Pinedo. Scheduling, volume 29. Springer, 2012. 2
[PW22] Amber L Puha and Amy R Ward. Fluid limits for multiclass many-server queues
with general reneging distributions and head-of-the-line scheduling. Mathematics of
Operations Research, 47(2):1192–1228, 2022. 7
[Rob19] Sarah T Roberts. Behind the screen. Yale University Press, 2019. 8
[RXS+17] Marian-Andrei Rizoiu, Lexing Xie, Scott Sanner, Manuel Cebrian, Honglin Yu, and
Pascal Van Hentenryck. Expecting to be hip: Hawkes intensity processes for social
media popularity. In Proceedings of the 26th international conference on world wide
web, pages 735–744, 2017. 2, 5, 6, 25, 28, 29
[SBF17] Eric M Schwartz, Eric T Bradlow, and Peter S Fader. Customer acquisition via display
advertising using multi-armed bandit experiments. Marketing Science, 36(4):500–522,
2017. 5, 27
[SBP21] Flore Sentenac, Etienne Boursier, and Vianney Perchet. Decentralized learning in on-
line queuing systems. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:18501–
18512, 2021. 6
[SDW06] Matthew J Salganik, Peter Sheridan Dodds, and Duncan J Watts.
Experimental
study of inequality and unpredictability in an artificial cultural market.
science,
311(5762):854–856, 2006. 2
[SFC+23] Sean R Sinclair, Felipe Vieira Frujeri, Ching-An Cheng, Luke Marshall, Hugo
De Oliveira Barbalho, Jingling Li, Jennifer Neville, Ishai Menache, and Adith Swami-
nathan. Hindsight learning for mdps with exogenous inputs. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 31877–31914. PMLR, 2023. 5, 26
37


--- Page 38 ---
[SGM22] Ziv Scully, Isaac Grosof, and Michael Mitzenmacher. Uniform bounds for scheduling
with job size estimates. In 13th Innovations in Theoretical Computer Science Con-
ference (ITCS 2022), pages 114–1. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur Informatik,
2022. 31
[SGMV20] Virag Shah, Lennart Gulikers, Laurent Massouli´e, and Milan Vojnovi´c.
Adap-
tive matching for expert systems with uncertain task types.
Operations Research,
68(5):1403–1424, 2020. 6
[SLL24] Juaren Steiger, Bin Li, and Ning Lu. Backlogged bandits: Cost-effective learning for
utility maximization in queueing networks. In IEEE INFOCOM 2024-IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Communications, pages 381–390. IEEE, 2024. 6
[SSM21] Thomas Stahlbuhk, Brooke Shrader, and Eytan Modiano.
Learning algorithms
for minimizing queue length regret.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
67(3):1759–1781, 2021. 6
[Sto04] Alexander L Stolyar. Maxweight scheduling in a generalized switch: State space col-
lapse and workload minimization in heavy traffic. The Annals of Applied Probability,
14(1):1–53, 2004. 7
[TE92] L Tassiulas and A Ephremides. Stability properties of constrained queueing systems
and scheduling policies for maximum throughput in multihop radio networks. IEEE
Transactions on Automatic Control, 37(12):1936–1948, 1992. 6
[Tik25a] TikTok.
Community
guidelines,
2025.
https://www.tiktok.com/
community-guidelines/en/. Accessed on March 9, 2025. 1
[Tik25b] TikTok.
Our approach to content moderation, 2025.
https://www.tiktok.com/
transparency/en/content-moderation/. Accessed on February 28, 2025. 1, 6
[VCM23] Sushil Mahavir Varma, Francisco Castro, and Siva Theja Maguluri. Power-of-d choices
load balancing in the sub-halfin whitt regime. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM SIG-
METRICS International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Sys-
tems, pages 95–96, 2023. 7
[Ver16] I.M. Verloop. Asymptotically optimal priority policies for indexable and nonindexable
restless bandits. The Annals of Applied Probability, 26(4):1947–1995, 2016. 7
[vKSSW24] Sanne van Kempen, Jaron Sanders, Fiona Sloothaak, and Maarten G Wolf. Learning
payoffs while routing in skill-based queues. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10168, 2024. 6
[VM95] Jan A Van Mieghem. Dynamic scheduling with convex delay costs: The generalized
c— mu rule. The Annals of Applied Probability, pages 809–833, 1995. 2, 25
[Whi88] Peter Whittle. Restless bandits: Activity allocation in a changing world. Journal of
applied probability, 25(A):287–298, 1988. 7
[WW90] Richard R Weber and Gideon Weiss. On an index policy for restless bandits. Journal
of applied probability, 27(3):637–648, 1990. 7
[WX21] Neil Walton and Kuang Xu. Learning and information in stochastic networks and
queues. In Tutorials in Operations Research: Emerging Optimization Methods and
Modeling Techniques with Applications, pages 161–198. INFORMS, 2021. 6
38


--- Page 39 ---
[WZS20] Wentao Weng, Xingyu Zhou, and Rayadurgam Srikant. Optimal load balancing with
locality constraints. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Com-
puting Systems, 4(3):1–37, 2020. 7, 20
[XHKS25] Wenqian Xing, Yue Hu, Anand Kalvit, and Vahid Sarhangian. Online learning for
dynamic service mode control. Available at SSRN 5123355, 2025. 6
[Yin17] Lei Ying. Stein’s method for mean field approximations in light and heavy traffic
regimes. Proceedings of the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Sys-
tems, 1(1):1–27, 2017. 7
[YSY23] Zixian Yang, R Srikant, and Lei Ying.
Learning while scheduling in multi-server
systems with unknown statistics: Maxweight with discounted ucb. In International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pages 4275–4312. PMLR, 2023. 6
[ZBW24] Yueyang Zhong, John R Birge, and Amy R Ward. Learning to schedule in multiclass
many-server queues with abandonment. Operations Research, 2024. 6
[ZEH+15] Qingyuan Zhao, Murat A Erdogdu, Hera Y He, Anand Rajaraman, and Jure Leskovec.
Seismic: A self-exciting point process model for predicting tweet popularity. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery
and data mining, pages 1513–1522, 2015. 2, 5
[ZLS+16] Haoti Zhong, Hao Li, Anna Cinzia Squicciarini, Sarah Michele Rajtmajer, Christopher
Griffin, David J Miller, and Cornelia Caragea. Content-driven detection of cyberbul-
lying on the instagram social network. In IJCAI, volume 16, pages 3952–3958, 2016.
7
39


--- Page 40 ---
A
Tables of Notation
This section summarizes key notation used in the paper.
It contains three tables of notation,
classified by whether the notation is mainly for jobs’ tree-shaped Markov chain (Table 1), system
dynamics (Table 2), or the analysis (Table 3).
Table 1: Notation for jobs’ tree-shaped Markov chain
Symbol
Meaning
S
state space
L
number of levels of the tree
(maximum length of a job’s cost trajectory)
θ
minimum abandonment probability
S0, . . . , Sℓ, . . . , SL−1
states on level ℓof the tree
P(i, k)
the probability of transitioning from state i to state k
p(i)
the probability of transitioning from its parent to state i
c(i)
the instantaneous holding cost for a job with state i
r
the root of the tree
pa(i)
the parent of state i
ch(i)
the set of child(ren) of state i
Anc(i)
the set of ancestors of state i
Sub(i)
the set of states in the subtree of state i
pa(X), ch(X), Anc(X), Sub(X)
the union of parents, children, ancestors or subtrees
over all states in X
Top(X)
the top set of states in X, which is the minimum subset of X
whose subtree is a superset of X
Table 2: Notation for system dynamics
Symbol
Meaning
N
the system size which scales to ∞
λ, µ
the (normalized) arrival and service rates
R(t)
the random number of available servers in period t
Q(t) = (Qi(t))i∈S
the number of state-i jobs at the beginning of period t
R(t) = (Ri(t))i∈S
the number of served state-i jobs in period t
Z(t) = (Zi(t))i∈S
the number of remaining state-i jobs after service in period t,
which is equal to Qi(t) −Ri(t)
C(A), C(N, A)
the long-run average holding cost of an algorithm A
(when the system size is N)
Reg(A), Reg(N, A)
the regret of an algorithm A (when the system size is N)
40


--- Page 41 ---
Table 3: Notation for analysis
Symbol
Meaning
q = (qi)i∈S
fluid-scaled queue length for state i
ν = (νi)i∈S
fluid-scaled service for state i
C⋆
the minimum cost in the fluid LP (OriginalFluid)
P ⋆
the maximum prevented cost, which is λcf(r) −C⋆
π(i)
the probability of a job becoming state i,
which is Q
a∈Anc(i) p(pa(a), a)
π(i)/π(a)
the probability of a state-a job to become a state-i job
cf(a)
the conditional future cost for state i, P
i∈Sub(a) c(i)π(i)/π(a)
γ
capacity dual / price
β⋆(γ)
the optimal state duals when the capacity dual is γ
V f(γ, i)
the future cost-to-go function conditioning on price γ and state i
o = (o1, . . . , o|S|)
a priority ordering denoting the order in which states are served
o[h]
the first h states, {o1, . . . , oh} in the priority ordering o
m
the maximum position with P
i∈Top(o[m) λπ(i) ≤µ,
i.e., the service rate can serve (in expectation) all jobs in the top set of o[m]
p
the partially-served state which is om+1
unless if the above inequality is equality or m = |S|
κ
the degeneracy parameter defined in (10)
qo, νo
fluid equilibrium for priority algorithm based on ordering o
qOaRC, νOaRC
fluid equilibrium for OaRC
B
Additional Proofs
B.1
Proof of Lemma 3.1 (Section 3.2)
Fix a capacity dual γ ≥0. Recall that β⋆(γ) = (β⋆
i (γ))i∈S with β⋆
i (γ) = max(0, c(i)+V f(γ, i)−γ).
The following result establishes a connection between the cost-to-go function and β⋆(γ).
Lemma B.1. For any a ∈S, the cost-to-go function V (γ, a) = cf(a) −P
i∈Sub(a) β⋆
i (γ)π(i)/π(a).
Proof. For ease of notation, we omit the dependence on γ for β⋆(γ) and use β⋆= β⋆(γ) with
β⋆
i = β⋆
i (γ). Denoting the right-hand-side of the lemma by
˜V (a) = cf(a) −
X
i∈Sub(a)
β⋆
i π(i)/π(a) =
X
i∈Sub(a)
(c(i) −β⋆
i )π(i)/π(a),
we show by induction that ˜V (a) = V (γ, a) defined in (3). Recall that states in S are partitioned
into states S0, . . . , SL−1 in each level. Our induction moves from the largest level L−1 to the lowest
level 0. First, for states a ∈SL−1 in the highest level, Sub(a) = {a}. Then ˜V (a) = c(a) −β⋆
a =
min(c(a), γ) = V (γ, a) by (3). As our inductive hypothesis, suppose for some 0 < ℓ< L −1,we
41


--- Page 42 ---
have shown ˜V (i) = V (γ, i) for any i ∈Sℓ+1; our inductive step now establishes this for a ∈Sℓ.
˜V (a) =
X
i∈Sub(a)
(c(i) −β⋆
i )π(i)/π(a)
(i)
= c(a) −β⋆
a +
X
k∈ch(a)
X
i∈Sub(k)
(c(i) −β⋆
i )π(i)/π(k) · P(a, k)
(ii)
= c(a) −β⋆
a +
X
k∈ch(a)
P(a, k)V (γ, k)
(iii)
= c(a) −β⋆
a + V f(γ, a),
where (i) is because π(k) = π(a)P(a, k) for k ∈ch(a); (ii) is because of the induction hypothesis
and k ∈Sℓ+1; (iii) is by the definition of V f(γ, a) in (3). Using β⋆
a = max(0, c(i) + V f(γ, i) −γ)
gives ˜V (a) = min(γ, c(a) + V f(γ, a)) = V (γ, a), finishing the induction.
Proof of Lemma 3.1. Define the function f(β) = P
i∈S π(i)βi for a state dual vector β = (βi)i∈S),
which is the first part of D⋆(γ) in (Dual). Define the feasible set of state duals for D⋆(γ) by
B(γ) =


β ∈RS
≥0 : cf(a) −
X
i∈Sub(a)
βiπ(i)/π(a) ≤γ, ∀a ∈S


.
Then D⋆(γ) = µ · γ + λ minβ∈B(γ) f(β) by (Dual). The problem minβ∈B(γ) f(β) is an LP whose
dual is given by
max
y∈RS
≥0
X
a∈S
(cf(a) −γ)ya
s.t.
X
a∈Anc(i)
ya · π(i)
π(a) ≤π(i), ∀i.
(22)
We show the first result of the lemma (that β⋆(γ) is an optimal solution to D⋆(γ)) by proving
two properties: (1) it is feasible, i.e., β⋆(γ) ∈B(γ); (2) there exists y⋆(γ) that is feasible to (22)
such that f(β⋆(γ)) = P
a∈S(cf(a) −γ)ya and thus by weak duality β⋆(γ) is optimal.
To prove β⋆(γ) ∈B(γ), Lemma B.1 shows that cf(a) −P
i∈Sub(a) β⋆
i (γ)π(i)/π(a) is equal to
V (γ, a), which is upper bounded by γ by its definition (3). Therefore, β⋆(γ) ∈B(γ).
To show β⋆(γ) is optimal, we construct a feasible y⋆to (22) with f(β⋆(γ)) = P
a∈S(cf(a)−γ)y⋆
a.
This shows β⋆(γ) is optimal because by weak duality, any feasible β ∈B(γ) must have f(β) ≥
P
a∈S(cf(a) −γ)y⋆
a. We construct y⋆= (y⋆
a)a∈S as follows from the lowest level S0 to the highest
level SL−1, which ensures that for any state, at most one of its ancestor a has non-zero y⋆
a:
y⋆
a =
(
π(a), if c(a) + V f(γ, a) > γ and π(k) = 0, ∀k ∈Anc(a), k ̸= a
0, otherwise.
(23)
Since y⋆
i ≥0 and P
a∈Anc(i) yaπ(i)/π(a) ≤π(i) for any i, y⋆is feasible to (22). Moreover, by
rearranging terms, we verify that
X
a∈S
(cf(a) −γ)y⋆
a −
X
i∈S
π(i)β⋆
i (γ) =
X
a∈S
y⋆
a

cf(a) −γ +
X
i∈Sub(a)
β⋆
i (γ)π(i)/π(a)


|
{z
}
Term 1
−
X
i∈S
β⋆
i (γ)

π(i) −
X
a∈Anc(i)
y⋆
aπ(i)/π(a)


|
{z
}
Term 2
.
42


--- Page 43 ---
If we establish Terms 1 and 2 are equal to zero, this implies P
i∈S π(i)β⋆
i (γ) = P
a∈S(cf(a) −γ)y⋆
a
and thus β⋆(γ) is optimal. We prove them as follows:
• For Term 1, Lemma B.1 shows cf(a) −P
i∈Sub(a) β⋆
i (γ)π(i)/π(a) = V (γ, a).
As a result,
Term 1 = P
a∈S y⋆
a(γ−V (γ, a)) = 0 because for any a, if y⋆
a > 0, (23) requires c(a)+V f(γ, a) >
γ and thus V (γ, a) = min(c(a) + V (γ, a), γ) = γ.
• For Term 2, if β⋆
i (γ) > 0, then c(i) + V f(γ, i) > γ. As a result, either y⋆
i = π(i) and any
ancestor a has y⋆
a = 0, or there exists an ancestor a with y⋆
a = π(a) by (23). This implies
π(i) −P
a∈Anc(i) y⋆
aπ(i)/π(a) = 0. As a result, Term 2 = 0.
Summarizing the above shows f(β⋆(γ)) = P
a∈S(cf(a) −γ)y⋆
a and thus β⋆(γ) is optimal to D⋆(γ).
For the second result of the lemma, since β⋆(γ) is an optimal solution,
D⋆(γ) = µ · γ + λf(β⋆(γ)) = µ · γ + λ
X
i∈S
π(i)β⋆
i (γ) = µ · γ + λ(cf(r) −V (γ, r)),
where, for the last equality, we use Lemma B.1.
B.2
Proof of Lemma 4.1 (Section 4.1)
Proof. Recall that the system state is (Q(t), R(t)) and initially Q(1) = 0. Define the system state
space by the set of states reachable from (0, n) for some n ∈[N]. To show irreducibility, it is
sufficient to show that there are paths connecting these states to state (0, 0) as state (0, 0) reaches
state (0, n) in one step for any n. Fix any state (q, n) in the system state space and suppose
Q(t) = q and R(t) = n. Since λ < 1, meaning that with non-zero probability there is no arrival
for this period. Moreover, given that the minimum abandonment probability θ > 0, every job in
the queue has non-zero probability to abandon. Moreover, R(t + 1) = 0 with non-zero probability.
As a result, Q(t + 1) = 0 and R(t + 1) = 0 with non-zero probability, which establishes that
the Markov chain is irreducible. For aperiodicity, since state (0, 0) can transition to itself in one
step, the Markov chain contains a self-loop, and is thus aperiodic. Finally, the Markov chain has
a finite state space because (i) Qi(t), R(t) are non-negative integers for any i; (ii) R(t) ≤N; (iii)
P
i∈S Qi(t) ≤PL−1
ℓ=0 A(t −ℓ−1) ≤L · N because a job with state i ∈Sℓin period t must have
arrived in period t −ℓ−1.
B.3
Proof of Lemma 4.2 (Section 4.1)
Proof. Since qo and νo satisfy (5), it suffices to verify the two constraints of (SimplerFluid), which
imply that (qo, νo) is feasible to (OriginalFluid). For the first constraint of (SimplerFluid), recall
from (6) that it is equivalent to having qo
i ≥νo
i for any state i. This inequality holds by definition
except for the partially-served state p (T-4), for which we verify that, if p ̸=⊥, then
qo
p −νo
p = λπ(p) −
µ −λ P
i∈Top(o[m]) π(i)
κ
=
λπ(p) −µ + λ P
i∈Top(o[m])\Sub(p) π(i)
κ
≥0,
where the second equality uses the definition of κ in (10). To see the last inequality, if p =⊥, then
κ = +∞and thus the fraction becomes zero. When p ̸=⊥, the partially-served state p is equal to
43


--- Page 44 ---
o[m+1] and Top(o[m+1]) = {p}∪Top(o[m])\Sub(p). If the last inequality is not true, then it contra-
dicts with the definition of m which defines m as the maximum position with P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ.
For the second constraint of (SimplerFluid), we verify that P
i∈S νo
i = P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ
when p =⊥, and when p ̸=⊥, it is
X
i∈S
νo
i =
X
i∈Top(o[m])\Sub(p)
λπ(i) + νo
p +
X
i∈Top(o[m])∩Sub(p)

λπ(i) −νo
pπ(i)
π(p) )

=
X
i∈Top(o[m])
λπ(i) + νo
p

1 −
X
i∈Top(o[m])∩Sub(p)
π(i)/π(p)


=
X
i∈Top(o[m])
λπ(i) + νo
pκ = µ,
where the second equality uses the definition of κ in (10) and the last equality uses the definition
of νo
p in (T-4). We have thus established that νo is feasible to (SimplerFluid).
B.4
Proof of Lemma 4.5 (Section 4.2)
Throughout this proof, we assume a fixed system size N and omit it in the notation. Fixing a
feasible algorithm ALG, we denote the number of state-i jobs in the queue at the beginning of
period t by Qi(t, ALG) and the number of served state-i jobs by Ri(t, ALG). To establish the lower
bound, for any horizon T, we define a feasible solution, qT = (qT
i ), νT = (νT
i ), to (OriginalFluid)
from the stochastic system by setting
qT
i =
1
NT E
" T
X
t=1
Qi(t, ALG)
#
+
1
NT E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

+ λπ(i)
T
(24)
νT
i =
1
NT E
" T
X
t=1
Ri(t, ALG)
#
,
(25)
where we define that Zi(t, ALG) = Qi(t, ALG) −Ri(t, ALG) and π(i) = Q
k∈Anc(i) P(pa(k), k).
Lemma B.2. The constructed (qT , νT ) is a feasible solution to (OriginalFluid).
Proof. We verify the constraints in (OriginalFluid):
44


--- Page 45 ---
(i) qT
i = (qT
pa(i) −νT
pa(i))P(pa(i), i) for any i ∈S \ {r}: this is because
1
NT E
" T
X
t=1
Qi(t, ALG)
#
=
1
NT E
" T
X
t=1
Zpa(i)(t −1, ALG)P(pa(i), i)
#
= P(pa(i), i) 1
NT E
"T−1
X
t=1
(Qpa(i)(t) −Rpa(i)(t))
#
= P(pa(i), i))

qT
pa(i) −νT
pa(i) −
1
NT E


X
k∈Anc(pa(i))
Zk(T, ALG)π(pa(i))
π(k)

−λπ(pa(i))
T


= P(pa(i), i)(qT
pa(i) −νT
pa(i)) −
1
NT E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

−λπ(i)
T
,
(26)
where the first equality is because each remaining job with state pa(i) has probability P(pa(i), i)
to become a state-i job; the second uses the definition of Z and shifts t by one period; the
third uses the definitions in (24) and (25); the last one uses π(i) = π(pa(i))P(pa(i), i) and
Anc(pa(i)) = Anc(i) \ {i}. Plugging (26) into (24) gives
qT
i = P(pa(i), i)(qT
pa(i) −νT
pa(i)) −

1
NT E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

−
   λπ(i)
T
+

1
NT E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

+
   λπ(i)
T
= (qT
pa(i) −νT
pa(i))P(pa(i), i).
(ii) qT
r = λ because (24) and the fact that r does not have ancestors implies
qT
r =
1
NT E
" T
X
t=1
Qr(t, ALG)
#
+ λπ(r)
T
=
1
NT E
"T−1
X
t=1
A(t)
#
+ λ
T = λ(T −1)
T
+ λ
T = λ.
(iii) νT
i ≤qT
i for any i ∈S because Ri(t, ALG) ≤Qi(t, ALG) for any period t.
(iv) P
i∈S νT
i ≤µ because
X
i∈S
νT
i =
1
NT
X
i∈S
T
X
t=1
E [Ri(t, ALG)] =
1
NT
T
X
t=1
E
"X
i∈S
Ri(t, ALG)
#
≤
1
NT
T
X
t=1
E [R(t)] = µ,
where R(t) is the number of available servers for period t and has expectation Nµ.
Proof of Lemma 4.5. For any finite horizon T, define the finite-horizon average holding cost
CT (ALG) = 1
T E
" T
X
t=1
X
i∈S
c(i)(Qi(t, ALG) −Ri(t, ALG))
#
.
45


--- Page 46 ---
The long-run average holding cost of ALG in (1) satisfies C(ALG) = lim supT→∞CT (ALG).
Recall the definition of qT and νT in (24) and (25). We lower bound CT (ALG) by
CT (ALG) = 1
T E
" T
X
t=1
X
i∈S
c(i)(Qi(t, ALG) −Ri(t, ALG))
#
= N
X
i∈S
c(i)(qT
i −νT
i ) −1
T
X
i∈S
c(i)

E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

+ λNπ(i)


≥NC⋆−1
T
X
i∈S
c(i)

E


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Zk(T, ALG) π(i)
π(k)

+ λNπ(i)


|
{z
}
(∗)
,
(27)
where the last inequality is because (qT , νT ) is feasible to (OriginalFluid) by Lemma B.2 and C⋆
is the optimal value to (OriginalFluid). To lower bound (∗), note that for any state i with level ℓ
and period t, the expected value of Zi(t) is at most
E [Zi(t, ALG)] ≤E

Zpa(i)(t −1, ALG)

P(pa(i), i)
≤E

Zpa(pa(i))(t −2, ALG)

P(pa(pa(i)), pa(i))P(pa(i), i)
≤. . . ≤E [A(t −ℓ−1)] π(i) ≤Nλπ(i).
(28)
Recalling cmax = maxi∈S c(i), we lower bound (∗) by:
(∗) ≤cmax
T
X
i∈S


X
k∈Anc(i)\{i}
Nλπ(k) · π(i)
π(k) + λNπ(i)

= cmax
T
X
i∈S
X
k∈Anc(i)
Nλπ(i)
≤Nλcmax
T
X
i∈S
Lπ(i) ≤NλcmaxL2
T
,
where the first inequality uses (28), the equality merges terms; the second inequality uses the fact
that a state has at most L ancestors; the last inequality uses P
i∈S π(i) ≤L. The latter is because
X
i∈S
π(i) =
L−1
X
ℓ=0
X
i∈Sℓ
π(i) ≤
L−1
X
ℓ=0
π(r) = L,
by applying Lemma B.3 with Y = Sℓand X = S
and because Top(Sℓ) = Sℓ, Top(S) = {r}. As a result, (27) gives CT (ALG) ≥NC⋆−NλcmaxL2
T
and C(ALG) = lim supT→∞CT (ALG) ≥NC⋆for any feasible algorithm ALG.
B.5
Proof of Lemma 4.3 (Sections 4.2 and 4.3)
A result we need is that the probability of a job being in a top state of a set X is larger than that
of a subset Y. Although this is direct when Top(Y) ⊆Top(X), this condition is in general not true.
For example, consider X = {2, 3, 4, 5} and Y = {3, 5} in Figure 2. Then Top(X) = {2, 4} while
Top(Y) = {3, 5}. The proof of Lemma B.3 is based on induction argument.
Lemma B.3. If Y ⊆X ⊆S, then P
i∈Top(Y) π(i) ≤P
i∈Top(X) π(i).
46


--- Page 47 ---
Proof. Fix any X, Y ⊆S such that Y ⊆X. We denote the top set of Y by V = Top(Y). For any
state i, we define a function f(i) = π(i) −P
k∈Sub(i)∩V π(k), which is the difference between πi and
the sum of πk across any k that is in both the top set V and the subtree of i. Since Y ⊆X, its top
set V is in the subtree of Top(X), and thus has a partition {Vi}i∈Top(X) with Vi = V ∩Sub(i) for
i ∈Top(X) such that V = S
i∈Top(X) Vi. As a result,
X
i∈Top(X)
π(i) −
X
i∈Top(Y)
π(i) =
X
i∈Top(X)
π(i) −
X
i∈Top(X)
X
k∈Vi
π(k) =
X
i∈Top(X)
f(i).
(29)
To prove the lemma, it is sufficient to show f(i) ≥0 for any state i. Recall that states have a
partition based on their levels S = S0 ∪· · · SL−1. We show f(i) ≥0 by induction from SL−1 to S0:
• base case: for any i ∈SL−1, since it has no children, f(i) = π(i) −π(i)1 (i ∈V) ≥0.
• induction step: suppose f(k) ≥0 for any k ∈Sℓ+1. Given a state i ∈Sℓ, if i ∈V, this implies
there is no other state in its subtree inside V; otherwise V is not a top set. As a result,
f(i) = π(i) −π(i) = 0. If i ̸∈V,
f(i) = π(i) −
X
a∈ch(i)
X
k∈Sub(a)∩V
π(k) ≥π(i) −
X
a∈ch(i)
π(a) = π(i) −π(i)
X
a∈ch(i)
P(i, a) ≥0,
where the first inequality is by the induction hypothesis that f(a) = π(a)−P
k∈Sub(a)∩V π(k) ≥
0 since a ∈Sℓ+1.
The above shows that f(i) ≥0 for any state i. Using (29) gives P
i∈Top(X) π(i) ≥P
i∈Top(Y) π(i).
Proof of Lemma 4.3. We partition states into three classes SHi, SEq, SLo corresponding to states
with indices IndexOaRC(i) = c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) higher, equal, or lower than γ⋆respectively. It is
sufficient to show that if a priority ordering o ranks these three classes in order (without ordering
within each), then its equilibrium is optimal to (OriginalFluid). This is because OaRC ranks all
states in a decreasing order of c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i), its corresponding priority ordering must rank SHi
before SEq before SLo.
For the remaining proof, suppose that a priority ordering o ranks SHi before SEq before SLo.
We show that νo is optimal to (SimplerFluid) using Lemma 4.6, which implies the optimality of
(qo, νo) to (OriginalFluid) by the equivalence between (OriginalFluid) and (SimplerFluid).
To do so, recall that the priority ordering o ranks states in SHi before states in SEq and those
in SEq before SLo.
Accordingly, there is a high position Hi and a low position Lo such that
c(oh) + V f(γ⋆, oh) > γ⋆for any h ≤Hi, c(oh) + V f(γ⋆, i) = γ⋆for any h ∈(Hi, Lo], and c(oh) +
V f(γ⋆, oh) < γ⋆for any h > Lo. Since Lemma 4.2 implies that νo is feasible to (SimplerFluid), it
remains to verify conditions (C-1) to (C-3) in Lemma 4.6 for νo. Before that, recall for the priority
ordering o, m is the maximum position such that P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) ≤µ. If the inequality is strict
and m < |S|, the partially-served state p is om+1; otherwise it is ⊥.
Condition (C-1) requires that P
i∈S νo
i = µ when γ⋆> 0. By Lemma 4.2, if the partially-
served state p ̸=⊥, then P
i∈S νo
i = µ. Thus we focus on the case when p =⊥. In this case,
P
i∈S νo
i = P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i). Moreover, by our construction, the case p =⊥only happens when
P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) = µ, which implies P
i∈S νo
i = µ, or when m = |S| and P
i∈Top(o[m]) λπ(i) < µ.
For the latter scenario, note that when m = |S|, the top set Top(o[m]) = Top(S) is equal to the root
47


--- Page 48 ---
note r. As a result, in this scenario λπ(r) = λ < µ. Recall that γ⋆minimizes g(γ) := µ·γ −λV (γ, r)
among γ ≥0 by Lemma 3.1. Since now λ < µ, this implies
∀γ > 0, g(γ) = µ · γ −λV (γ, r) ≥µ · γ −λ · γ = (µ −λ)γ > 0 = g(0).
Therefore, γ⋆= 0 when λ < µ, satisfying (C-1). We thus verify this condition for νo.
Condition (C-2) requires qo
i = νo
i for any i ∈o[Hi]. To show this, it is sufficient to show that
P
i∈Top(o[Hi]) λπ(i) ≤µ as it implies any state i ∈o[Hi] is fully-blocked (T-2), partially-blocked (T-5)
or an empty state (T-3), which gives qo
i = νo
i by our construction. To show P
i∈Top(o[Hi]) λπ(i) ≤µ,
by (C-2) of Lemma 4.6 an optimal solution (q⋆, ν⋆) to (OriginalFluid) satisfies q⋆
i = ν⋆
i for i ∈o[Hi]
and thus
X
i∈Top(o[Hi])
λπ(i)
(5)
=
X
i∈Top(o[Hi])

q⋆
i +
X
a∈Anc(i)\{i}
ν⋆
a · π(i)
π(a)

Lemma 4.6
=
X
i∈Top(o[Hi])
X
a∈Anc(i)
ν⋆
a · π(i)
π(a)
=
X
a∈S
ν⋆
a


X
i∈Top(o[Hi])∩Sub(a)
π(i)

/π(a)
(∗)
≤
X
a∈S
ν⋆
aπ(a)/π(a) =
X
a∈S
ν⋆
a ≤µ,
where Inequality (*) applies Lemma B.3 with X = Sub(a) and Y = Top(o[Hi]) ∩Sub(a) and noting
that Top(X) = {a}, Top(Y) = Y, Y ⊆X. We thus show P
i∈Top(o[Hi]) λπ(i) ≤µ, which implies
Condition (C-2) as we showed at the beginning of this part.
Condition (C-3) requires νo
i = 0 for any i ̸∈o[Lo]. We show this by a case discussion:
• m + 1 ≤Lo: since our construction only allows state i ∈o[m+1] to have non-zero νo
i , this
gives νo
i = 0 for any i ̸∈o[Lo] since o[m+1] ⊆o[Lo] when m + 1 ≤Lo.
• m + 1 > Lo: By (C-3) of Lemma 4.6, an optimal solution (q⋆, ν⋆) to (OriginalFluid) satisfies
ν⋆
i = 0 for i ̸∈o[Lo] and thus
C⋆=
X
i∈S
c(i)(q⋆
i −ν⋆
i )
(7)
= λ
X
i∈S
π(i)c(i) −
X
a∈S
ν⋆
a
X
i∈Sub(a)
c(i)π(i)/π(a)
Lemma 4.6
=
λ
X
i∈S
π(i)c(i) −
X
a∈o[Lo]
ν⋆
a
X
i∈Sub(a)
c(i)π(i)/π(a)
= λ
X
i∈S
π(i)c(i) −
X
i∈Sub(o[Lo])
c(i)
X
a∈Anc(i)
ν⋆
aπ(i)/π(a)
≥λ
X
i∈S
π(i)c(i) −
X
i∈Sub(o[Lo])
λc(i)π(i) = λ
X
i̸=Sub(o[Lo])
π(i)c(i),
(30)
where the inequality is by the first constraint of (SimplerFluid). As a result,
X
i∈S
c(i)(qo
i −νo
i ) =
X
i∈S\Sub(o[Lo])
c(i)(qo
i −νo
i ) ≤λ
X
i∈S\Sub(o[Lo])
c(i)π(i) ≤C⋆,
where the first equality is because m + 1 > Lo and thus qo
i = νo
i for i ∈Sub(o[Lo]) by our
construction in (T-2), (T-3) and (T-5); the first inequality is because qo
i ≤λπ(i) for any i;
the last inequality is by (30). Hence, if m+1 > Lo, we directly show that (qo, νo) is optimal
to (OriginalFluid), the desired result of this lemma, which also implies (C-3) by Lemma 4.6.
48


--- Page 49 ---
Summarizing the above, Conditions (C-1), (C-2), (C-3) hold for νo. Lemma 4.6 thus shows it is
optimal to (SimplerFluid), implying that (qo, νo) is optimal to (OriginalFluid).
B.6
Proof of Lemma 4.6 (Section 4.3)
Proof. Recall that γ⋆is the optimal capacity dual and β⋆(γ⋆) is an optimal solution to (Dual) by
Lemma 3.1. To ease the notation, let β⋆
i = β⋆
i (γ⋆) = max(0, c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) −γ) for any state i.
For any feasible service decision ν = (νi)i∈S to (SimplerFluid), the following equation holds true
by rearranging terms:
 
λ
X
i∈S
πiβ⋆
i + µγ⋆
!
−
X
a∈S
νacf(a) = γ⋆
 
µ −
X
i∈S
νi
!
|
{z
}
Term 1
+
X
i∈S
β⋆
i

λπ(i) −
X
a∈Anc(i)
νa
π(i)
π(a)

+
|
{z
}
Term 2
+
X
a∈S
νa

γ +
X
i∈Sub(a)
β⋆
i
π(i)
π(a) −cf(a)


|
{z
}
Term 3
.
By strong duality, ν is optimal to (SimplerFluid)if and only if the left hand side of the above
equation is equal to zero, which is equivalent to have Terms 1 to 3 equal to zero because each of
these terms is non-negative by the feasibility of ν to (SimplerFluid) and the feasibility of (γ⋆, β⋆)
to (Dual).
We prove the lemma by showing that Terms 1 to 3 are equivalent to Conditions (C-1) to (C-3):
• Term 1 and Condition (C-1) are equivalent because (i) if (C-1) is satisfied, then Term 1
evaluates to zero because γ⋆≥0; (ii) if Term 1 is zero, then either γ⋆or µ −P
i∈S νi is zero,
satisfying (C-1).
• Term 2 and Condition (C-2) are equivalent. If (C-2) is satisfied, it implies that for any state i
with β⋆
i > 0, we have qi, as defined in (5), equal to νi, implying that λπ(i) = P
a∈Anc(i) νa
π(i)
π(a).
Since β⋆
i ≥0 for any state i, this implies Term 2 evaluates to zero. In addition, if Term 2
is equal to zero, it requires that for any state i, either β⋆
i = 0 or λπ(i) = P
a∈Anc(i) νa
π(i)
π(a).
Therefore, if c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i) > γ, i.e., β⋆
i > 0, (5) requires qi = λπ(i) −P
a∈Anc(i)\{i} νa
π(i)
π(a) =
νi, satisfying ((C-2)).
• Term 3 and Condition ((C-3)) are equivalent. To see this, Lemma B.1 shows that V (γ⋆, a) =
cf(a) −P
i∈Sub(a) β⋆
i π(i)/π(a) and thus Term 3 simplifies to P
a∈S νa(γ −V (γ⋆, a)) where
V (γ⋆, a) = min(γ, c(i) + V f(γ⋆, i)). If (C-3) holds true, it implies that for any state a with
V (γ⋆, a) < γ, νa = 0 and thus Term 3 is equal to zero. Moreover, if Term 3 is equal to zero,
either νa = 0 or V (γ⋆, a) = γ for any state a, which implies (C-3).
Summarizing the above, ν is optimal to (SimplerFluid) if and only if Terms 1 to 3 are equal to
zero, which we established is equivalent to having Conditions (C-1) to (C-3).
B.7
Proof of Lemma 4.8 (Section 4.4)
Proof. The challenge in directly proving this result lies in the following two issues:
49


--- Page 50 ---
(a) the number of arrivals in each period is random;
(b) the correlation between jobs due to capacity constraint because a job’s presence in the queue
affects another job’s chance of getting service.
We circumvent these two issues by expanding the original system with fictitious jobs such that
(a) in each period there are always N new (fictitious) jobs and (b) even if a (fictitious) job leaves
because of service, we keep it in the system and thus remove correlation between jobs’ presence.
In particular, in each period there are always N new (fictitious) jobs. A new job j has probability
λ to have a state Sj(t + 1) = r, while with probability 1 −λ, the job has a state Sj(t + 1) =⊥,
i.e., it immediately abandons upon its arrival. The original set of new jobs, A(t), corresponds to
the fictitious jobs with Sj(t + 1) = r. Moreover, for the jobs that obtain service and leave, i.e., for
j ∈R(1) ∪· · · R(t), we assume that their states still transition according to the Markov chain. For
a period t, we define the set of fictitious job arrivals in this period by J (t), which deterministically
contains N jobs. The above expansion does not give more jobs than what exist in the original
system. Therefore, for a set of states X ⊆S, the number of waiting jobs with states in X is
X
i∈X
Qi(t) ≤
t−1
X
τ=1
X
j∈J (τ)
1 (Sj(t) ∈X) ≤
t−1
X
τ=t−min(L,|X|)
X
j∈J (τ)
1 (Sj(t) ∈X) ≤N min(L, |X|),
where the second inequality is because for a job j ∈J (τ) to have a state Sj(t) with level ℓ, it must
arrive in period t −ℓ, and the states in X contain at most min(L, |X|) different levels.
Since job states transition independently, X := Pt−1
τ=1
P
j∈J (τ) 1 (Sj(t) ∈X) is the sum of N(t−
1) independent binary random variables {Xj}j∈J (1)∪...∪J (t−1) where Xj = 1 (Sj(t) ∈X) . Moreover,
E [X] = E


t−1
X
τ=1
X
j∈J (τ)
1 (Sj(t) ∈X)

=
L−1
X
ℓ=0
X
i∈X∩Sℓ
X
j∈J (t−ℓ−1)
P{Sj(t) = i}
≤
L−1
X
ℓ=0
X
i∈X∩Sℓ
Nλπ(i) = Nλ
X
i∈X
π(i),
where the first equality is by partitioning states in X according to their levels and noting that only
jobs arriving in period t −ℓ−1 will have states of level ℓin period t; the inequality is because (i)
the size of J (t −ℓ−1) is N when t > ℓ+ 1 and equal to zero otherwise; (ii) the probability that a
new fictitious job transitions to state i ∈Sℓin ℓperiods is λπ(i). In addition,
X
i∈X
π(i) =
L−1
X
ℓ=0
X
i∈X∩Sℓ
π(i) ≤
L−1
X
ℓ=0
π(r) = L,
(31)
where the inequality applies Lemma B.3 to X ∩Sℓand S where Top(X ∩Sℓ) = X ∩Sℓand
Top(S) = {r}. Therefore, E [X] ≤NL. To give a high probability of P
i∈X Qi(t), consider two
cases. First, if E [X] = 0, it implies X = 0 since X ≥0 and thus P
i∈X Qi(t) = 0. Second, if
50


--- Page 51 ---
E [X] > 0, we finish the proof by
P
(X
i∈X
Qi(t) ≥Nλ
X
i∈X
π(i) + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ
)
≤P
(
X ≥Nλ
X
i∈X
π(i) + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ
)
≤P
(
X ≥E [X]
 
1 + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ
E [X]
!)
(a)
≤exp
 
−9NL ln2 1
δ
2E [X] + 2
√
NL ln 1
δ
!
(b)
≤exp
 
−9NL ln2 1
δ
4NL ln 1
δ
!
≤δ2,
where Inequality (a) is by noting X is the sum of independent binary random variables and applying
Fact 3; Inequality (b) is by E [X] ≤NL and the assumption that δ ∈(0, 1/e].
B.8
Proof of Lemma 4.9 (Section 4.4)
The proof follows a similar structure with that of theorem 1 in [BGT01]. We first establish the
following result.
Lemma B.4. Given the same conditions of Lemma 4.9 and that vwhp ≤vmax, then ∀a ≥B −vwhp,
P{Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp} ≤
vwhp
vwhp + ∆P{Φ(X(∞)) > a −vwhp} + 6εvmax
vwhp
.
Proof. Define a stochastic process {Y (t)} such that Y (t) = X(t + 1). Let ˆΦ(x) = max(a, Φ(x)).
Condition (iii) of the lemma also implies an almost sure upper bound on ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X(t))
since if Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t))) ≤vmax holds almost surely, it implies almost surely that
ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X(t)) = max(a, Φ(X(t + 1))) −max(a, Φ(X(t)))
≤max(a −a, Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t))) ≤vmax.
(32)
The assumption that E [Φ(X(∞))] < ∞implies E
h
ˆΦ(X(∞))
i
< ∞. Since X(t) has a limiting
distribution, both X(∞) and Y (∞) exist and are identically distributed (though not independent).
As a result, recalling the state space is X, the following equation holds:
E
h
ˆΦ(Y (∞)) −ˆΦ(X(∞))
i
= 0, and thus
X
x∈X
P{X(∞) = x} E
h
ˆΦ(Y (∞)) −ˆΦ(X(∞))
 X(∞) = x
i
|
{z
}
drift D(x)
= 0.
(33)
The proof proceeds by bounding the drift term D(x) considering three types of state x ∈G:
• Φ(x) ≤a −vwhp: in this case ˆΦ(x) = a. Moreover, by Condition (i) of the lemma, for any
period t, P{Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t) ≥vwhp|X(t) = x} ≤ε. That is, with probability at least
1 −ε, Φ(X(t + 1)) ≤Φ(x) + vwhp ≤a and ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) = a conditioning on X(t) = x.
Moreover, by (32), ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X(t)) ≤vmax almost surely.
As a result, recalling
Y (t) = X(t+1), E
h
ˆΦ(Y (t)) −ˆΦ(X(t))
 X(t) = x
i
≤(1−ε)(a−a)+ε·vmax = εvmax. Since
this bound holds for any t, it is also true for the limiting distribution. We thus conclude the
drift D(x) ≤εvmax when Φ(x) ≤a −vwhp and x ∈G.
51


--- Page 52 ---
• Φ(x) > a+vwhp: since a ≥B−vwhp, Φ(x) ≥B. By Condition (ii) of the lemma, conditioning
on X(t) = x, with probability at least 1 −ε, Φ(X(t + 1)) ≤Φ(x) −∆, which gives
ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X(t)) = max(a, Φ(X(t + 1))) −max(a, Φ(x))
= max(a, Φ(x) −∆) −Φ(x) ≤−∆,
where the last inequality is because Φ(x) ≥a + vwhp and vwhp ≥∆by assumption. By
(32), ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X(t)) ≤vmax almost surely. Therefore,
E
h
ˆΦ(Y (t)) −ˆΦ(X(t))
 X(t) = x
i
≤(1−ε)(−∆)+ε·vmax = −∆+ε∆+εvmax ≤−∆+2εvmax,
where the last inequality is by the assumption that ∆≤vwhp ≤vmax. Taking t →∞shows
that the drift D(x) ≤−∆+ 2εvmax when Φ(x) ≥a + vwhp and x ∈G.
• Φ(x) ∈(a −vwhp, a + vwhp] : for this case, recall from (32) that ˆΦ(X(t + 1)) −ˆΦ(X)(t)) ≤
max(0, Φ(X(t+1))−Φ(X(t))). By Condition (i) of the lemma, conditioning on X(t) = x ∈G,
with probability at least 1−ε, the difference Φ(X(t+1))−Φ(X(t)) is at most vwhp. Therefore,
E
h
ˆΦ(Y (t)) −ˆΦ(X(t))
 X(t) = x
i
≤(1 −ε)vwhp + ε · vmax ≤vwhp + εvmax,
which implies D(x) ≤vwhp + εvmax when Φ(x) ∈(a −vwhp, a + vwhp] and x ∈G.
Applying the above three cases to (33) gives
0 ≤P {Φ(X(∞)) ≤a −vwhp} (εvmax) + P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp, X(∞) ∈G} (−∆+ 2εvmax)
+ P {Φ(X(∞)) ∈(a −vwhp, a + vwhp]} (vwhp + εvmax) + P {X(∞) ̸∈G} vmax.
Since P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp, X(∞) ∈G} ≥P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp} −P{X(∞) ̸∈G} by the
union bound and P{X(∞) ̸∈G} ≤ε by the lemma condition, the above inequality simplifies to
0 ≤−∆P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp} + vwhpP {Φ(X(∞)) ∈(a −vwhp, a + vwhp]} + 6εvmax
= −∆P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp} + vwhp (P {Φ(X(∞)) > a −vwhp} −P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp})
+ 6εvmax.
Therefore, by rearranging terms and recalling the assumption that vwhp ≥1, we obtain
P {Φ(X(∞)) > a + vwhp} ≤
vwhp
vwhp + ∆P {Φ(X(∞)) > a −vwhp} + 6εvmax
vwhp
.
Proof of Lemma 4.9. Without loss of generality, we assume vwhp ≤vmax in the proof; otherwise the
result of the lemma is implied by the case with vwhp = vmax. For any ℓ≥0, applying Lemma B.4
52


--- Page 53 ---
iteratively with a = B + 2vwhpℓ−vwhp, B + 2vwhp(ℓ−1) −vwhp, . . . , B −vwhp gives
P{Φ(X(∞)) > B + 2vwhpℓ} ≤
vwhp
vwhp + ∆P{Φ(X(∞)) > B + 2vwhp(ℓ−1)} + 6εvmax
vwhp
≤

vwhp
vwhp + ∆
2
P{Φ(X(∞)) > B + 2vwhp(ℓ−2)} +

1 +
vwhp
vwhp + ∆
 6εvmax
vwhp
≤

vwhp
vwhp + ∆
2
P{Φ(X(∞)) > B + 2vwhp(ℓ−2)} + 26εvmax
vwhp
≤· · ·
≤

vwhp
vwhp + ∆
ℓ+1
P{Φ(X(∞)) > B −2vwhp} + 6(ℓ+ 1)εvmax
vwhp
.
B.9
Proof of Lemma 4.10 (Section 4.4)
The proof requires an additional lemma that lower bounds the number of jobs that leave the
system without getting service in each period due to abandonment. Specifically, for a state i, let
Fi(t) = Zi(t) −P
k∈ch(i) Qk(t + 1) be the number of state-i jobs transitioning into the ⊥state at
the end of period t (abandoning). Given a minimum abandonment probability θ > 0 and a set of
states X, the below concentration result shows that P
i∈X Fi(t) is approximately lower bounded by
θ P
i∈X Zi(t).
Lemma B.5. For any set of states X, period t and δ ∈(0, e−1],
P
(X
i∈X
Fi(t) ≥θ
X
i∈X
Zi(t) −
r
NL ln 1
δ
)
≥1 −δ2.
Proof. Letting θi = 1 −P
k∈ch(i) P(i, k) be the abandonment probability for a state-i job, Fi(t)
is a Binomial distribution with Zi(t) trials and success probability θi.
Moreover, Fi(t), i ∈X,
are independent because each job transitions according to the Markov chain independently. As a
result, the sum P
i∈X Fi(t) is the sum of P
i∈X Zi(t) independent random variables taking value in
{0, 1}. Conditioning on P
i∈X Zi(t) = n, the conditional expectation of P
i∈X Fi(t) is at least nθ.
Applying Hoeffding’s Inequality (Fact 2) gives
P
(X
i∈X
Fi(t) ≥nθ −
r
n ln 1
δ

X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
≥1 −exp
 
−2n ln 1
δ
n
!
= 1 −δ2.
(34)
53


--- Page 54 ---
As P
i∈X Zi(t) ≤P
i∈X Qi(t) ≤NL almost surely by Lemma 4.8, the law of total probability shows
P
(X
i∈X
Fi(t) ≥θ
X
i∈X
Zi(t) −
r
NL ln 1
δ
)
=
NL
X
n=0
P
(X
i∈X
Fi(t) ≥θ
X
i∈X
Zi(t) −
r
NL ln 1
δ

X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
P
(X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
≥
NL
X
n=0
P
(X
i∈X
Fi(t) ≥nθ −
r
n ln 1
δ

X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
P
(X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
≥(1 −δ2)
NL
X
n=0
P
(X
i∈X
Zi(t) = n
)
= 1 −δ2,
where the first inequality is because n ≤NL, the second inequality is by (34), and the last one is
because P
i≤X Zi(t) ≤NL almost surely.
Proof of Lemma 4.10. Recall that T = Top(o[m]) and thus Sub(T ) = Sub(o[m]). We define the
following good event G of system states such that if X(t) = (Q(t), R(t), Q(t + 1)) ∈G, then
(G-1) P
i∈T Qi(t + 1) ≤λN P
i∈T π(i) + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ;
(G-2) P
i∈Sub(T ) fi(X(t)) ≥θ P
i∈Sub(T ) zi(X(t))−
q
NL ln 1
δ, where we denote the number of aban-
doning state-i jobs by fi(X(t)) = zi(X(t)) −P
k∈ch(i) Qk(t).
We note that P{X(∞) ∈G} ≥1 −2δ2. To see this, X(∞) satisfies (G-1) with probability at least
1 −δ2 by Lemma 4.8 and it satisfies (G-2) with probability 1 −δ2 by Lemma B.5. Using a union
bound gives P{X(∞) ∈G} ≥1 −2δ2. We thus showed (i) of the lemma.
To show (ii), for any t, condition on X(t) and define an event Gservice where the number of
available services is not far below its mean:
Gservice =
(
R(t + 1) ≥µ · N −
r
N ln 1
δ
)
.
(35)
By Hoeffding’s Inequality (Fact 2), P{Gservice|X(t)} ≥1−δ2 since R(t+1) is a Binomial distribution
with mean Nµ and is independent from X(t).
Given X(t) ∈G and Gservice, we show (14) in Lemma 4.10 by expanding the drift:
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) =
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t)
=
X
i∈Sub(T )
(Qi(t + 1) −Ri(t + 1)) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t)
=
X
i∈T
Qi(t + 1) +
X
i∈Sub(T )\T
Qi(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Ri(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t).
(36)
By the rule of Prio(o) in (8), the R(t) available services must first serve jobs with states in Sub(T )
before they are used to serve jobs in S \ Sub(T ). As a result, there are two cases:
54


--- Page 55 ---
• P
i∈Sub(T ) Ri(t + 1) = P
i∈Sub(T ) Qi(t + 1): in this case the available services are sufficient to
serve all jobs in Sub(T ). The first three terms in (36) cancel out, showing that in this case
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤−
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t).
• P
i∈Sub(T ) Ri(t + 1) < P
i∈Sub(T ) Qi(t + 1): in this case P
i∈Sub(T ) Ri(t + 1) = R(t + 1). This
is because the jobs with states in Sub(T ) must take all R(t) available services (otherwise we
can increase the Ri(t + 1) for some i ∈Sub(T )). Putting this into (36) gives
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤
X
i∈T
Qi(t + 1) +
X
i∈Sub(T )\T
Qi(t + 1) −R(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t)
(37)
Recall the definition of m that λ P
i∈T π(i) ≤µ. Combining this bound with Property (G-1)
of event G and the definition of event Gservice shows
X
i∈T
Qi(t + 1) −R(t + 1) ≤Nλ
X
i∈T
π(i) −Nµ + 3
√
NL ln 1
δ +
r
N ln 1
δ ≤4
√
NL ln 1
δ .
(38)
Putting (38) into (37) shows
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤
X
i∈Sub(T )\T
Qi(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t) + 4
√
NL ln 1
δ .
To upper bound the right hand side, the set of parents of Sub(T ) \ T is a subset of Sub(T ).
Therefore,
Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤
X
i∈Sub(T )\T
Qi(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t) + 4
√
NL ln 1
δ
=
X
i∈Sub(T )
X
k∈ch(i)
Qk(t + 1) −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t) + 4
√
NL ln 1
δ
(a)
= −
X
i∈Sub(T )
Fi(t) + 4
√
NL ln 1
δ
(b)
≤−θ
X
i∈Sub(T )
Zi(t) + 5
√
NL ln 1
δ = −θΦ(X(t)) + 5
√
NL ln 1
δ .
where (a) is by the definition of the number of abandoning state-i jobs Fi(t) and (b) is by
Property (G-2) of event G.
Summarizing the above two cases shows that if X(t) ∈G and Gservice happen, then (14) holds true.
Lastly, since the parents of all states in Sub(T )\T must be in Sub(T ), P
i∈Sub(T )\T Qi(t+1) ≤
P
i∈Sub(T ) Zi(t).
As a result, Φh(X(t + 1)) −Φh(X(t)) ≤P
i∈T Qf(t + 1) ≤NL by (36) and
Lemma 4.8. Therefore, the drift has an almost sure upper bound NL.
55


--- Page 56 ---
B.10
Proof of Lemma 4.7 (Section 4.4)
Proof of Lemma 4.7. The proof is by applying Lemmas 4.9 and 4.10. Lemma 4.10 shows that there
exists a good event G with P{X(∞) ∈G} ≥1 −2δ2, such that conditioning on X(t) ∈G, (14)
holds with probability at least 1 −δ2. Take ε = 2δ2, ∆= vwhp = 5
√
NL ln 1
δ, B = 2∆
θ , vmax = NL.
Conditions of Lemma 4.9 are met because P{X(∞) ∈G} ≥1 −ε, E [Φ(X(∞))] < +∞, and
(i) if X(t) ∈G, with probability at least 1 −δ2 ≤1 −ε conditioning on X(t), (14) holds and
implies that Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤5
√
NL ln 1
δ = vwhp;
(ii) if X(t) ∈G and Φ(X(t)) ≥B, with probability at least 1 −δ2 ≥1 −ε conditioning on X(t),
(14) gives Φ(X(t + 1)) −Φ(X(t)) ≤−θΦ(X(t)) + 5
√
NL ln 1
δ ≤−θ · B + ∆= −∆.
(iii) Φh(X(t + 1)) −Φh(X(t)) ≤vmax = NL by the last result of Lemma 4.10.
As a result, Lemma 4.9 applies. Taking ℓ= ⌊3 ln 1
δ⌋(thus ℓ+ 1 ≥2 ln 1
δ) in Lemma 4.9 gives
P

Φh(X(∞)) > B + 6vwhp ln 1
δ

≤2−(ℓ+1) + 6(ℓ+ 1)εvmax ≤δ2 + 6

3 ln 1
δ + 1

2δ2NL
≤(1 + 6 · (3 + 1) · 2)δ2NL ln 1
δ = 49NLδ2 ln 1
δ ,
where we use the assumption that δ ≤e−1. Moreover,
B + 6vwhp ln 1
δ ≤
2
θ + 6 ln 1
δ

5
√
NL ln 1
δ ≤40θ−1√
NL ln2 1
δ ,
which finishes the proof.
B.11
Proof of Lemma 4.11 (Section 4.4)
Recall the degeneracy parameter κ = 1−P
i∈Top(o[m])∩Sub(p) π(i)/π(p) in (10). We first lower bound
it by the minimum abandonment probability θ.
Lemma B.6. The minimum abandonment probability θ lower bounds the degeneracy parameter κ.
Proof. Recall that Tm = Top(o[m]) and thus κ = 1 −P
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) π(i)/π(p) from (10). Showing
κ ≥θ is equivalent to show (1 −θ)π(p) ≥P
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) π(i).
To see why this is true, define the set X = Sub(ch(p)), which is the subtree of children of p. Then
Top(X) consists of the children of p, i.e., Top(X) = ch(p). In addition, define Y = Tm ∩Sub(p).
The top set of Y is itself since it is a subset of Tm, which is itself a top set of o[m]. As a result,
X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
π(i) =
X
i∈Y
π(i) =
X
i∈Top(Y)
π(i)
(a)
≤
X
i∈Top(X)
π(i) =
X
i∈ch(p)
π(i)
(b)
≤(1 −θ)π(p),
where inequality (a) is because Y is a subset of X and Lemma B.3 applies; inequality (b) is because
P
i∈ch(p) π(i) = P
i∈ch(p) π(p)P(p, i) = π(p) P
i∈ch(p) P(p, i) ≤π(p)(1 −θ) as θ is the minimum
abandonment probability. We thus finish the proof by establishing an equivalence of κ ≥θ.
56


--- Page 57 ---
Proof of Lemma 4.11. If p =⊥the result trivially holds; we thus suppose p ̸=⊥, which by definition
is equal to om+1. The limiting distribution Zp(∞) satisfies Zp(∞) = Qp(∞) −Rp(∞) with
Rp(∞) = min


Qp(∞),

R(∞) −
X
i∈o[m]
Qi(∞)


+

.
Therefore, Zp(∞) = max

0, Qp(∞) −

R(∞) −P
i∈o[m] Qi(∞)
+
, implying
Zp(∞) ≤max

0, Qp(∞) −R(∞) +
X
i∈o[m]
Qi(∞)


= max

0, Qp(∞) +
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)
Qi(∞) +
X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
Qi(∞) +
X
i∈o[m]\Tm
Qi(∞) −R(∞)

.
(39)
Define a good event Gz with the following three properties:
(Gz-1) the available service is not far below its mean, i.e., R(∞) ≥Nµ −
√
N ln N;
(Gz-2) the number of jobs with states in Tm \ Sub(p) is not high, i.e.,
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
Qi(∞) ≤Nλ
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
π(i) + 3
√
NL ln N.
(Gz-3) there are few jobs with states in Sub(Tm) \ Tm, i.e., P
i∈Sub(Tm)\Tm Qi(∞) ≤˜U
√
N.
Each of the three properties happens with probability at least 1 −1/N: the first is by Hoeffding’s
Inequality in Fact 2; the second is by Lemma 4.8; and the third is by the lemma assumption and
the fact that P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞) stochastically dominates P
i∈Sub(Tm)\Tm Qi(∞). Applying a union
bound gives P{Gz} ≥1 −3/N. Conditioning on Gz, (39) gives
Zp(∞) ≤max

0, Nλ
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
π(i) +
X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
Qi(∞) + 4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N −Nµ


≤Nλ
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
π(i) −Nµ +
X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
Qi(∞) + 4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N,
where the second inequality is because λ P
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p} π(i) > µ. Otherwise we can increase
m while keeping λ P
i∈Tm π(i) ≤µ, which contradicts the definition that m is the maximum such
position. Since Zp ≤N almost surely and P{Gz} ≥1 −3/N, the above inequality implies
E [Zp(∞)] ≤Nλ
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
π(i)−Nµ+E


X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
Qi(∞)

+4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N +3. (40)
For any state i in the subtree of Sub(p), its steady-state number of waiting jobs must satisfy
E [Qi(∞)] ≤E [Zp(∞)] π(i)
π(p) because (i) to be in state i a job must first be in state p; (ii) the condi-
tional probability of a state-p job becoming a state-i job is π(i)/π(p) assuming the job does not leave
57


--- Page 58 ---
because of getting service. As a result, E
hP
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) Qi(∞)
i
≤E [Zp(∞)] P
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) π(i)/π(p).
Putting it into (40) gives
E [Zp(∞)] ≤Nλ
X
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p}
π(i)−Nµ+E [Zp(∞)]
X
i∈Tm∩Sub(p)
π(i)/π(p)+4
√
NL ln N+ ˜U
√
N+3.
Rearranging the term and recalling κ = 1 −P
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) π(i)/π(p), we obtain
E [Zp(∞)] ≤N ·
λ P
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p} π(i) −µ
κ
+ 4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N + 3
κ
.
For the boxed term, observe that
zo
p = λπ(p) −νo
p = λπ(p) −µ −λ P
i∈Tm π(i)
κ
=
λπ(p) −λ P
i∈Tm∩Sub(p) π(i) + P
i∈Tm π(i) −µ
κ
=
λπ(p) + λ P
i∈Tm\Sub(p) π(i) −µ
κ
=
λ P
i∈Tm\Sub(p)∪{p} π(i) −µ
κ
.
We thus conclude E [Zp(∞)] ≤Nzo
p + 4
√
NL ln N+ ˜U
√
N+3
κ
≤Nzo
p + 4
√
NL ln N+ ˜U
√
N+3
θ
by Lemma B.6.
B.12
Proof of Lemma 4.12 (Section 4.4)
Proof of Lemma 4.12. By its definition (1), the long-run average holding cost of Prio(o) is
C(N, Prio(o)) = lim sup
T→∞
1
T E


T
X
t=1
X
j∈Q(t)\R(t)
c(Sj(t)

= lim sup
T→∞
1
T E
" T
X
t=1
X
i∈S
c(i)Zi(t)
#
=
X
i∈S
c(i)
 
lim sup
T→∞
E
"
1
T
T
X
t=1
Zi(t)
#!
=
X
i∈S
c(i)E [Zi(∞)] .
The last equation is because Zi(t) converges in distribution to Zi(∞) and is bounded (0 ≤Zi(t) ≤
Qi(t) and Qi(t) ≤N by Lemma 4.8). Therefore, C(N, Prio(o)) −P
i∈S zo
i is equal to
C(N, Prio(o)) −N
X
i∈S
cizo
i =
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
fully served
+
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
partially served
+
X
i∈S\Sub(o[m])\Sub(p)
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ]
|
{z
}
never served
.
The proof bounds each of the three terms. For the first term, since zo
i ≥0 by definition, it suffices
to bound P
i∈Sub(o[m]) E [Zi(∞)] . Note that P
i∈Sub(o[m]) E [Zi(∞)] ≤P
i∈Sub(o[m]) E [Qi(∞)] ≤NL.
Hence, by Lemma 4.8 and the assumption that P{P
i∈o[m] Zi(∞) ≤˜U
√
N} ≥(N −1)/N:
(fully served) ≤cmax
X
i∈Sub(o[m])
E [Zi(∞)] ≤cmax

˜U
√
N + NL · 1
N

≤cmax( ˜U
√
N + L).
(41)
58


--- Page 59 ---
For the second term, an induction on the tree shows that for any state k and i with i ∈Sub(k), the
number of remaining jobs with state i in period t is at most E [Zi(t)] ≤E [Zk(t −d(k, i))] π(i)/π(k),
where d(k, i) is the tree distance from state k to state i. As a result, E [Zi(∞)] ≤E [Zk(∞)] π(i)/π(k)
by taking t →∞. Moreover, as discussed in the proof sketch, any state i ∈Sub(p)Sub(o[m]) is either
the partially-served state (T-4) or a partially-reduced state (T-6). This implies zo
i = zo
pπ(i)/π(p)
by our construction. Using this observation, the second term satisfies
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ciE [Zi(∞) −Nzo
i ] =
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ci
 E [Zi(∞)] −Nzo
pπ(i)/π(p)

≤
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ci
 E [Zp(∞)] π(i)/π(p) −Nzo
pπ(i)/π(p)

= (E [Zp(∞)] −Nzo
p)
X
i∈Sub(p)\Sub(o[m])
ciπ(i)/π(p)
(a)
≤(E [Zp(∞)] −Nzo
p)cmaxL
(b)
≤cmaxL
θ

4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N + 3

.
where (a) uses that P
i∈Sub(p) π(i) = PL−1
ℓ=0
P
i∈Sub(p)∩Sℓπ(i) ≤PL−1
ℓ=0 π(p) = Lπ(p) where the last
inequality is by Lemma B.3 and (b) uses Lemma 4.11.
For the third term, observe that for any state i and period t, E [Zi(t)] ≤Nλπ(i) by induction
from its parent state.
Therefore, E [Zi(∞)] ≤Nλπ(i) by taking t →∞. Since any state i ∈
S \Sub(o[m])\Sub(p) is an un-reduced state (T-1) with zo
i = λπ(i), the third term is equal to zero.
Combining the above bounds for the three terms gives
C(N, Prio(o)) −N
X
i∈S
cizo
i ≤cmax

˜U
√
N + L + L
θ

4
√
NL ln N + ˜U
√
N + 3

≤10cmaxLθ−1 √
LN ln N + ˜U
√
N

.
B.13
Proof of Lemma 4.4 (Sections 4.2 and 4.4)
To give the proof of Lemma 4.4, we first simplify the bound in Lemma 4.7 by tuning the parameter δ.
Lemma B.7. With probability at least 1−1/N, the number of remaining jobs in Sub(o[m]) is upper
bounded by 160θ−1√
NL ln2(55NL).
Proof. Lemma 4.7 shows that for any δ ∈(0, e−1], P{P
i∈Sub(o[m] Zi(∞) > 40θ−1√
NL ln2 1
δ} ≤
48NLδ2 ln 1
δ. To highlight the dependence on δ, we define
U(δ) = 40θ−1√
L ln2 1
δ ,
ε(δ) = 49NLδ2 ln 1
δ .
(42)
We aim to pick a δ⋆∈(0, e−1] such that ε(δ⋆) ≤1/N and then bound U(δ⋆). Lemma 4.7 then
implies P{P
i∈Sub(o[m]) Zi(∞) > U(δ⋆)
√
N} ≤1/N.
Set δ⋆to be the maximum value in (0, 1] such that

ln(49NL) + ln ln 1
δ⋆

= ln 1
δ⋆.
(43)
59


--- Page 60 ---
Such a δ⋆must exist because (1) both the left and right hand sides of the equation are continuous
function when δ ∈(0, 1]; (2) when δ →0+, the right hand side grows to infinity faster than the left
hand side; (3) when δ = 1, the left hand side is larger than zero but the right hand side is zero.
Moreover, δ⋆≤e−1 as otherwise the left hand side of (43) is larger than the right hand side.
We first show ε(δ⋆) ≤1/N. Taking exponentiation of both sides of (43) gives
49NL ln 1
δ⋆= 1
δ⋆⇒ε(δ⋆) = δ⋆⇒ε(δ⋆) =
1
49NL ln 1
δ
⋆≤1
N .
Upper bounding U(δ⋆) is less immediate as it involves a term ln2 1
δ⋆. We define two auxiliary
quantities, δ0 = 1/ exp(2 ln(49NL)) and δ1 = 1/ exp(exp(4)) and consider three cases:
• if δ⋆≥δ0, then ln 1
δ⋆≤2 ln(49NL).
• if δ⋆≥δ1, then ln ln 1
δ⋆≤ln ln 1
δ1 and (43) gives ln 1
δ⋆≤ln(49NL) + 4 ≤2 ln(55NL).
• It is impossible to see δ⋆< min(δ0, δ1). This is because if δ⋆< δ1, then ln 1
δ⋆> exp(4) and
thus ln ln 1
δ⋆≤1
2 ln 1
δ⋆by Fact 1. As a result,
ln(49NL) + ln ln 1
δ⋆≤ln(49NL) + 1
2 ln 1
δ⋆
(a)
< 1
2 ln 1
δ⋆+ 1
2 ln 1
δ⋆= ln 1
δ⋆,
which contradicts (43). The strict inequality (a) is by the case assumption that δ⋆< δ0.
Summarizing the above discussion gives ln 1
δ⋆≤2 ln(55NL) and thus using (42),
U(δ⋆) ≤160θ−1√
L ln2(55NL),
which finishes the proof.
Proof of Lemma 4.4. By Lemma B.7,
P



X
i∈Sub(o[m])
Zi(∞) ≤160θ−1√
NL ln2(55NL)


≥1 −1/N.
As a result of Lemma 4.12,
C(N, Prio(o)) −N
X
i∈S
cizo
i ≤10cmaxLθ−1(
√
NL ln N + 160θ−1√
NL ln2(55NL))
≤1610cmaxθ−2L1.5 ln2(55NL)
√
N.
B.14
Alternative regret bound (Remark 1)
We outline how the analysis in Section 4 gives a regret bound of OaRC,
Reg(N, OaRC) ≤O(θ−3.5 ln2(NL)
√
N),
60


--- Page 61 ---
which only logarithmically depends on the maximum level L. From the proof of Theorem 1 in Sec-
tion 4.2, it suffices to show how Lemma 4.4 also applies for some U′(L, θ, ln N) = O(θ−3.5 ln2(NL)).
We do so by showing that all the dependence on L can be replaced by 1/θ in Lemmas 4.7 to 4.12,
except the 48NLδ2 ln 1
δ term in Lemma 4.7 and the almost sure upper bound N(min(L, |X|)) in
Lemma 4.8. These exceptions are what leads to the ln(L) dependence in the revised regret bound;
how to further remove this dependence would require a more refined version of our tail bound in
Lemma 4.9 that does not need an almost sure upper bound on the drift.
A new result we need is the following upper bound.
Lemma B.8. The sum P
i∈S π(i) is at most 1
θ.
Proof. Recall that states partition into levels S = S0 ∪. . . ∪SL−1. We show by induction that
P
i∈Sℓπ(i) ≤(1 −θ)−ℓfor any ℓ. When ℓ= 0, S0 = {r} and thus P
i∈S0 π(i) = π(r) = 1. For ℓ> 0,
X
i∈Sℓ
π(i) =
X
i∈Sℓ−1
X
k∈ch(i)
π(k) =
X
i∈Sℓ−1
π(i)
X
k∈ch(i)
P(i, k) ≤
X
i∈Sℓ−1
π(i)(1 −θ) ≤(1 −θ)ℓ.
As a result, P
i∈S π(i) = PL−1
ℓ=0
P
i∈Sℓπ(i) ≤PL−1
ℓ=0 (1 −θ)ℓ≤1
θ.
Changes to the proofs are as follows:
• The revised proof of Lemma 4.7 in Appendix B.10 will select ∆= vwhp = 5
p
N/θ ln 1
δ;
• The proof of Lemma 4.8 in Appendix B.7 replaces the bound in (31) with Lemma B.8 and
changes L to 1/θ from then on.
• The revised proof of Lemma 4.10 in Appendix B.9 requires several changes. For Lemma B.5,
we can show that P{P
i∈X Fi(t) ≥θ P
i∈X Zi(t) −
p
N/θ ln 1
δ} ≥1 −O(δ2). To show this, we
replace the almost sure upper bound of P
i∈X Zi(t) ≤NL below (34) by a high probability
upper bound that P{P
i∈X Zi(t) ≤2Nλ/θ ln 1
δ)} ≥1 −O(δ2) using the revised Lemma 4.8.
The derivation below (34) follows by replacing L with O(ln 1
δ/θ) and separating out the
event that P
i∈X Zi(t) > 2Nλ/θ ln 1
δ), which happens with small probability. The proof of
Lemma 4.10 follows by replacing the L in (G-1) with 1/θ and the L in (G-2) with 2/θ ln 1
δ and
updating the proof accordingly. These changes allow the term
√
NL in Lemma 4.10 becomes
p
N/θ with suitably changed constants.
• The revised proof of Lemma 4.11 in Appendix B.11 changes the
√
NL term in (Gz-2) to
p
N/θ.
• The revised proof of Lemma 4.12 replaces the L in (41) with 1/θ, which is valid because
P
i∈Sub(o[m]) E [Qi(∞)] ≤Nλ P
i∈S π(i) ≤N/θ by Lemma B.8. Similarly, the equality (a)
below (41) is valid with L replaced by 1/θ because the same proof of Lemma B.8 shows
P
i∈Sub(p) π(i) ≤π(p)/θ.
• The revised proof of Lemma 4.4 replaced the
√
NL term in Lemma B.7 with
p
N/θ.
61


--- Page 62 ---
C
Useful Facts
This section states several useful analytical facts and concentration bounds.
The below fact shows condition for x such that a ln x ≤x/2.
Fact 1. If a ≥1 and x ≥exp(4a ln(e · a)), then a ln x ≤x/2.
Proof. Let g(x) = x/2 −a ln x. Its derivative is g′(x) = 1/2 −a/x which is positive when x ≥2a.
Moreover, by Taylor’s expansion,
g(e4a ln(e·a)) = 1
2e4a ln(e·a) −4a2 ln(e · a) ≥1
2 + 2a ln(e · a) + 4a2 ln2(e · a) −4a2 ln(e · a) ≥0,
where the last inequality is because 4a2 ln2(e · a) ≥4a2 ln(e · a). Using e4a ln(e·a) ≥4a ln(e · a) ≥2a
shows that the function g(x) is increasing and non-negative over x ≥exp(4a ln(e · a)).
We use Hoeffding’s Inequality, whose proof can be found in, e.g., Theorem 2.8 of [BLM13].
Fact 2 (Hoeffding’s Inequality). Given n independent random variables X1, . . . , Xn such that Xi ∈
[ai, bi] almost surely for all i. Letting S = Pn
i=1(Xi −E [Xi]), for any x > 0,
max (P{S ≤−x}, P{S ≥x}) ≤exp

−
2x2
Pn
i=1(bi −ai)2

.
We also use the following Chernoff bound restated from theorem 2.4 of [CL06].
Fact 3 (Chernoff bound). Given n independent random variables X1, . . . , Xn such that Xi ∈{0, 1}
for all i. Letting X = Pn
i=1 Xi, for any ε > 0,
Pr{X ≥E [X] + ε} ≤exp

−
ε2
2(E [X] + ε/3)

.
62
