--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:2506.18178v1  [cs.RO]  22 Jun 2025
1
Integrating LLMs and Digital Twins for Adaptive
Multi-Robot Task Allocation in Construction
Min Deng1†, Bo Fu2†, Lingyao Li3, Xi Wang4
Abstract—Multi-robot systems are emerging as a promising
solution to the growing demand for productivity, safety, and
adaptability across industrial sectors. However, effectively coor-
dinating multiple robots in dynamic and uncertain environments,
such as construction sites, remains a challenge, particularly
due to unpredictable factors like material delays, unexpected
site conditions, and weather-induced disruptions. To address
these challenges, this study proposes an adaptive task allocation
framework that strategically leverages the synergistic potential of
Digital Twins, Integer Programming (IP), and Large Language
Models (LLMs). The multi-robot task allocation problem is
formally defined and solved using an IP model that accounts for
task dependencies, robot heterogeneity, scheduling constraints,
and re-planning requirements. A mechanism for narrative-driven
schedule adaptation is introduced, in which unstructured natural
language inputs are interpreted by an LLM, and optimization
constraints are autonomously updated, enabling human-in-the-
loop flexibility without manual coding. A digital twin–based
system has been developed to enable real-time synchronization
between physical operations and their digital representations.
This closed-loop feedback framework ensures that the system
remains dynamic and responsive to ongoing changes on site. A
case study demonstrates both the computational efficiency of the
optimization algorithm and the reasoning performance of several
LLMs, with top-performing models achieving over 97% accuracy
in constraint and parameter extraction. The results confirm the
practicality, adaptability, and cross-domain applicability of the
proposed methods.
Index Terms—Construction digital twin, large language model
(LLM), multi-robot task allocation, adaptive scheduling
I. INTRODUCTION
W
Ith rising demands for faster project delivery and
improved efficiency, automation is becoming an es-
sential solution for the construction industry [1]–[3]. Robotics,
particularly the use of coordinated teams of robots, offers a
promising approach that could revolutionize traditional con-
struction practices. Robotic systems are being employed on
construction sites to assist with tasks such as material delivery
[4], assembly [5]–[7], and installation [8], [9], with the poten-
tial to significantly improve efficiency [10], [11] and safety
[12]. However, effectively coordinating multiple robots in
dynamic and unpredictable construction environments remains
†Min Deng and Bo Fu contributed equally to this work
1Min Deng is with the Department of Civil, Environmental, and Construc-
tion Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409, USA (e-mail:
mindeng@ttu.edu)
2Bo Fu is with Amazon Robotics, North Reading, MA 01864, USA (e-mail:
bofu@amazon.com)
3Lingyao Li is with the School of Information, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33620, USA (e-mail: lingyaol@usf.edu)
4Xi Wang is with the Department of Construction Science, Texas A&M
University, College Station, TX 77843, USA (e-mail: xiwang@tamu.edu)
a considerable challenge. Ensuring smooth interoperability and
avoiding operational conflicts require sophisticated algorithms
and management strategies [13]–[15]. Furthermore, the lim-
ited number of available robots and their diverse capabilities
add complexity to task assignment. This necessitates task
allocations that are not only efficient but also aligned with
each robot’s specialized skills and functional strengths, thereby
making the problem NP-hard [16].
Although existing solvers and algorithms based on standard
Integer Programming (IP) [17] and Genetic Algorithms (GA)
[18] can address task allocation problems in multiple scenar-
ios, they lack the flexibility to adapt to changes in construction
sites. These methods are generally designed to find solu-
tions under static constraints [19]–[21] and are not inherently
equipped to accommodate dynamic factors such as material
supply shortages or changes in project priorities. Uncertainties
in construction environments may arise from various sources,
such as human decision-making, abrupt weather shifts, delays
in material supply, and operational disruptions, all of which
can influence task priorities, durations, or dependencies. For
example, sudden weather changes, such as an unexpected
rainstorm, might force the suspension of outdoor tasks [22],
[23]. Additionally, operational events like unforeseen robot
malfunctions or the deployment of new robots require frequent
recalculations to maintain optimal task assignments. However,
purely mathematical algorithms lack the ability to reason about
real-world construction site dynamics. They struggle to adapt
task assignments in response to changing conditions, such as
reassigning robots to indoor tasks like electrical wiring or
interior finishing when outdoor work is halted due to weather.
Recalculating task schedules in response to these changes
often requires extensive manual intervention and algorithmic
reconfiguration, which is time-consuming and impractical.
The lack of adaptability of the existing task allocation ap-
proaches can result in project delays [23], underutilized labor
[24], [25], and resource inefficiencies [26]. In addition, there
is a notable gap in current research regarding the capability
to perform real-time adjustments of task requirements based
on actual construction progress. These limitations and gaps
highlight the need for flexible approaches capable of adapting
to the dynamic and ever-changing conditions of construction
sites, leading to the following research questions:
• RQ1. What task allocation approaches can effectively
handle dynamic characteristics and uncertainties inherent
in multi-robot operations on construction sites?
• RQ2. How can real-time task information from con-
struction progress be used to dynamically adjust task
assignments for multiple robots?


--- Page 2 ---
2
To address these research questions, this study introduces
an optimization framework for multi-robot task allocation
that integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) [27] with
IP, enabling effective management of dynamic uncertainties
typical of construction environments. The key contributions of
this study are as follows. First, we develop a digital twin-based
framework that enables communications between real-time
robotic operations and digital building models (e.g., Building
Information Models (BIMs)). This integration supports the
dynamic updating of task statuses and material supplies for
task management and robot control. Second, we formulate the
multi-robot task allocation problem as an IP model specifically
designed for the complexities of dynamic construction tasks,
accounting for task interdependencies, heterogeneous robot
capabilities, and evolving constraints. Third, we propose a
novel mechanism for narrative-driven task allocation adapta-
tion, whereby an LLM interprets unstructured natural language
inputs and autonomously modifies optimization constraints.
This approach facilitates human-in-the-loop decision-making
while eliminating the need for manual reconfiguration of the
optimization code. Lastly, we validate the proposed framework
through extensive simulation-based experiments. They demon-
strate both the computational efficiency of the optimization
methods and the reasoning accuracy of multiple LLM models.
The results demonstrate the framework’s effectiveness, adapt-
ability, and potential for practical deployment in real-world
construction scenarios.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews the related literature and identifies key research
gaps. Section III presents the detailed research methodology,
including the design of the closed-loop digital twin system, the
formulation of the optimization function, and the development
of the LLM-driven adaptive decision-making mechanism.
Section IV demonstrates and validates the proposed system
and algorithms through a case study, with further discussion
provided in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Robotic automation in construction
Recent studies have explored the potential of integrating
robots into construction tasks. Exploratory studies such as [28]
conducted by Gautam et al. examined the application of robots
to assist with the repetitive task of screwing gypsum boards
onto ceilings. During initial testing with two rows of screws,
the robots demonstrated a success rate of about 78%. Hard
’wooden eye’ spots were also avoided through fine-tuning in
the final phase, resulting in an average screwing time of 6.07
seconds per screw. Similarly, Kunic et al. [29] demonstrated
a robotic workflow for assembling reversible timber structures
through a multi-stage process. Using a kit of CNC-milled
timber elements, the robots could handle the assembly with
reversible joinery, allowing the structure to be disassembled
and reassembled. A prototype showed that robots could build,
disassemble, and reassemble complex structures with only a
small amount of human assistance.
To further improve the efficiency, precision, and adaptability
of robots, many researchers have also started to implement
the concept of digital twins [30]. For example, a BIM-
integrated system that enabled task planning and simulation
for construction robots in indoor wall painting was developed
by Kim et al. [31]. The created IFC-SDF converter linked BIM
data with the ROS and facilitated robot behavior simulations
based on construction schedules and site conditions. The sys-
tem showcased potential advancements in allowing robots to
autonomously perform tasks in construction sectors. Likewise,
Wang et al. [32] presented a BIM-integrated framework that
can dynamically update an interactive digital twin from BIM
data, enabling robots to adjust work plans in response to site
deviations with human oversight. The system combined human
flexibility with robotic precision to improve construction ro-
bustness by demonstrating drywall and block placement tests.
Moreover, a BIM-enhanced robotic system was proposed by
Follini et al. [33], which could provide pre-existing geometric
and semantic data. They used two applications to demonstrate
that integrating BIM with robotic systems could improve
environmental awareness and operational progress tracking,
laying the groundwork for easier implementation of robots in
construction. The percentage of improvement reached up to
53%, with a mean value of 20%.
While these studies have demonstrated the potential of
implementing robots to assist with construction tasks, they
primarily focus on single-task or narrowly scoped applications,
without considering the scenarios when a variety of tasks
and multi-robots exist. Additionally, existing approaches often
require manual adjustments to accommodate evolving site
conditions, highlighting a gap in automation for adaptive task
management.
B. Algorithms for multi-robot task allocation (MRTA)
Driven by industrial demands and future trends, multi-robot
task allocation (MRTA) has emerged as a significant research
area in robotics, focusing on the efficient coordination and
assignment of tasks among multiple robots to accomplish
complex objectives [34]. Existing studies have extensively ex-
plored various optimization methods to enhance performance
metrics such as task completion time [35]–[37] and resource
utilization [38], [39]. For example, game theory was often used
for solving the MRTA, such as the study conducted by Martin
et al. [40], which employed the Shapley value to measure the
individual contributions of robots and tasks. The authors par-
titioned complex MRTA problems into smaller subproblems
by clustering robots and tasks based on their Shapley values,
effectively balancing robot capabilities and task demands. The
simulations demonstrated that this framework outperformed
conventional metaheuristic algorithms, such as Genetic Algo-
rithms (GA), in both solution quality and computational effi-
ciency. Similarly, a game-theoretic decision-making algorithm
for MRTA in changing environments was developed by Park
et al. [41]. The proposed approach enabled robots to itera-
tively adapt their task selections, guaranteeing convergence
to optimal allocations. Experimental validation demonstrated
the algorithm’s effectiveness in responding to environmental
changes and maintaining resilience against disturbances or
robot failures. In addition, Yan and Di [42] introduced a hyper-
heuristic algorithm for MRTA problems involving compulsory


--- Page 3 ---
3
and optional (“functional”) tasks. The developed algorithm
assigned functional tasks using an influence diffusion model
optimized by Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). Simulation
results demonstrated superior performance compared to ex-
isting benchmarks, particularly with increasing numbers of
functional tasks. With more complex scenarios, a stochastic
programming framework was proposed by Fu et al. [13] to
simultaneously optimize task decomposition, assignment, and
scheduling for heterogeneous robot teams. Unlike conven-
tional approaches that assumed fixed task decompositions,
this framework captured uncertainties in task requirements
and agent capabilities using stochastic representations. It en-
hanced robustness and flexibility by minimizing risk through
Conditional Value at Risk (CVaR). The results demonstrated
scalability, low optimality gaps, and effective trade-offs among
energy, time, and success probabilities.
Despite considerable advancements, existing MRTA ap-
proaches often fail to adequately address dynamic uncertain-
ties and unforeseen events prevalent in real-world scenarios,
such as construction environments. Such uncertainties often
necessitate human-like reasoning to manage effectively, as
they can alter task dependencies, initiation times, and task
durations.
C. Applications of LLMs in construction
The integration of LLMs into the construction industry
has emerged as a transformative area of research, reshaping
traditional approaches to data management, decision-making,
and communication. Recent studies have explored the potential
of LLMs to enhance construction information exchange [43],
planning [44], and inspection [45] through their advanced
information processing capabilities. For example, Chen et al.
[46] introduced a Meet2Mitigate (M2M) framework to auto-
mate the capture, transcription, and analysis of construction
meetings by integrating speaker diarization, automatic speech
recognition (ASR), and LLMs with retrieval-based summa-
rization. The M2M prototype showed significant accuracy,
promising a seamless, automated solution for meeting recaps
that enhances project management and decision alignment
across teams. The Word Error Rate (WER) and Character Error
Rate (CER) were only 4.68% and 4.31%, respectively. This
study confirmed LLMs’ ability to extract essential information
from fragmented content and demonstrated their potential to
obtain real-time construction site information through com-
municating with human. In addition, the capabilities of LLMs
in information integration were investigated by Forth and
Borrmann [47], who proposed a methodology to automate the
enrichment of BIM models with missing data. By leveraging
Semantic Textual Similarity (STS) and fine-tuned LLMs, the
approach enabled efficient mapping of thermal properties to
construction elements, such as walls and spaces, based on
architectural and mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP)
data. Tested on real-world case studies, the framework demon-
strated high accuracy in construction-specific matching tasks.
Moreover, Prieto et al. [48] explored the potential of LLM for
generating construction schedules, finding that it can produce
coherent and logically organized schedules that fulfill project
requirements. Participants reported a positive interaction ex-
perience with the tool. One step further, Kim et al. [49]
developed a framework integrating LLMs, BIM, and robotic
systems to enhance autonomous task planning in construction,
aiming to address challenges with dynamic site conditions. The
prototype achieved high accuracy in managing task responses
and adapting to environmental changes, demonstrating the
potential for improving task adaptability and efficiency in
complex construction environments. In terms of construction
site inspection, a framework named AutoRepo, which could
use multimodal LLMs and unmanned vehicles to automate
report generation, was presented by Du et al. [45]. It aimed at
improving efficiency and reducing human error in traditional
inspection practices. AutoRepo had shown the potential to
deliver high-quality, standardized reports with greater accuracy
and speed. The reports generated by the framework were all
scored higher than 80 (considered qualified) based on expert
reviews.
Although existing studies demonstrated promising applica-
tions of LLMs in construction-relevant tasks, there was a lack
of a comprehensive framework for dynamic, multi-robot task
management in rapidly changing construction environments.
They did not leverage the potential of LLMs to autonomously
reassign and adapt tasks in response to real-time environmental
factors. Additionally, while some frameworks incorporated
structured data sources (e.g., BIM), they did not integrate
continuous, real-time feedback from digital twins to support
responsive task reallocation across multiple robots.
III. METHODOLOGY
The methodology developed in this study is illustrated in
Fig. 1. It introduces a scalable framework for situation-aware
decision-making in multi-robot task allocation, enabled by
an LLM. The system is capable to operate with or without
an initial digital model (e.g., BIM) and has a closed-loop
feedback mechanism that synchronizes the physical site with
its digital representation.
The Digital Twin serves as a bridge for synchronization
between the physical site and the digital model. The digital
model integrates: (1) a list of construction tasks and their
precedence relationship that can either be presented in the
form of a structured list or be automatically extracted from
the BIM; (2) site information (i.e., material supplies and
locations), which can either be manually created or detected
by robots on the physical site and transmitted to the digital
model; and, (3) building information that includes object ge-
ometries, types, and poses. It includes the completed structures
as well as placeholders for components that have not yet
been constructed. Each component is associated with attribute
information, including its name (reference ID), layer (unbuilt,
as-built, materials, inactive), material type, installation pose,
and gripping pose. Based on this information, a comprehensive
task list that contains the completion status can be extracted.
It covers all active tasks (i.e., tasks that are scheduled to be
performed in this project stage), including both the ones that
are completed and the pending ones waiting to be assigned
and executed.


--- Page 4 ---
4
Fig. 1: LLM and digital twin enhanced dynamic robot task allocation
When an update event is triggered, the robots extract the
list of tasks to complete and their logic relationships from
the digital model. Updates to this list may originate from the
physical site, where task completion status and site changes
are detected and transmitted via ROS. Conversely, new or
modified task instructions are synchronized back to the digital
twin. Human supervision plays a critical role in interpreting
construction progress and intervening when unforeseen uncer-
tainties occur, such as weather disruptions, equipment failures,
or site access limitations. These decisions and environmental
conditions are reflected in the digital twin and influence task
allocation strategies.
The central processor coordinates the intelligent decision-
making layer. Here, an LLM interprets contextual inputs (e.g.,
natural language updates from human operators), supported
by a repository of domain knowledge. Rather than solving
the optimization problem directly, the LLM identifies relevant
parameters and updates constraints within a pre-defined IP
model used for task allocation. The optimized task allocation
plan is then sent to the robot controllers, which execute
the tasks accordingly. Completion data flows back to the
digital twin and task model, ensuring continuous updates and
alignment between the virtual and physical environments.
A. Digital twin system
As a critical component of the proposed framework, the
digital twin system integrates the digital model and the sys-
tem central processor to continuously monitor and manage
the project’s status. It also functions as the user interface,
connecting human users with system backends and enabling
them to visualize, supervise, and intervene in the project using
natural language via keyboard or voice input. The digital twin
state at time t is formalized as:
St = D0 + F(St−1, Rt, SIt, ∆task, ∆robot)
(1)
Here, St represents the current state of the digital twin at time
t, D0 denote the initial information from the digital model D,
F is the state update function, Rt and SIt denote the robot
states (i.e., arm joint states and base locations and orientations)
and site information at time t, respectively, and ∆task and
∆robot capture updates to task statuses and robot statuses (i.e.,
high-level task each robot in the team is performing) at time
t, respectively. Fig. 2 illustrates the system architecture and
information flow of the technical implementation. The three
core capabilities, visualization, supervision, and intervention,
are supported by four key modules, including the synchronized
visualization module, task status tracker, robot status tracker,
and user command receiver.
Visualization (D0, Rt, SIt →St): The synchronized vi-
sualization module, adapted from the authors’ previous work
[32], is responsible for continuously updating the visual rep-
resentation of the site and robots in the digital twin based
on SIt and Rt. Before the process starts, robot emulators are
generated by transmitting the URDF models of the robots and
associated mesh files from ROS to the digital twin. In the
initial state S0, the basic digital twin scene is generated from
D0, which includes both geometric and attribute information.
In this step, component geometries received from D are
instantiated at the corresponding locations in the digital twin
as the environment. Attribute information embedded in D is
transmitted to the digital twin to adjust the properties of the
corresponding components, such as its name, layer, attachment
offset, and visualization (e.g., color). During the runtime, the
robot emulators mirror on-site robots’ movements by sub-
scribing to their state data Rt, thereby reflecting synchronized


--- Page 5 ---
5
Fig. 2: Digital twin system framework
robot states to human users. SIt is similarly integrated through
subscription to corresponding ROS topics.
Supervision (D0, ∆task, ∆robot →St): The supervision
function allows the users to quickly get an oversight of
construction progress and multi-robot operations to facilitate
intervention decision making, which is enabled by the robot
status tracker and task status tracker. At t = 0, the task status
tracker extracts from D a comprehensive list of tasks involved.
According to the progress, each task is marked as uninitiated,
ongoing, or completed. As construction progresses, these
labels are updated according to ∆task. Meanwhile, the robot
status tracker provides the operation status of each robot in
the teams in the form of high-level task name or description.
If no task is being performed, the status of the corresponding
robot will be marked as ”idle”.
Intervention: The user command receiver module supports
user interventions when users make intervention decisions
during the visualization and supervision process or uncer-
tainties occur. In these cases, users can submit high-level
instructions in natural language by keyboard typing or directly
through voice. The commands are processed by the embedded
LLM into actionable modifications. These modifications are
then forwarded as valid inputs to the task allocation module,
updating ∆task and triggering state updates via F.
After the completion of tasks or upon reaching a project
milestone, the updated task list and building information are
transmitted to update the digital model. This information
includes components installed during construction and changes
in site conditions, such as leftover construction materials on-
site. As a result, the digital model maintains an up-to-date
record and accurate representation of the project. This closed-
loop feedback mechanism ensures that the digital model accu-
rately reflects the project’s as-built condition. It also enhances
the model’s utility in subsequent phases of work, such as
facility management, progress auditing, and future renovations.
B. Multi-robot task allocation: plan creation
This section formally defines the task allocation and
scheduling problem, formulates it as an integer program, and
describes the algorithms used to solve it.
Suppose there are nA capabilities, denoted by A
=
{1, . . . , nA}, nR heterogeneous robots, denoted by R =
TABLE I: Definition of the notation.
Meaning
xir
= 1 if task i ∈T is assigned to robot r ∈R.
ts
ir
The start time if robot r ∈R works on task i ∈T .
te
ir
The end time if robot r ∈R works on task i ∈T .
ts
i
The start time of task i ∈T .
te
i
The end time of task i ∈T .
yijr
Auxiliary variables for robot scheduling.
yij
Auxiliary variables for task dependencies.
T D
i
The time duration to complete task i ∈T .
T s
i
The earliest start time for task i ∈T .
T e
i
The latest end time for task i ∈T .
Tlarge
A large time constant.
akr
The amount of capability k ∈A available on robot r ∈R.
bki
The amount of capability k ∈A required to execute task i ∈T
{1, . . . , nR}, and nT tasks, denoted by T = {1, . . . , nT }.
Each robot has a subset of capabilities, and each task requires
a team of robots with the required capabilities to serve it.
When a team of qualified robots Ri ⊂R arrive, the task
i ∈T can be completed after time duration T d
i . A robot may
only serve one task at a time. Additionally, each task may
have a set of dependencies Ti ⊂T , i.e., other tasks that must
be completed beforehand. The goal is to schedule tasks on a
set of available robots in a way that minimizes the makespan,
the time by which all tasks have been completed.
We formulate the above-mentioned task allocation and
scheduling problem as an integer program. Here, we provide
common notations in Table I. The decision variables are xir
for task assignment and ts
ir, te
ir, ts
i, and te
i for scheduling.
Objective function: The objective function jointly mini-
mizes the makespan and the individual task completion times.
The third piece in the objective function penalizes the number
of robots assigned to tasks. The makespan is defined as the
maximum end time among all tasks. We set Cm ≫Cs ≈Cr
to ensure that the makespan is the primary objective.
min
xir, ts
i , te
i ,
ts
ir, te
ir
(Cm max
i∈T
te
i + Cs
X
i∈T
te
i + Cr
X
i∈T
X
r∈R
xir)
(2)
Variable bound constraints: xir is a binary task allocation
variable, equal to 1 if task i ∈T is assigned to a team
that contains robot r ∈R, and 0 otherwise. The scheduling
variables are continuous, with the requirement that the end
time is always larger the start time.
xir ∈{0, 1},
∀i ∈T , ∀r ∈R
(3)
0 ≤ts
i ≤td
i ,
∀i ∈T
(4)
0 ≤ts
ir ≤td
ir,
∀i ∈T , ∀r ∈R
(5)
Task dependency constraints: The task dependency is
specified using the time variables. If task i depends on the
completion of task j, then task i can start only after task j is
completed.
ts
i ≥te
j,
∀j ∈Ti, ∀i ∈T
(6)
Task requirement constraints: A capability model is
introduced to define the task requirement constraints. Let
akr ∈R≥0 denote the amount of capability k ∈A available
on robot r ∈R, and let bki ∈R≥0 denote the amount


--- Page 6 ---
6
of capability k ∈A required to execute task i ∈T . The
robot team assigned to a task must collectively possess all the
capabilities required by that task, as enforced by (7).
X
r∈R
akrxir ≥bki,
∀k ∈A, ∀i ∈T
(7)
Task schedule constraints: Equation (8) specifies the rela-
tion between the task start and end time. The constraints (9)-
(12) are organized into two groups. The first group, (9)-(10),
ensures that when robot r ∈R is in the team assigned to task
i ∈T , the task start time ts
i equals the robot-specific start time
ts
ir. Similarly, the second group, (11)-(12), guarantees that the
task end time te
i matches te
ir under the same assignment. Note
that Tlarge is a large time constant.
te
i = ts
i + T D,
∀i ∈T
(8)
ts
i ≤ts
ir + Tlarge(1 −xir),
∀r ∈R, ∀i ∈T
(9)
ts
i ≥ts
ir −Tlarge(1 −xir),
∀r ∈R, ∀i ∈T
(10)
te
i ≤te
ir + Tlarge(1 −xir),
∀r ∈R, ∀i ∈T
(11)
te
i ≥te
ir −Tlarge(1 −xir),
∀r ∈R, ∀i ∈T
(12)
Robot schedule (no-overlap) constraints: Each robot can
perform at most one task at a time, so their task schedules
must not overlap, as specified in (13)-(14). When the auxiliary
variable yijr = 1, task i is scheduled before task j; otherwise,
task i is scheduled after task j.
te
ir ≤ts
jr + Tlarge(1 −yijr),
∀i < j ∈T , ∀r ∈R (13)
te
jr ≤ts
ir + Tlarge yijr,
∀i < j ∈T , ∀r ∈R (14)
yijr ∈{0, 1},
∀i < j ∈T , ∀r ∈R (15)
Time window constraints (optional): The time window
constraint is an optional condition that requires a task to be
completed within a specified time interval.
T s
i ≤ts
i ≤te
i ≤T e
i ,
∀i ∈T with a time constraint
(16)
Task conflict constraints (optional): The task conflict
constraints are optional and ensure that two tasks i and
j with conflicting resource requirements are not executed
concurrently. yij is a binary auxiliary variable.
te
i ≤ts
j + Tlarge(1 −yij),
∀i < j ∈T with conflicts (17)
te
j ≤ts
i + Tlarge yij,
∀i < j ∈T with conflicts (18)
yij ∈{0, 1},
∀i < j ∈T with conflicts (19)
The above integer program can be solved using a CP-
SAT solver. A CP-SAT solver is an optimization engine
that combines constraint programming (CP) techniques with
Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solving methods. It is designed
to efficiently tackle combinatorial optimization problems -
such as scheduling, planning, and assignment tasks - by
systematically exploring potential solutions while adhering to
a set of constraints. In our work, we employ the CP-SAT solver
provided by Google OR-Tools to efficiently solve the integer
program.
C. LLM-driven adaptive decision-making
To enable adaptive task reallocation in response to dy-
namic site conditions, we introduce a formal mapping that
captures how the LLM interprets natural language narratives
and transforms them into actionable modifications to the task
allocation problem. This process serves as the core of the
narrative-driven adaptation mechanism, facilitating human-in-
the-loop flexibility without requiring direct manipulation of
optimization code.
Fig. 3 illustrates the pipeline for enabling adaptive multi-
robot task allocation driven by natural language inputs. The
process begins with a narrative containing dynamic project up-
dates, such as task sequencing preferences, resource delays, or
timing adjustments. An LLM processes this narrative to extract
actionable information, identifying relevant task entities (e.g.,
painting, window installation, wall-drilling) and interpreting
relationships such as precedence constraints or temporal shifts.
To ensure accurate task reference, a structured database is used
to map textual descriptions to corresponding task IDs (e.g.,
wall-drilling →T6).
The extracted instructions are then categorized into discrete
flag types, each representing a specific kind of modification as
demonstrated in Table II. Each flag is paired with a structured
parameter representation, which encapsulates the necessary
information to modify the optimization code. These flags
are designed to align with designated insertion points in a
standalone optimization codebase.
Let the input to the LLM be a narrative description N, such
as a sentence or paragraph provided by a site supervisor or
worker, which describes changes in site conditions, task sta-
tuses, or scheduling preferences. The LLM acts as a function:
M : N →{(Ck, θk)}K
k=1
(20)
Where:
M is the mapping function learned or encoded by the LLM
Ck is the type of constraint (e.g., dependency, time shift)
θk is the parameter set for the update
Each (Ck, θk) pair defines a flagged constraint to be dy-
namically injected into the optimization model. These flags
are associated with predefined templates in the integer pro-
gramming codebase, allowing seamless integration with the
solver without altering the base model structure. For example:
• A narrative like ”Our skilled wall-drilling worker will be
arriving an hour late” may yield (C = 3, θ = {T6, 1}).
• A command like ”The owner has requested that paint-
ing be completed before window installation” maps to
(C = 1, θ = {T13 ≺T9}).
To ensure consistency, the LLM references a structured task
knowledge base T = {(Ti , Description i)} that maps textual
task names to task IDs. This helps avoid ambiguity and ensures
each extracted constraint can be accurately linked to the model.
The LLM output is then parsed into a structured JSON
format and passed to the optimization backend, which updates
the constraint set accordingly:


--- Page 7 ---
7
TABLE II: Types of constraint and parameter changes
Constraint Type
Definition
Label
Parameter
Task Dependency
Adjustments in the sequence or prerequisite relation-
ships among tasks
1
[task_id, successors, +/-]
Task Duration
Variations in the estimated time to complete tasks
2
[task_id, new_duration]
Task Starting Time
Changes to tasks’ earliest or planned start times
3
[task_id, start_time_change]
Number of Robot
Variations in robot availability
4
[new_robot_type_id, robot_number_change]
Task Conflict Constraints
Some tasks cannot be performed at the same time
5
[task_id1, task_id2]
Fig. 3: Pipeline for narrative-driven adaptive schedule
optimization
Cnew = Coriginal ∪{Ck (θk)}
(21)
This interaction between the LLM and the optimizer ensures
the system can continuously adapt to evolving conditions while
maintaining model transparency and interpretability.
Please note that the optimization algorithm operates inde-
pendently from the LLM. The LLM’s role is limited to inter-
preting the narrative and modifying only the flagged portions
of the code, leaving the optimization logic itself untouched.
This separation ensures that the optimization process remains
robust and interpretable while gaining the flexibility through
natural language instructions. The result is a hybrid, human-
in-the-loop system that bridges narrative reasoning and formal
optimization in a modular, scalable manner.
D. LLM implementation and prompt design
Prompt design is critical for LLMs to perform high-quality
information extraction, particularly given the intricate nature
of construction scheduling tasks [50], [51]. To create effec-
tive prompts tailored for construction project scheduling, we
utilize prompt engineering strategies articulated by White et
al. (2023) [50]. These strategies emphasize the necessity of
integrating context descriptions, structured templates, and ex-
plicit output formatting into prompts. In our scenario, context
descriptions detail construction tasks, their interdependencies,
durations, and associated robotic capabilities, and we further
employ JSON as the structured output format to ensure clarity.
In addition, we incorporate two techniques into our prompt
design. The first technique is chain-of-thought (CoT) prompt-
ing, which guides the LLM through step-by-step reasoning
[52]. This approach can facilitate accurate task identification
and constraint recognition by prompting LLM to engage in
deliberate, intermediate reasoning stages before concluding.
Specifically, our CoT prompts instruct the LLM to: (1) care-
fully read the task description, (2) identify the specific task and
associated robotic system, (3) determine the constraint type,
(4) extract relevant parameters, and (5) format the extracted
information. The second technique is few-shot learning. Given
that prior research indicates LLMs excel in few-shot learning
scenarios [53], [54], we provide multiple examples within our
prompt. These examples serve as explicit references, allow-
ing LLM to capture task requirements more effectively and
thereby enhancing the accuracy of its outputs. By leveraging
these prompt engineering techniques, we develop a structured
prompt template tailored for prompting LLMs to analyze task
descriptions of construction project scheduling (see Appendix
A).
For model selection, we refer to the widely recognized
Multi-task Language Understanding (MMLU) benchmark
[55]. We utilize two popular LLM families, OpenAI’s GPT
series and Anthropic’s Claude series, because of their demon-
strated capabilities in complex reasoning and strong per-
formance across diverse NLP tasks [56], [57]. Specifically,
from OpenAI, we select GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, GPT-4.1-mini
and GPT-4.1. From Anthropic, we include Claude-Haiku and
Claude-Sonnet.
E. Multi-robot task allocation: replanning
Suppose the task schedule and robot assignments have
already been determined through the task allocation opti-
mization described in the previous section, and the plan has
been partially executed. At time T R, updated information
becomes available reflecting changes in task conditions, such
as modifications to robot capabilities, availability, expected
task durations, additional task dependencies, or time window
constraints. These changes may render the current plan in-
feasible or suboptimal, necessitating the generation of a new
plan. At this point, some tasks have been completed, others
are in progress, and the rest have not yet started. For the com-
pleted and ongoing tasks, their assigned robots and schedules
must remain unchanged during the replanning. Furthermore,
in many real-world scenarios, modifying the original plan
may incur additional operational costs. To account for this,
penalties can be introduced into the optimization to discourage
unnecessary deviations from the original plan.
Given an original task allocation and scheduling plan,
represented by the solution to the variables 0xir, 0ts
ir, 0te
ir,
0ts
i, and 0te
i. Let T−= {i ∈T | 0ts
i ≤T R} denote the set


--- Page 8 ---
8
of tasks that are ongoing or completed by the replanning time
T R, and let T+ = {i ∈T | 0ts
i > T R} represent the set of
tasks that have not yet started. The replanning optimization is
formulated as follows.
Replanning optimization: The replanning objective jointly
minimizes the makespan and individual task completion times
while also penalizing deviations from the original plan. We set
Cm ≫Cs ≈Cx ≈Ct to ensure that the makespan remains
the primary objective, with the other terms balanced relative
to one another. The constraints include the original constraints
(3)-(19), along with additional constraints (25)-(26) to ensure
plan consistency.
min
xir, ts
i , te
i ,
ts
ir, te
ir
(Cm max
i∈T
te
i + Cs
X
i∈T
te
i + Cr
X
i∈T
X
r∈R
xir
+ Cx∆x + Ct∆t)
(22)
subject to (3) −(19) and (25) −(26)
Plan change penalty for: Changes to the original task
assignments and schedules are penalized during replanning
to ensure that the new plan accommodates updated task
conditions while minimizing deviations from the original plan.
∆x =
X
∀i∈T+
X
∀r∈R
|xir −0xir|
(23)
∆t =
X
∀i∈T+
 |ts
i −0ts
i| + |te
i −0te
i|

(24)
Historical plan constraints for completed tasks: The
robot assignments and task schedules for ongoing or com-
pleted tasks must remain unchanged to ensure consistency
between the updated plan and the actual execution.
ts
i = 0ts
i, te
i = 0te
i,
∀i ∈T−
(25)
xir = 0xir
∀r ∈R, ∀i ∈T−
(26)
IV. CASE STUDY
To validate the proposed framework, a case study is con-
ducted to verify the system workflow and evaluate module
capabilities. A BIM model is employed in this study as the
digital environment for evaluating LLM performance. Rhino
is used as the BIM platform, which offers intuitive user
interface to edit attribute data and can be interfaced with
other applications. Fig. 4 shows the initial BIM model, which
represents the current state of the construction site. The robotic
system leverages the BIM model and the extracted task list
to identify work zones and dynamically allocate tasks. The
robotic agents receive task assignments based on priority,
dependencies, and spatial constraints, ensuring an optimized
workflow. Human workers can interact with the system by
updating task priorities, modifying scheduling constraints, or
assigning specific tasks to robots based on evolving site condi-
tions. As robotic agents complete their tasks, the BIM model
is updated in real-time, reflecting changes in the construction
progress.
The physical site is simulated in Gazebo, with inter-robot
communication established through ROS. Fig. 5 demonstrates
an example scenario of the simulation, where two robots
Fig. 4: Scene of the construction site
transfer window frames to windows of corresponding sizes:
red frame strips for wider windows and blue strips for narrower
ones. It is important to note that the robots are not expected
to handle all tasks independently, but rather to complete or
assist with specific tasks, with human workers often remaining
essential to the process. Once a robot transfers and places
the frame strips on the ground near a window, the associated
transfer task is completed, and a human worker installs the
frame on the wall. The actions of human workers are not
modeled; instead, the world state is updated, and the frames are
teleported onto the wall. Following installation, the simulation
updates the building state specifications and transmits the
relevant information to the digital twin for incorporation into
the BIM data.
Since the robot trajectory planners and communication
framework can be seamlessly applied to similar mobile robots
in real-world settings, this simulation is used to assess the
practicality of the proposed framework in actual applications.
A. Digital twin demonstration
The digital twin is developed using Unity, with a project
template designed to automatically generate interactive digital
twins from different BIMs, eliminating the need for manual
setup each time [32]. This template includes five key compo-
nents: (1) robot emulators for robot state synchronization; (2)
BIM object templates for digital model visualization; (3) site
information templates for site data rendering; (4) user interface
elements for user supervision and intervention; and (5) BIM
update functions. A screenshot of the digital twin interface
and the robot status tracker is shown in Fig. 6.
The robot emulators are created by subscribing to robot
descriptions from ROS through the ROS# library [58]. Robot
URDF files and meshes, stored in ROS, are retrieved and
stored in Unity as game objects. These game objects represent
the hierarchical structure of each robot: links are structured
as children of their respective parent links, allowing dynamic
transformation updates based on real-time state data. A ded-
icated script is attached to each robot emulator to subscribe
to robot states (i.e., arm joint states and base locations and
orientations), enabling continuous pose synchronization.


--- Page 9 ---
9
Fig. 5: Simulation of the task allocation and completion
”Prefab” game object templates are used to visualize BIM
components. For each component in BIM, a prefab object
template is instantiated in the Unity scene. The mesh of the
instantiated object is automatically set to the component mesh
received from the BIM to replicate the site environment. The
script attached to the template can change the name, layer,
material, and state of the instantiated object according to its
BIM attributes. For example, the objects that have not yet
been constructed are rendered as hidden or transparent in the
digital twin. This BIM-Unity communication is established
with Rhino.Inside, which is an open-source plugin to run
Rhino and its API inside other applications on the Windows
operating system.
For the site information, this case study specifically fo-
cuses on the construction materials. Monitoring the states
of materials is essential in construction projects for supply
management and task scheduling. Additionally, due to their
large size and weight, these materials pose significant safety
considerations during robot manipulation. Both the resting and
active materials are tracked. Locations of the materials resting
on site are detected by robots and instantiated in the digital
twin as game objects. For materials being manipulated, they
are attached as a child to the end effector or moving platform
of the corresponding robot based on their attachment offsets.
Therefore, they can move with the robot during operation.
In addition, the user interface elements are created. The
digital twin is initiated with two buttons on the top-left corner
for users to access the task status tracker and the robot status
tracker. Once the ”Task Status” button is clicked, a panel
shows up with text inside displaying a comprehensive task list
along with the status of each task (i.e., uninitiated, ongoing,
or completed). The initial task list is received from the BIM
at project initiation. As construction progresses, task statuses
are updated via messages received from ROS. Similarly, the
”Ongoing” button provides the users with a summary of the
current task each robot is performing, shown as task IDs,
followed by high-level task descriptions, also via messages
received from ROS. An example of robot status tracker is
demonstrated in Fig. 6. At the bottom-right corner of the
UI, two additional buttons are used to collect user inputs.
The keyboard button pops up a text input field for typing,
while the voice button transcribes spoken input to text with
the transcription API from OpenAI. The text collected is
then passed to the LLM module for further processing and
interpretation.
B. Construction tasks and robot capabilities
Typical construction tasks, such as element delivery, win-
dow installation, wall drilling, HVAC duct installation, wiring,
wall painting, and site inspections, are used to showcase the
capabilities of the methodologies developed in this study. The
assumed durations and dependencies of these tasks are detailed
in Table III. Additionally, seven types of robots with varying
capabilities, as outlined in Table IV, are considered alongside
these construction-related tasks. For instance, robots equipped
with a cargo container can assist with material transport and
element delivery tasks. Robots with an Indoor Air Quality
(IAQ) sensor can help with site inspections, particularly in
monitoring environmental conditions.
C. LLM performance analysis
To evaluate the LLMs’ ability to interpret constraints of
varying complexity, we constructed a test set consisting of
500 descriptive narrative samples. Each sample includes one
or more types of constraint and parameter changes as defined
in Table II. The dataset is evenly divided into five groups
based on the number of changes described in each sample. For
example, the first group contains 100 samples, each involving
a single change. The second group includes 100 samples with
two randomly selected changes, and so on, up to the fifth
group, which contains samples with five randomly selected
changes. We then define three metrics to comprehensively
evaluate the LLMs’ performance, including (1) Constraint
Accuracy, (2) Parameter Accuracy, and (3) Correct Rate. Con-
straint Accuracy measures how accurately the LLM identifies
the categories of changes, as defined and labeled from 1 to
5 in Table II. Parameter Accuracy evaluates the accuracy of


--- Page 10 ---
10
Fig. 6: Screenshot of digital twin interface
TABLE III: Durations and dependencies of the construction
tasks*
Task
Pred.
Duration
Description
Robot
T1
-
0.25
Move Electrical Conduit
R1
T2
-
0.25
Move Window Frame
R1
T3
-
0.25
Move Window
R1
T4
-
0.25
Move Duct Structural Materials
R1
T5
-
0.25
Move Duct
R1
T6
-
0.5
Drill Wall
R4 / R2
T7
T1, T6
1
Install Electrical Conduit
R5 / R2
T8
T2
1
Install Window Frame
R4 / R2
T9
T3, T8
0.5
Install Window
R3
T10
T4
2
Duct Structural Framing
R4 / R2
T11
T5, T10
2
Install HVAC Duct
R4 / R2
T12
T7
2
Install Wiring
R5 / R2
T13
T12
1
Wall Painting
R6
T14
-
0.5
Construction Site Inspection
R7
*Note: Durations are in hours. “Pred.” denotes predecessor.
TABLE IV: Robot capabilities and quantities
Robot
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5
R6
R7
Number
[1,4]
[1,2]
[1,2]
[1,2]
[1,2]
[1,2]
[1]
Cargo container
1
High-payload
1
1
1
Suction-based gripper
1
Precise parallel gripper
1
1
Normal parallel gripper
1
1
Sprayer
1
Camera
1
IAQ sensors
1
specific extracted values or attributes given each constraint,
such as task duration or robot change. Finally, the Correct Rate
assesses the proportion of cases in which the LLM provides
entirely accurate responses across all evaluated constraints and
parameters.
The evaluation of the selected LLMs’ performance across
five task difficulty levels is presented in Fig. 7 and Table V.
The results reveal a consistent pattern that Constraint Accuracy
remains consistently high (around 100%) across all LLMs,
demonstrating their robust capacity to accurately interpret and
classify task relationships, even as task complexity increases.
Regarding Parameter Accuracy, GPT-4.1, GPT-4.1-mini,
and GPT-4o outperform Anthropic’s Claude models and GPT-
4o-mini across five complexity levels. In particular, GPT-4.1
and GPT-4o maintain consistently high accuracy scores (typi-
cally above 95%) across difficulty levels. In contrast, Claude
models achieve moderate Parameter Accuracy (generally be-
tween 70% and 80%). This pattern suggests that Claude and
GPT4o-mini models encounter difficulties extracting precise
details, such as task durations and robot types, from complex
textual descriptions.
In terms of the Correct Rate metric, which provides a
more integrated assessment, GPT-4.1 achieves the highest
Correct Rates across all difficulty levels (consistently above
95%), underscoring its comprehensive understanding and ro-
bust performance in combined reasoning tasks. GPT-4o and
GPT-4.1-mini also show commendable Correct Rates at lower
complexity but exhibit noticeable performance drops at higher
difficulty. The other three selected LLMs, Claude-Haiku,
Claude-Sonnet, and GPT-4o-mini models display substantial
reductions in Correct Rate, especially at higher complexity
levels, often falling below 40%.
Overall, the evaluation identifies OpenAI’s GPT-4.1 models
as the top performers across all assessed metrics, consistently
achieving nearly 98% accuracy with narrower confidence
intervals across all five complexity levels. This indicates that
GPT-4.1 offers superior precision and reliability in handling
intricate construction scheduling analyses compared to other
evaluated models. While GPT-4o models also deliver strong
performance, they exhibit noticeable limitations as task com-
plexity increases. These findings are promising for construc-
tion project scheduling as they illustrate the capability of
advanced LLMs, particularly GPT-4.1, to reliably automate


--- Page 11 ---
11
Fig. 7: Performance evaluation of selected LLMs across five complexity levels using Constraint Accuracy, Parameter
Accuracy, and Correct Rate.
TABLE V: Average performance across all difficulty levels
Model
Constraint Acc.
Parameter Acc.
Correct Rate
claude haiku
96.2%
74.9%
45.4%
claude sonnet
96.5%
77.9%
51.4%
gpt4o mini
96.2%
79.3%
53.8%
gpt4o
99.5%
98.2%
93.4%
gpt4.1 mini
98.9%
96.1%
88.8%
gpt4.1
99.8%
99.2%
97.6%
and accurately manage complex scheduling tasks.
D. Optimization results
To evaluate the performance and efficiency of formulated
task allocation algorithms in construction tasks, we randomly
vary the number of available robots for each type according
to the number ranges specified in Table IV. In addition, we
vary the number of tasks as outlined in Table III by generating
either one or two sets from the groups {T1, T6, T7, T12, T13},
{T2, T3, T8, T9}, and {T4, T5, T10, T11}. Tasks within the same
group are selected together to maintain the task dependencies.
Overall, 1000 test scenarios with different combinations of
robots and tasks were created to evaluate the proposed frame-
work (row 1 in TABLE VI).
To simulate scenarios with additional time window con-
straints (row 2 in TABLE VI), we randomly select between one
and three tasks and impose a condition that these tasks must
start after a randomly chosen period of 2 to 4 hours, reflecting
scheduling conflicts. For scenarios with task conflict con-
straints (row 3 in TABLE VI), we enforce that tasks in the set
{T6, T7, T8, T9, T12, T13} cannot be performed concurrently,
as they require collaboration with a single available worker
for these tasks. Similarly, we generated 1024 test scenarios
incorporating various combinations of robots and tasks with
either the time window or task conflict constraints. To evaluate
the replanning optimization (row 4 in TABLE VI), the plan
created without time constraints is used as the original plan,
and additional time window constraints are introduced during
replanning. The updated plan should leverage the original plan
while satisfying the time constraints and accounting for the
penalty associated with deviations from the original plan.
TABLE VI: Evaluation of the task allocation algorithm*
Tasks
Robots
Max
Max
Max
Avg
# of
# of
Time
Time
Vars
Cons.
(sec)
(sec)
Original
14-27
15
345
377
3.40
0.13
Time window
14-27
15
345
379
1.26
0.05
Task conflicts
14-27
15
345
378
23.76
0.48
Replanning
14-27
15
372
406
0.08
0.02
*The table displays only the maximum and average values across task
scenarios. “Vars.” and “Cons.” denote variables and constraints, respectively.
The integer programming-based task allocation is applied to
the generated test scenarios. Table VI summarizes the number
of tasks, robots, decision variables, and constraints in each
scenario, along with the corresponding computational times to
find the optimal solution. According to the table, on average,
the optimal solutions are found within under one second,
demonstrating the efficiency of our task allocation formulation.
Fig. 8 presents an example of task allocation results. Follow-
ing these results, we ran the simulation, and the scene at the
snapshot time was captured as shown in the Fig. 5 and Fig. 6.
In this scenario, the robot fleet includes two robots of type R1,
two of type R2, and one each of types R3, R6, and R7. These
robots are assigned to complete one set of wall installation
and painting tasks, one set of electrical wiring tasks, one set of
HVAC duct installation tasks, two sets of window installation
tasks, and a site inspection. The optimal completion time for
the schedule is calculated to be 5.25 hours.
In addition to the initial plan, a replanned scenario is also
illustrated. We present a scenario in which, at 0.2 hours into
the schedule, the workers realize that the structural materials
required for the HVAC duct installation are unavailable due
to delivery delays and will not arrive until 0.5 hours. This
disruption necessitates a reallocation of tasks. Applying the
replanning framework described in Section III-E, the system


--- Page 12 ---
12
Fig. 8: Example of the optimized task allocation and schedule
minimally adjusts the initial plan to accommodate the dis-
turbance. Considering the penalties for deviating from the
original schedule, the updated plan reassigns R1 to execute
task T5 followed by T4, reversing the original task order (as
shown in Fig. 8).
V. DISCUSSION
The findings of this study highlight the potential of inte-
grating LLMs, optimization algorithms, and digital twins to
address challenges in multi-robot coordination on dynamic
construction sites. The results have demonstrated the effec-
tiveness of the adaptive system architecture. By separating the
reasoning capabilities of the LLM from the task optimization
algorithm itself, the framework maintains computational rigor
while maintaining flexibility. The results indicate that the
optimization model remains interpretable and robust while
benefiting from the LLM’s ability to interpret unstructured
input and dynamically generate task-specific modifications.
Although the accuracy of LLMs in interpreting construction-
relevant narratives varies across models, the results underscore
their practical viability. In particular, advanced models such
as GPT-4.1 consistently extracted constraints and parameters
with high accuracy, even as task complexity increased. This
suggests strong potential for LLMs to serve as intelligent inter-
mediaries between human planners and autonomous systems,
especially in time-sensitive, information-rich environments.
The integration of a digital twin enabled a closed-loop infor-
mation flow between the physical construction site and its vir-
tual representation. Real-time updates of task progress, robot
states, and environmental changes are synchronized through
the digital twin, which allows for continuous refinement of
task allocations and site-level decision-making. This capability
is especially valuable in dynamic construction settings, where
conditions shift frequently and adaptability is paramount. The
simulation results have supported the practicability of the
proposed framework.
Beyond the context of construction, the proposed framework
exhibits strong potential for scalability and cross-domain ap-
plications. The generalizable principles of optimization, real-
time feedback, and natural language reasoning, makes it highly
adaptable to other sectors such as manufacturing, logistics,
warehousing, and industrial assembly. In these domains, simi-
lar to construction, tasks often follow strict sequences, depend
on heterogeneous agent capabilities, and may subject to un-
expected disruptions. Additionally, the digital twin integration
offers significant benefits for sectors that rely heavily on spatial
coordination and progress tracking, such as infrastructure
development and maintenance.
Despite some promising outcomes, there are several limita-
tions in this study. For example, the current simulation setup
simplifies certain aspects of real-world construction scenarios.
In particular, the collaboration between robots and human
workers is not explicitly modeled, resulting in idealized task
transitions that may differ slightly from real-world condi-
tions. Additionally, while LLMs show strong performance in
structured prompt settings, their reliability in processing more
ambiguous or informal construction narratives need further
investigations.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This research introduced an integrated framework for adap-
tive multi-robot task allocation in dynamic construction envi-
ronments, combining digital twin technology, IP optimization,
and LLM-driven narrative interpretation. The proposed system
addresses the challenges posed by real-time uncertainties, en-
abling efficient and flexible task rescheduling without manual
intervention. By decoupling the reasoning and optimization
processes, the framework maintains algorithmic transparency
and scalability, offering a structured yet flexible solution
adaptable to evolving site conditions. Empirical evaluations
demonstrated the computational robustness of the optimization
model. They also showed that LLMs can effectively extract
constraint modifications from unstructured natural language
descriptions with high accuracy. The establishment of a closed-
loop feedback mechanism between the physical construction
site and its digital twin representation further enhances situa-
tional awareness and supports continuous system adaptation.
Future work will focus on extending the framework to more
complex human-robot collaboration scenarios and expand-
ing its application beyond construction to domains such as


--- Page 13 ---
13
manufacturing, logistics, and industrial assembly in dynamic
environments.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Begi´c, M. Gali´c, and Z. Dolaˇcek-Alduk, “Digitalization and au-
tomation in construction project’s life-cycle: A review,” Journal of
information technology in construction, vol. 27, pp. 441–460, 2022.
[2] Q. Chen, B. G. de Soto, and B. T. Adey, “Construction automation:
Research areas, industry concerns and suggestions for advancement,”
Automation in construction, vol. 94, pp. 22–38, 2018.
[3] A. Klarin and Q. Xiao, “Automation in architecture, engineering and
construction: a scientometric analysis and implications for management,”
Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, vol. 31,
no. 8, pp. 3308–3334, 2024.
[4] K. S. Saidi, T. Bock, and C. Georgoulas, “Robotics in construction,” in
Springer handbook of robotics.
Springer, 2016, pp. 1493–1520.
[5] S. Liu, X. V. Wang, and L. Wang, “Digital twin-enabled advance exe-
cution for human-robot collaborative assembly,” CIRP annals, vol. 71,
no. 1, pp. 25–28, 2022.
[6] X. Wang, S. Wang, C. C. Menassa, V. R. Kamat, and W. McGee,
“Automatic high-level motion sequencing methods for enabling multi-
tasking construction robots,” Automation in Construction, vol. 155, p.
105071, 2023.
[7] B. Fu, M. Bi, S. Umeda, T. Nakano, Y. Nonaka, Q. Zhou, T. Matsui,
D. M. Tilbury, and K. Barton, “Digital twin-based smart manufacturing:
Dynamic line reconfiguration for disturbance handling,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp. 14 892–
14 905, 2025.
[8] B. M. Tehrani, S. BuHamdan, and A. Alwisy, “Robotics in assembly-
based industrialized construction: A narrative review and a look for-
ward,” International Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications,
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 556–574, 2023.
[9] J. Xu, M. Dixit, and X. Wang, “Adaptive visual perception for robotic
construction process: A multi-robot coordination framework,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.11275, 2024.
[10] M. Gharbia, A. Chang-Richards, Y. Lu, R. Y. Zhong, and H. Li, “Robotic
technologies for on-site building construction: A systematic review,”
Journal of Building Engineering, vol. 32, p. 101584, 2020.
[11] A. Attalla, O. Attalla, A. Moussa, D. Shafique, S. B. Raean, and
T. Hegazy, “Construction robotics: review of intelligent features,” Inter-
national Journal of Intelligent Robotics and Applications, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp. 535–555, 2023.
[12] B. Xiao, C. Chen, and X. Yin, “Recent advancements of robotics in
construction,” Automation in Construction, vol. 144, p. 104591, 2022.
[13] B. Fu, W. Smith, D. M. Rizzo, M. Castanier, M. Ghaffari, and K. Barton,
“Robust task scheduling for heterogeneous robot teams under capability
uncertainty,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 1087–
1105, 2022.
[14] O. Valero, J. Antich, A. Tauler-Rossell´o, J. Guerrero, J.-J. Mi˜nana, and
A. Ortiz, “Multi-robot task allocation methods: A fuzzy optimization
approach,” Information Sciences, vol. 648, p. 119508, 2023.
[15] T. Lei, P. Chintam, C. Luo, L. Liu, and G. E. Jan, “A convex optimization
approach to multi-robot task allocation and path planning,” Sensors,
vol. 23, no. 11, p. 5103, 2023.
[16] B. Abdzadeh, S. Noori, and S. F. Ghannadpour, “Simultaneous schedul-
ing of multiple construction projects considering supplier selection and
material transportation routing,” Automation in construction, vol. 140,
p. 104336, 2022.
[17] L. A. Wolsey, Integer programming.
John Wiley & Sons, 2020.
[18] F. A. Omara and M. M. Arafa, “Genetic algorithms for task scheduling
problem,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed computing, vol. 70, no. 1,
pp. 13–22, 2010.
[19] K. Wang and A. Jacquillat, “A stochastic integer programming approach
to air traffic scheduling and operations,” Operations Research, vol. 68,
no. 5, pp. 1375–1402, 2020.
[20] C. Perreault-Lafleur, M. Carvalho, and G. Desaulniers, “A stochastic
integer programming approach to reserve staff scheduling with pref-
erences,” International Transactions in Operational Research, vol. 32,
no. 1, pp. 289–313, 2025.
[21] L. R. Abreu, J. O. Cunha, B. A. Prata, and J. M. Framinan, “A genetic
algorithm for scheduling open shops with sequence-dependent setup
times,” Computers & Operations Research, vol. 113, p. 104793, 2020.
[22] J. Deng, “Research on the risk early warning of construction engineering
under the coupling disaster of typhoons and rainstorms in coastal areas
based on bp neural network,” Journal of Coastal Research, vol. 105,
no. SI, pp. 151–154, 2020.
[23] S. J. Schuldt, M. R. Nicholson, Y. A. Adams, and J. D. Delorit,
“Weather-related construction delays in a changing climate: a systematic
state-of-the-art review,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 5, p. 2861, 2021.
[24] D. Yu, Q. Lv, G. Srivastava, C.-H. Chen, and J. C.-W. Lin, “Multiobjec-
tive evolutionary model of the construction industry based on network
planning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 2173–2182, 2022.
[25] J. Lee, M. Park, H.-S. Lee, T. Kim, S. Kim, and H. Hyun, “Workflow
dependency approach for modular building construction manufacturing
process using dependency structure matrix (dsm),” KSCE journal of civil
engineering, vol. 21, pp. 1525–1535, 2017.
[26] T. Jin, Z. Cai, B. Li, C. Zheng, G. Jiang, and J. Cheng, “Improving
resource utilization by timely fine-grained scheduling,” in Proceedings
of the Fifteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, 2020, pp.
1–16.
[27] H. Naveed, A. U. Khan, S. Qiu, M. Saqib, S. Anwar, M. Usman,
N. Akhtar, N. Barnes, and A. Mian, “A comprehensive overview of
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06435, 2023.
[28] M. Gautam, H. Fagerlund, B. Greicevci, F. Christophe, and J. Havula,
“Collaborative robotics in construction: A test case on screwing gypsum
boards on ceiling,” in 2020 5th international conference on green
technology and sustainable development (GTSD).
IEEE, 2020, pp.
88–93.
[29] A. Kunic, R. Naboni, A. Kramberger, and C. Schlette, “Design and
assembly automation of the robotic reversible timber beam,” Automation
in Construction, vol. 123, p. 103531, 2021.
[30] M. Deng, C. C. Menassa, and V. R. Kamat, “From bim to digital twins:
A systematic review of the evolution of intelligent building represen-
tations in the aec-fm industry.” Journal of Information Technology in
Construction, vol. 26, 2021.
[31] S. Kim, M. Peavy, P.-C. Huang, and K. Kim, “Development of bim-
integrated construction robot task planning and simulation system,”
Automation in Construction, vol. 127, p. 103720, 2021.
[32] X. Wang, H. Yu, W. McGee, C. C. Menassa, and V. R. Kamat,
“Enabling building information model-driven human-robot collaborative
construction workflows with closed-loop digital twins,” Computers in
Industry, vol. 161, p. 104112, 2024.
[33] C. Follini, V. Magnago, K. Freitag, M. Terzer, C. Marcher, M. Riedl,
A. Giusti, and D. T. Matt, “Bim-integrated collaborative robotics for
application in building construction and maintenance,” Robotics, vol. 10,
no. 1, p. 2, 2020.
[34] H. Chakraa, F. Gu´erin, E. Leclercq, and D. Lefebvre, “Optimization
techniques for multi-robot task allocation problems: Review on the state-
of-the-art,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 168, p. 104492,
2023.
[35] X. Bai, A. Fielbaum, M. Kronm¨uller, L. Knoedler, and J. Alonso-Mora,
“Group-based distributed auction algorithms for multi-robot task as-
signment,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering,
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1292–1303, 2022.
[36] A. Patil, J. Bae, and M. Park, “An algorithm for task allocation and
planning for a heterogeneous multi-robot system to minimize the last
task completion time,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 15, p. 5637, 2022.
[37] H. Guo, Z. Miao, J. Ji, and Q. Pan, “An effective collaboration
evolutionary algorithm for multi-robot task allocation and scheduling
in a smart farm,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 289, p. 111474, 2024.
[38] S. Mayya, D. S. D’antonio, D. Salda˜na, and V. Kumar, “Resilient task
allocation in heterogeneous multi-robot systems,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1327–1334, 2021.
[39] D.-H. Lee, “Resource-based task allocation for multi-robot systems,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 103, pp. 151–161, 2018.
[40] J. G. Martin, F. J. Muros, J. M. Maestre, and E. F. Camacho, “Multi-
robot task allocation clustering based on game theory,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 161, p. 104314, 2023.
[41] S. Park, Y. D. Zhong, and N. E. Leonard, “Multi-robot task allocation
games in dynamically changing environments,” in 2021 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 8678–8684.
[42] F. Yan and K. Di, “Solving the multi-robot task allocation with
functional tasks based on a hyper-heuristic algorithm,” Applied Soft
Computing, vol. 146, p. 110628, 2023.
[43] Y. Wang, H. Luo, and W. Fang, “An integrated approach for automatic
safety inspection in construction: Domain knowledge with multimodal
large language model,” Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 65, p.
103246, 2025.
[44] Z. Qian and C. Shi, “Large language model-empowered paradigm for
automated geotechnical site planning and geological characterization,”
Automation in Construction, vol. 173, p. 106103, 2025.


--- Page 14 ---
14
[45] H. Pu, X. Yang, J. Li, and R. Guo, “Autorepo: A general framework for
multimodal llm-based automated construction reporting,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 255, p. 124601, 2024.
[46] G.
Chen,
A.
Alsharef,
A.
Ovid,
A.
Albert,
and
E.
Jaselskis,
“Meet2mitigate: An llm-powered framework for real-time issue identi-
fication and mitigation from construction meeting discourse,” Advanced
Engineering Informatics, vol. 64, p. 103068, 2025.
[47] K. Forth and A. Borrmann, “Semantic enrichment for bim-based build-
ing energy performance simulations using semantic textual similarity and
fine-tuning multilingual llm,” Journal of Building Engineering, vol. 95,
p. 110312, 2024.
[48] S. A. Prieto, E. T. Mengiste, and B. Garc´ıa de Soto, “Investigating the
use of chatgpt for the scheduling of construction projects,” Buildings,
vol. 13, no. 4, p. 857, 2023.
[49] K. Kim, M. Ivashchenko, P. Ghimire, and P.-C. Huang, “Context-aware
and adaptive task planning for autonomous construction robots through
llm-robot communication,” Available at SSRN 4827728.
[50] J. White, Q. Fu, S. Hays, M. Sandborn, C. Olea, H. Gilbert, A. El-
nashar, J. Spencer-Smith, and D. C. Schmidt, “A prompt pattern
catalog to enhance prompt engineering with chatgpt,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.11382, 2023.
[51] S. Atreja, J. Ashkinaze, L. Li, J. Mendelsohn, and L. Hemphill,
“Prompt design matters for computational social science tasks but in
unpredictable ways,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.11980, 2024.
[52] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 35, pp. 24 824–24 837, 2022.
[53] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language mod-
els are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020.
[54] S. Hegselmann, A. Buendia, H. Lang, M. Agrawal, X. Jiang, and
D. Sontag, “Tabllm: Few-shot classification of tabular data with large
language models,” in International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Statistics.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 5549–5581.
[55] D. Hendrycks, C. Burns, S. Basart, A. Zou, M. Mazeika, D. Song, and
J. Steinhardt, “Measuring massive multitask language understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03300, 2020.
[56] L. Fan, W. Hua, L. Li, H. Ling, and Y. Zhang, “Nphardeval: Dynamic
benchmark on reasoning ability of large language models via complexity
classes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14890, 2023.
[57] Y. Sonoda, R. Kurokawa, Y. Nakamura, J. Kanzawa, M. Kurokawa,
Y. Ohizumi, W. Gonoi, and O. Abe, “Diagnostic performances of gpt-
4o, claude 3 opus, and gemini 1.5 pro in “diagnosis please” cases,”
Japanese journal of radiology, vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 1231–1235, 2024.
[58] Siemens,
“siemens/ros-sharp,”
https://github.com/siemens/ros-sharp/
wiki, 2025, [Online; accessed June 10, 2025].
APPENDIX
A. Prompt Template
Figs. 9-11 (due to the page length, we break it into three
parts) show the prompt design for the information extraction
in the context of construction project scheduling.
SYSTEM PROMPT: You are a project management assistant
specializing in construction scheduling analysis. Your task is to
analyze text descriptions of project changes and extract structured
information about task relation changes in a construction project.
CONTEXT
The project involves the following tasks and their relationships:
Task ID | Predecessor | Duration | Description | Robot Type
• T1 | - | 0.25 | Move Electrical Conduit | R1
• T2 | - | 0.25 | Move Window Frame | R1
• T3 | - | 0.25 | Move Window | R1
• T4 | - | 0.25 | Move Duct Structural Materials | R1
• T5 | - | 0.25 | Move Duct | R1
• T6 | - | 0.5 | Drill Wall | R4 or R2
• T7 | T1, T6 | 1 | Install Electrical Conduit | R5 or R2
• T8 | T2 | 1 | Install Window Frame | R4 or R2
• T9 | T3, T8 | 0.5 | Install Window | R3
• T10 | T4 | 2 | Duct Structural Framing | R4 or R2
• T11 | T5, T10 | 2 | Install HVAC Duct | R4 or R2
• T12 | T7 | 2 | Install Wiring | R5 or R2
• T13 | T12 | 1 | Wall Painting | R6
• T14 | - | 0.5 | Construction Site Inspection | R7
The robot capabilities are listed below:
Robot ID | Capabilities
• R1: Cargo container
• R2: High-payload, Precise parallel gripper, Normal parallel
gripper
• R3: High-payload, Suction-based gripper
• R4: High-payload, Normal parallel gripper
• R5: Precise parallel gripper
• R6: Sprayer
• R7: Camera, IAQ sensors
CONSTRAINT TYPES:
1) Task Dependency Adjustments
• Format: [task id, successor, +/-]
• task id: the target task
• successor: the successors of the target task
• +/-: “+” indicates a newly added successor, “-” means the
dependency has been removed
2) Task Duration Variations
• Format: [task id, new duration]
• task id: the target task
• new duration: the new duration of the target task in hours
3) Task Starting Time Changes
• Format: [task id, start time change]
• task id: the target task
• start time change: the changes in start time of the target task
(e.g., +2 means delayed by 2 hours; -2 means ahead by 2
hours)
4) Number of Robot Variations
• Format: [robot type id, robot number change]
• robot type id: the type of robot (e.g., R1, R2, R3, etc.)
• robot number change: the number changes of the robot (e.g.,
+1 means one more robot; -1 means one less robot)
5) Task Conflict Constraints
• Format: [task id1, task id2]
• task id1: the first task in the conflict
• task id2: the second task in the conflict
Fig. 9: Prompt design for construction project scheduling -
Part 1.


--- Page 15 ---
15
STEP-BY-STEP INSTRUCTIONS:
1) Read through the entire description to understand the context.
2) For each change mentioned in the description:
a. Identify which task (T1-T14) or robot type (R1-R7) is being
affected based on CONTEXT.
– Be careful to distinguish between similar tasks, for
example:
∗T2 (Move Window Frame) vs. T3 (Move Window)
vs. T8 (Install Window Frame) vs. T9 (Install
Window) - These are different tasks.
∗If text mentions “window installation”, specifically, it
refers to T9 (Install Window), not T3 or T8
∗If text mentions ”window frame installation,” it
refers to T8 (Install Window Frame), not T2
– Be careful to distinguish between similar robots, for
example:
∗R2, R3, R4, and R5 are different robots.
∗Only R2 combines both high-payload and precise
parallel gripper capabilities.
∗If text only mentions “high-payload and normal
parallel gripper”, it refers to R4 not R2.
b. Determine which constraint type (1-5) applies to the change
based on CONSTRAINT TYPES.
c. Extract the specific parameters needed for that constraint
type.
d. Format the parameters according to the required format for
that constraint type.
3) Compile all identified changes into the JSON output format:
a. Create a JSON object with a “changes” array.
b. For each change, add an object with “constraint type” and
“parameters” fields.
c. Ensure numerical values (like durations and time changes) are
formatted as numbers, not strings.
d. Ensure task IDs, successors, and robot types are formatted as
strings.
e. For time-related values:
– Simplify all numerical values to their simplest form (e.g.,
1.5 not 1.50, 2 not 2.0)
– Convert minutes to hours (e.g., 30 minutes = 0.5 hours,
45 minutes = 0.75 hours)
– Please be aware that if you identify the constraint as 3,
the time change should be associated with “+” or “-”.
g. Please be aware that if you identify the constraint as 4, the
robot change should be associated with “+” or “-”.
4) Double-check your result to ensure all changes mentioned in the
description have been captured.
a. Please ensure that your output follows the required format;
e.g., for constraint 1, the output should be [task id,
successor, +/-] (do NOT nest successors in additional
brackets) and the task id should be the predecessor of the
successor.
b. Please ensure that if you identify the constraint as 1, you
correctly identify the target task and the successor of the
target task and put them in the right order [task id,
successor, +/-].
c. Please ensure that if you identify the constraint as 3, the
time change should be associated with “+” or “-”.
d. Please ensure that if you identify the constraint as 4, the
robot change should be associated with “+” or “-”.
e. Please ensure that the task description corresponds to the
task id in the CONTEXT.
Fig. 10: Prompt design for construction project scheduling -
Part 2.
EXAMPLES:
Example 1:
Input: “Due to how things are unfolding on-site, it’s understood that
the drilling machine is not functioning, so the wall will be drilled
manually. The task is expected to take two hours, and in light of
recent discussions, after coordinating with field staff, it seems that
the original worker assigned to install the HVAC duct is no longer
available; however, we have secured another worker who can arrive in
150 minutes.”
Output:
{"changes": [
{"constraint_type": 2, "parameters": [T6, 2]},
{"constraint_type": 3, "parameters": [T11, +2.5]}
]}
Example 2:
Input: “Recent developments suggest that wall painting takes 1.5 hours
instead of 1 hour due to the need for multiple coats, and in light of
recent adjustments, a revised understanding across teams indicates
that a specialist required for electrical conduit installation calls in
sick, preventing work from starting for 2 hours., followed by further
refinements as recent developments suggest that wall painting takes
1.5 hours instead of 1 hour due to the need for multiple coats.”
Output:
{"changes": [
{"constraint_type": 2, "parameters": [T13, 1.5]},
{"constraint_type": 3, "parameters": [T7, +2]},
{"constraint_type": 2, "parameters": [T13, 1.5]}
]}
Example 3:
Input: “Task dependencies have shifted, and one of the robots capable
of handling heavy loads and performing fine, precise tasks is currently
out of service due to a mechanical failure. Additionally, in light of
recent discussions and the evolving situation on-site, it appears that
two robots with high-capacity arms and fine-movement grippers were
not charged, and have now run out of power.”
Output:
{"changes": [
{"constraint_type": 4, "parameters": [R2, -1]},
{"constraint_type": 4, "parameters": [R2, -2]}
]}
Now, analyze the following description and extract all task relation
changes in the specified JSON format: {description}
Please output your response in JSON format and do not output other
things.
{"changes": [
{"constraint_type": <number>,
"parameters": [<value1>, <value2>, ...]},...
]}
Fig. 11: Prompt design for construction project scheduling -
Part 3.
