--- Page 1 ---
arXiv:2506.12495v1  [cs.AI]  14 Jun 2025
Automated Heuristic Design for Unit Commitment
Using Large Language Models
Junjin Lv
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
lvjunjin@mail.shiep.edu.cn
Shaodi Zhang
Shanghai Electrical Appliances Research Institute (Group) Co
Shanghai, China
17321033713@163.com
Chunyang Gong
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
gongchunyang@shiep.edu.cn
Chenggang Cui
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
cgcui@shiep.edu.cn
Hui Chen
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
chenhui@shiep.edu.cn
Jiaming Liu
Shanghai University of Electric Power
Shanghai, China
y23204141@mail.shiep.edu.cn
Abstract—The Unit Commitment (UC) problem is a classic
challenge in the optimal scheduling of power systems. Years of
research and practice have shown that formulating reasonable
unit commitment plans can significantly improve the economic
efficiency of power systems’ operations. In recent years, with
the introduction of technologies such as machine learning and
the Lagrangian relaxation method, the solution methods for
the UC problem have become increasingly diversified, but still
face challenges in terms of accuracy and robustness. This paper
proposes a Function Space Search (FunSearch) method based
on large language models. This method combines pre-trained
large language models and evaluators to creatively generate
solutions through the program search and evolution process
while ensuring their rationality. In simulation experiments, a case
of unit commitment with 10 units is used mainly. Compared to
the genetic algorithm, the results show that FunSearch performs
better in terms of sampling time, evaluation time, and total
operating cost of the system, demonstrating its great potential as
an effective tool for solving the UC problem.
Index Terms—Large Language Model, Unit Combination,
Electric Power System, Function Space Search, Operating Cost
I. INTRODUCTION
The unit commitment problem (UC) is a classic issue in opti-
mal power system scheduling. Years of theoretical research and
practical operation have shown that formulating a reasonable
and optimized unit commitment plan can significantly improve
the economic operation efficiency of the power system [1].
In recent years, numerous scholars have conducted in-
depth studies on the unit commitment (UC) problem and
proposed various optimization methods to solve it. For example,
Reference [2] proposes a UC model that combines machine
learning and Lagrangian relaxation methods, improving the
efficiency of the solution of complex UC problems through
online self-learning; Reference [3] studies the multiobjective
UC problem based on profit maximization, comprehensively
considering the uncertainties of renewable energy sources and
energy storage units; Reference [4] proposes an algorithm
that combines discrete differential evolution and quadratic
programming to optimize the start-stop status of units and
economic dispatch in a layered manner. Compared with
traditional optimization methods, the above-mentioned methods
have relatively obvious effects in solving the UC problem.
However, there are still certain limitations in terms of accuracy
and robustness in solving the unit commitment problem.
Recently, with the rise of Large Language Model (LLM)
technology, a revolution is quietly unfolding across multiple
industries. In the field of power systems, the combination of
LLM with advanced optimization algorithms and data-driven
strategies is injecting strong momentum into the evolution
of smart grids, ushering in unprecedented development op-
portunities. For example, Reference [5] analyzes the potential
security threats that large language models may bring to modern
power systems, emphasizing the necessity of researching
and developing countermeasures; Reference [6] discusses the
potential of foundation models (such as GPT-4) in power system
tasks and evaluates their performance in tasks such as optimal
power flow, vehicle scheduling, and technical report knowledge
retrieval; Reference [7] proposes a large language model
based on prompt templates to generate power grid operation
instructions and improves the quality of generation through
human expert feedback. LLM has shown great potential in
solving complex tasks. However, LLM sometimes suffers from
the "hallucination" problem [8], which may lead to seemingly
reasonable but incorrect explanations.
In view of the existing problems in current academic research,
this study introduces a Function Space Search (FunSearch)
1


--- Page 2 ---
method. This is an evolutionary process that pairs a pre-trained
LLM with a system evaluator. It combines large language
models and program search to solve complex mathematical
and computational problems. This method performs excellently
in solving the unit commitment problem in power systems
and can efficiently address related challenges and optimize the
scheduling and operation of generating units.
II. LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL UC DECISION
OPTIMIZATION FRAMEWORK
As shown in Fig.??, the Large Language Model Unit
Commitment (LLM UC) Decision Optimization Framework
is shown in Figure 1. In the LLM UC Decision Optimization
Framework, key components include generating units, load de-
mand dispatch centers, LLM inference modules, and FunSearch
optimization modules. This framework ingeniously combines
pre-trained LLMs with evaluators. It can not only understand
complex power system operation rules but also intelligently
generate and continuously optimize generator scheduling plans
according to real-time data. Through the iterative evolution
process, the LLM UC framework can quickly find scheduling
strategies close to the optimal solution, effectively reducing the
operating costs of the power system and improving economic
benefits.
Fig. 1. Large Language Model UC Optimization Framework
III. MATHEMATICAL MODEL OF UNIT COMMITMENT
The UC problem is a classical optimal scheduling problem
in power systems, where the main objective is to schedule a
group of generating units in a given time period so that the
operating cost of the whole system is minimized and the load
demand, as well as various constraints are satisfied at the same
time.
A. objective function
The UC problem is to rationally determine the optimal startup
and shutdown states and the corresponding output sizes of all
available units in each computation period to minimize the total
system operating cost, subject to various constraints.The UC
problem is a large-scale mixed integer nonlinear constrained
optimization problem, which contains the 0 and 1 decision
variables that represent the startup and shutdown states of the
units, and a continuous variable for the output power. The total
system operating cost consists of two parts: unit operating cost
and penalty cost, and its objective function can be expressed
as:
Ctotal = Co + Pd + Pmint
(1)
Co =
T
X
t=1
N
X
i=1
Ci(ut
i) · P t
i
(2)
Pd = 104
T
X
t=1
max
 
0, Dt −
N
X
i=1
ut
i · P t
i
!
(3)
Pmint =
N
X
i=1
Mi
X
j=1
(
105(UTi −li,j),
if li,j < UTi
0,
otherwise
(4)
where Ctotal, Co, Pd, Pmint denote the total system operat-
ing cost, the unit operating cost, the penalty cost when demand
is not met, and the penalty cost for the minimum start/stop
time constraint, respectively; Ci(ut
i) is the cost function of the
generating unit i at time period t; ut
i is the start/stop state of
the unit (1 or 0); P t
i is the power generation of the unit i at
time period t; Dt is the demand load at time period t; UTi is
the minimum start/stop time of the unit i; and li,j is the time
period of the unit i at the first j length of continuous operation
or shutdown.
B. Restrictive Condition
1) Load Balancing Constraint: For each time period t the
total generation of the system must meet the power demand
for that time period.
N
X
i=1
P t
i = Dt, ∀t ∈{1, 2, · · ·T}
(5)
2) Unit Start-Stop Constraint: Each unit i can only be in
the on or off state at each time period t.
ut
i ∈{0, 1},
(
∀t ∈{1, 2, . . . , T}
∀i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N}
(6)
where ut
i = 1 indicates the on state and ut
i = 0 indicates
the off state.
3) Minimum Start-Stop Time Constraint: Each unit needs
to be maintained for a certain period of time after startup or
shutdown before switching states, and the constraints are as
follows for the minimum run time after startup Tmin _up and
the minimum shutdown time after shutdownTmin _down.
Minimum runtime after power-up:Indicates that the unit’s
continuous operation time after startup cannot be less than the
minimum startup time.
t+Tminu p,i
X
t∗=t
ut∗
i ⩾Tminu p,i
(7)
Minimum running time after shutdown: indicates that the
unit’s continuous downtime after shutdown cannot be less than
the minimum downtime.
t+Tmin _down,i
X
t∗=t
(1 −ut∗
i ) ⩾Tmin _down,i
(8)


--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2. FunSearch Evolution Process
4) Upper and Lower Limits of Unit Output Constraints:
P t
i,min ⩽P t
i ⩽P t
i,max
(9)
P t
i,min and P t
i,max indicate the upper and lower limits of
Unit i output during the time period t.
IV. THE EVOLUTION OF FUNSEARCH PROGRAM SEARCH
A. FunSearch Methods
FunSearch is a search method that combines a pre-trained
LLM and an evaluator designed to generate solutions creatively
while ensuring their reasonableness [8]. A UC decision scheme
is generated by calling the LLM on the content and initial
code in the prompt, and the evaluator reviews this output,
filtering and improving the unreasonable parts. The two work
in tandem through an iterative process: the LLM generates
scenarios and the evaluator evaluates and provides feedback,
leading to incremental improvements in the quality of the
scenarios.
B. Program Search Evolution
Program Search is a method that uses computer programs
to create and improve solutions. It combines search algorithms
with program generation methods and keeps exploring new
solutions to optimize problem solving.
In the FunSearch method, Program Search is used to continue
evolving the initial program in order to lower system operating
costs and solve the unit commitment problem. The evolution
of FunSearch is shown in Fig.??.
1) Input: In FunSearch, the input consists primarily of unit
information and an initial program. Unit information includes
unit power, load demand, minimum startup/shutdown times,
and cost profiles. A simple initial program is provided for
further evolution.
2) Prompt Engineering: By using the input information,
the packing program database, and the need for program
improvements, we feed these elements into the LLM to generate
new programs.
3) Invoke the LLM API: In FunSearch, the LLM serves as
the core. It uses the given prompts to generate new programs
that meet the required needs.
4) Program Evaluation: Using the evaluation program, we
assess the new programs generated by the LLM in terms of
their score (total unit operating cost), evaluation time, and
sampling time. Programs with a valid score are then placed in
the program database for packing, while those without a score
or exceeding the time limit are discarded.
5) Program Database: After evaluation, the newly devel-
oped heuristics are compiled into a library of programs awaiting
iterative comparisons with subsequently evaluated heuristic
implementations. The aggregated insights and performance
metrics are then systematically integrated into the generation
of hints, enabling the LLM to use this contextual knowledge
as a reference to synthesize new heuristics in subsequent
optimization cycles.
6) Output: After comparison, the main output is the new
program with the lowest UC operating cost score and the on/off
decisions for each unit at every time step. The FunSearch
solving process is shown in Fig.??.
Fig. 3. FunSearch Solving Process
V. CASE STUDY
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed FunSearch
method, we programmed in Python 3.9 and tested it on a
Chengde system that includes 10 units. This system divides
3


--- Page 4 ---
one day into 24 time periods, treating each hour as a separate
calculation interval. Using data for 10 units and 24 periods
provided in [9], we ran the algorithm 50 consecutive times and
performed a statistical analysis of the results. Finally, we chose
the best solution from these 20 runs as the final optimized
result.
To evaluate the effectiveness of FunSearch in determining the
initial solution for the UC problem, we compared the solution
of the UC problem with a Genetic Algorithm (GA) versus
using FunSearch. We mainly compared the sampling time, the
evaluation time, and the total operating cost of the system. The
comparison results are shown in Table I.
TABLE I
COMPARISON RESULTS ANALYSIS
Approach
Sampling Time
Evaluation Time
Operating Cost
(s)
(s)
(dollar(s)
GA
240
14.5
5236
FunSearch
6.6
3.9
4884
From Table I, we see that compared to the GA method,
FunSearch performs better in both sampling time and evaluation
time, and the optimal schedule it produces has lower operating
costs.
The visualization results and the on/off decisions of each
unit when solving the UC problem with the Genetic Algorithm
are shown in Fig.??.
Fig. 4. Visualization of the GA Solution for the UC Problem
The visualization results and the on/off decisions of each
unit when solving the UC problem with FunSearch are shown
in Fig.??. Based on the overall results of the visual comparison,
we can see that in most cases, FunSearch performs better than
the GA algorithm in generating an initial solution for the UC
problem, and in certain situations, it can successfully find the
optimal solution. This shows the strong potential of FunSearch
as an effective tool for solving the UC problem.
VI. CONCLUSION
This research explores the innovative application of Large
Language Models (LLM) in optimizing complex power system
Unit Commitment (UC) decisions. By proposing a Function
Fig. 5. Visualization of the FunSearch Solution for the UC Problem
Space Search (FunSearch) method that combines pre-trained
language models with a system evaluator, the study aims
to solve accuracy and robustness challenges in traditional
UC problem solving. The method leverages LLM’s seman-
tic understanding and program search techniques, iteratively
generating and precisely evaluating programs to intelligently
optimize power generator scheduling and effectively reduce
system operating costs. The simulation results show that,
compared to traditional genetic algorithms, FunSearch performs
exceptionally well in solving efficiency, computation time, and
cost control. Future research can further improve the model’s re-
liability and generalization capabilities by addressing potential
"hallucination" issues when LLM handles UC problems.
REFERENCES
[1] Xi Peng, Li Peng, and Liu Jinxin. “Power System Unit Commitment
Based on an Improved Binary Particle Swarm Algorithm.” Shaanxi
Electric Power, 2011, 39(08): 5–8+26.
[2] [2]Wu J, Luh P B, Chen Y, et al. Synergistic integration of machine
learning and mathematical optimization for unit commitment[J]. IEEE
Transactions on Power Systems, 2023, 39(1): 391-401.
[3] [3]Lotfi H, Nikkhah M H. Multi-Objective Profit-Based Unit Commitment
with Renewable Energy and Energy Storage Units Using a Modified
Optimization Method[J]. Sustainability, 2024, 16(4): 1708.
[4] Ketian C, Yuliang Q, Ziyun F, et al. Research on Unit Commitment
Optimization Based on Discrete Differential Evolution and Quadratic
Programming[C]//2021 6th International Conference on Power and
Renewable Energy (ICPRE). IEEE, 2021: 1303-1308.
[5] Ruan J, Liang G, Zhao H, et al. Applying Large Language Models to
Power Systems: Potential Security Threats[J]. IEEE Transactions on
Smart Grid, 2024.
[6] [6]Huang C, Li S, Liu R, et al. Large foundation models for power sys-
tems[C]//2024 IEEE Power Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM).
IEEE, 2024: 1-5.
[7] [7]Dong H, Zhu J, Chung C. Prompts of Large Language Model for
Commanding Power Grid Operation[J]. Artificial Intelligence, Social
Computing and Wearable Technologies, 2023, 113(113).
[8] Romera-Paredes B, Barekatain M, Novikov A, et al.Mathematical
discoveries from program search with large language models[J]. Nature,
2024, 625(7995): 468-475.
[9] Logenthiran T, Srinivasan D. Particle swarm optimization for unit
commitment problem[C]//2010 IEEE 11th International Conference on
Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems. IEEE, 2010: 642-647.
4
