--- Page 1 ---
FORGE: FOUNDATIONAL OPTIMIZATION REPRESEN-
TATIONS FROM GRAPH EMBEDDINGS
Zohair Shafi,1,2 and Serdar Kadıo˘glu2, 3
1Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University {shafi.z@northeastern.edu}
2AI Center of Excellence, Fidelity Investments
3Department of Computer Science, Brown University {serdark@cs.brown.edu}
ABSTRACT
Combinatorial optimization problems are ubiquitous in science and engineering.
Still, learning-based approaches to accelerate combinatorial optimization often
require solving a large number of difficult instances to collect training data, in-
curring significant computational cost. Existing learning-based methods require
training dedicated models for each problem distribution, for each downstream
task, severely limiting their scalability and generalization. We introduce FORGE:
Foundational Optimization Representations from Graph Embeddings, a frame-
work that pre-trains a vector-quantized graph autoencoder on a large, diverse col-
lection of mixed-integer programming (MIP) instances in an unsupervised man-
ner, without relying on optimization solvers or optimal solutions. Vector quantiza-
tion produces discrete code assignments that serve as a vocabulary for representing
optimization instances. We evaluate FORGE in both unsupervised and supervised
settings. In the unsupervised setting, FORGE embeddings effectively cluster un-
seen instances across problem domains and sizes. In the supervised setting, we
fine-tune FORGE embeddings and show that a single pre-trained model helps pre-
dicting both the integrality gap for cut-generation and variable hints for search
guidance across multiple problem and size distributions. In both tasks, we improve
the performance of a commercial optimization solver and outperform state-of-the-
art learning-based methods. Finally, we open-source our training code, pre-trained
FORGE weights, and embeddings for multiple MIP distributions to foster further
research in representation learning for optimization problems.
1
INTRODUCTION
Combinatorial Optimization (CO) problems are fundamental in science and engineering with appli-
cations spanning diverse domains, including logistics, energy systems, network design, and recom-
mendations (Gabriel Crainic et al., 2021; Miller et al., 2023; Kadıo˘glu et al., 2024). Traditionally,
CO problems have been solved using carefully designed meta-heuristics and sophisticated opti-
mization solvers. While effective, such classical methods demand significant domain expertise and
computational resources, especially as problem size and complexity grow.
Recent advances in Machine Learning (ML) have introduced promising alternatives for solving CO
problems. The approaches for ML-guided optimization fall mainly under two categories: 1) end-to-
end models that predict solutions or objective without relying on solvers or meta-heuristics, and 2)
hybrid methods which either 2a) replace computationally intensive solver components with learned
models, e.g., learning to predict strong branching heuristics (Gasse et al., 2019), or 2b) guide meta-
heuristics with learning from feedback (Cai et al., 2025b). For a comprehensive overview of ML-
guided CO, we refer readers to the survey by Bengio et al. (2021b).
Despite their potential, learning-based methods face practical limitations. A significant drawback
of learning approaches is their heavy dependency on offline training. Training is computationally
costly, depends on carefully curating training datasets with desired properties and distributions of the
underlying CO instances, and has limited generalization. Ironically, training depends on optimiza-
tion solvers, that they try to accelerate, to create labeled datasets. This defeats the purpose of im-
proving solving for challenge instances that optimization solvers cannot deal with today. Adapting
learning-based methods to new distributions and domains remains a challenge, and hence, design-
ing a foundational optimization representation in an unsupervised fashion applicable to multiple
optimization scenarios is a much-needed alternative. This is exactly what we study in this paper.
1
arXiv:2508.20330v4  [cs.LG]  24 Sep 2025


--- Page 2 ---
Our main motivation is grounded in the exceedingly successful foundational methods in other
modalities, such as text and image embeddings. This raises a natural question for optimization:
can we leverage the abundance of publicly available mixed-integer programming (MIP) instances
to develop a pre-trained, general-purpose foundational model for MIP representations that serves
multiple optimization tasks, across varying problem domains and sizes?
The growing success of ML-based approaches for optimization problems makes this direction im-
minent. For example, Zhou et al. (2023) propose a meta-learning framework that generalizes across
variants of vehicle routing problems of different sizes, but remains limited to routing. Similarly, Cai
et al. (2025a) introduce a multi-task framework for backdoor prediction and solver configuration,
however, the shared model is trained separately for each problem. Likewise, Li et al. (2025) propose
an LLM-based evolutionary framework to generate diverse MIP problems, but is supervised, and
requires a large number of pre-solved instances. While promising, the existing work either general-
izes across multiple tasks but remains problem-specific, or scales across different sizes and variants
but is task-specific, or remains dependent on solvers. We envision a foundational model that pro-
duces MIP embeddings generalizable across tasks, problems, and sizes, trained in an unsupervised
fashion, without relying on solving hard optimization problems.
When we look at Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV), foundational
models have emerged through unsupervised or self-supervised training, enabled by the abundance
of data. CO problems, while also benefiting from publicly available datasets, span highly hetero-
geneous problem types (e.g., Set Covering vs. Combinatorial Auction) and exhibit significant vari-
ability within each problem. Most ML-based approaches to CO rely on Graph Neural Networks
(GNNs), as proposed in (Gasse et al., 2019), which effectively capture local variable and constraint-
level information but struggle to encode meaningful global structure. This limitation, rooted in the
inherent locality bias of GNNs, is analyzed in detail by (Feng et al., 2025). As a result, while embed-
dings for other modalities such as text, image, and audio are now widespread, no general-purpose
instance-level embeddings exist for MIPs to date.
With this vision in mind, we propose FORGE: Foundational Optimization Representations from
Graph Embeddings. FORGE is a foundational model designed to generate MIP embeddings through
a pre-training framework that learns structural representations at the instance level in an unsuper-
vised manner, using a broad distribution of MIP instances without requiring access to their solutions.
To achieve this, we incorporate two key ideas; one inspired by NLP and the other by CV. From NLP,
we adopt the concept of a vocabulary to represent the latent space of optimization problems, en-
abling instance-level representations. From CV, we leverage vector quantization to preserve global
information, addressing the limitations of GNN-based approaches in prior CO work. By extending
these two crucial insights into the CO context, we make the following concrete contributions:
➪A Foundational Model for Optimization: We propose FORGE, a general-purpose foundational
model for generating MIP embeddings (§3). FORGE captures both local and global structures
critical to optimization. Unlike prior work, a single pre-trained FORGE model provides em-
beddings at multiple levels: instance-level representations (one vector per MIP instance), and
fine-grained variable and constraint embeddings.
➪Unsupervised Generalization: In the unsupervised setting, FORGE embeddings cluster previ-
ously unseen instances across diverse problem types with high accuracy (§4).
➪Supervised Adaptability: In the supervised setting, pre-trained FORGE embeddings can be fine-
tuned on diverse downstream tasks using minimal additional data and a low-cost labeling strategy
that avoids solving to optimality. We evaluate FORGE on two distinct tasks: estimating integrality
gap for cut generation (5.1) and predicting variables for search guidance (5.2). Notably, a single
pre-trained FORGE model is fine-tuned and applied across varied domains and problem sizes.
➪Solver Integration: To enhance traditional optimization solvers, we integrate FORGE predic-
tions into GUROBI (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2024), a state-of-the-art commercial solver, and
demonstrate consistently lower primal gap across both tasks and a wide range of problem do-
mains and sizes.
➪ML Augmentation: To enhance ML-guided optimization, we evaluate FORGE against (Li et al.,
2025) for integrality gap prediction, and PS-Gurobi (Han et al., 2023) for search guidance, im-
proving their performance on large sets of instances they were trained on, yet unseen by FORGE.
2


--- Page 3 ---
c1
c2
c3
c4
cn
v1
v2
v3
v4
vm
Input Bipartite 
Representation of 
a MIP Instance
Graph 
Neural 
Network
GNN Using Two 
GraphSAGE 
Layers
GNN Embedding for v1
GNN Embedding for v2
GNN Embedding for c1
GNN Embedding for c2
GNN Embedding for cn
GNN Embedding for vm
Hidden Layer 
Representation 
(
)
ℝd
Code-word for v1
Code-word for v2
Code-word for c1
Code-word for c2
Code-word for cn
Code-word for vm
Code Word 
Representation 
(
)
ℝd
Vector 
Quantization 
(  codes)
k
Node 
Feature 
Decoder
Edge 
Decoder
Decoder Layers
c1
c2
c3
c4
cn
v1
v2
v3
v4
vm
Reconstructed 
Instance
Code 
book
code1
codek
Vector Quantizer
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
Loss Function
(F)
ℒ= ℒRec
+ℒCodebook
+ℒCommitment
Figure 1: FORGE: Our approach for learning MIP embeddings without supervision. Starting with
the bipartite representation and its GNN embedding (A-B), FORGE uses a vector quantized graph
autoencoder (C-D) to reconstruct node features and edges (E). It is pretrained across a diverse set of
problems and sizes to learn generic MIP representations without dependency on optimal solutions.
2
BACKGROUND: MIXED-INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Let us start with a brief background on Mixed-Integer Programming (MIP) that formulates combi-
natorial optimization problems of the form: f(x) = min{cT x | Ax ≤b, x ∈Rn, xj ∈Z ∀j ∈I}
where f(x) is the objective function, and A ∈Rm×n, b ∈Rm, c ∈Rn, and the non-empty set
I ⊆1, ..., n indexes the integer variables. The Linear Programming (LP) relaxation of a MIP xlp is
obtained by relaxing integer variables to continuous variables, i.e., by replacing the integer constraint
xj ∈Z ∀j ∈I to xj ∈R ∀j ∈I. The LP relaxation is an essential part of the branch-and-bound
algorithm for providing bounds. The integrality gap measures how much worse the optimal solution
of the LP relaxation when compared to the optimal solution of the original MIP.
3
FORGE: UNSUPERVISED REPRESENTATION LEARNING FOR MIPS
MIP instances are typically represented as a bipartite graph between variables and constraints aug-
mented with node features (Gasse et al., 2019; Ferber et al., 2022; Yau et al., 2024; Chen et al.,
2023). This is then followed by training a GNN in a supervised fashion for a specific downstream
task on a certain problem class. For example, in Han et al. (2023), the GNN is used for predicting
variables for warm-starts trained on Set Cover (SC) and Independent Set (IS) problems. Similarly,
in Li et al. (2025), a GNN is used for predicting the integrality gap. Numerous variants follow this
template (see related works in §6 and Appendix A.9). Notice that, all of these methods require su-
pervision and do not yield a general-purpose MIP embeddings at the instance level. Taking this a
step further; our goal is to learn the structure of MIP instances in an unsupervised manner.
Figure 1 presents our overall architecture, which is composed of these main building blocks:
A) MIP-to-BP: Given a MIP instance, we start with its bipartite (BP) representation and node
features. Each node in this bipartite graph represents a constraint or a variable, with edges indicating
which variables are part of which constraints. Each node is associated with node features and each
edge is weighted by the coefficient of the variable in the constraint. Node features are typically
extracted from the internal branch-and-bound search tree when solving an instance. For example,
there are 18 input node features used in (Gasse et al., 2019). We do not attempt to solve or depend
on the solution of the instance. Instead, FORGE only uses the basic properties of the input instance.
For each constraint node, we introduce 4 features composed of its sense (i.e., >, < or =) and the
RHS value. For each variable node, we introduce 6 features composed of its type (integer, binary,
continuous), upper/lower bound, and the coefficient in the objective function. In total, for each node,
we obtain a vector of size 10, padded with zeros accordingly based on node type (Figure 1-A).
B) BP-to-GNN: This bipartite graph with 10-dimensional input node features is passed into a GNN,
akin to previous works, to generate embeddings for each constraint and variable node. More specifi-
cally, FORGE uses two GRAPHSAGE (Hamilton et al., 2017) layers that project each input node into
a d dimensional embedding space. As discussed earlier, while GNNs are good at capturing local
variable- and constraint-level information, they struggle to capture meaningful global information at
the instance level due to their inherent locality bias (Feng et al., 2025). Preserving global structure
is important in CO problems, especially to generalize across problem types (Figure 1-B).
3


--- Page 4 ---
C) Vector Quantized Codebook: To preserve global structure, we introduce a vector quantized
codebook with k discrete codes. These codes act as a ‘vocabulary’, akin to language models, across
MIP instances of various domains and difficulties, thereby preserving global structure. The design
follows the approaches developed in computer vision (Van Den Oord et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2022; Lee
et al., 2022) and the structure-aware graph tokenizer extension in Yang et al. (2024) (Figure 1-C).
D) GNN-to-CW: GNN embeddings are passed into a vector quantizer which consists of a codebook
with k codes. The codebook maps each variable and constraint node to a discrete code. Each code
is then mapped into a d dimensional codeword (CW), producing CW representations for constraints
and variables, aligned with the dimensionality of the hidden GNN layers (Figure 1-D).
E) CW-to-BP: We use the CW corresponding to each constraint and variable node to reconstruct
the original bipartite representation of the MIP instance. These codewords are passed into a linear
node feature decoder and a linear edge decoder to reconstruct the input bipartite graph. By doing so,
we obtain an unsupervised method that learns from the structure of MIP instances (Figure 1-E).
F) Loss Function: Our loss function minimizes the edge reconstruction loss, the node feature re-
construction loss, and losses related to the vector quantization. Concretely, the loss function is:
L = LRec + LCodebook + LCommitment where given N nodes, input node feature vi ∀i ∈N,
the adjacency matrix A and a matrix ˆX composed of reconstructed input features vi. Specifically,
reconstruction loss, LRec = (A −ˆX ˆ
XT )2 + 1
N
PN
i=1( ˆvi −vi)2, the codebook loss, LCodebook =
1
N
PN
i=1 ∥sg[hi] −cwi∥2
2, and commitment loss, LCommitment =
α
N
PN
i=1 ∥sg[cwi] −hi∥2
2. For
more details on the loss function, we refer to Appendix A.1.
Once FORGE is trained in this unsupervised manner across a corpus of MIP instances, we obtain:
Local Constraint & Variable Representations: Each node in the bipartite graph is assigned a dis-
crete code which is mapped to a codeword. These become the constraint and variable embeddings.
Global MIP Instance Representation: We leverage the distribution of codes at the instance level.
Each instance is represented with an embedding of vocabulary size, |codebook|, where each value
indicates the frequency of the corresponding code. See Figure 7 in Appendix A.2 for an example.
Next, we start with an initial investigation of the effectiveness of FORGE embeddings when cluster-
ing unseen instances across various problem domains (§4), and then explore how they can enhance
solving MIP instances via search guidance and cut-generation(§5).
4
INITIAL ANALYSIS OF FORGE EMBEDDINGS
Given the absence of methods in the literature that can provide general-purpose MIP embeddings
at the instance level, with the exception of earlier works that depend on creating hand-crafted fea-
tures to classify MIP instances (e.g., (Kadioglu et al., 2010)), we start our initial analysis with a
comparison of FORGE embeddings against two (ablation) baselines for clustering unseen instances.
We investigate both the accuracy (quantitative) as well as visual inspection (qualitative) of the clus-
tering. To do so, we train FORGE on a set of MIP instances from MIPLIB (Gleixner et al., 2021), and
test it on unseen instances from Distributional MIPLIB (D-MIPLIB) (Huang et al., 2024) and also
on strIPlib (Bastubbe et al., 2025) in Appendix A.3. While MIPLIB is a mixed dataset, D-MIPLIB
and strIPlib are categorized into different problem classes and difficulties. This serves as a ground
truth label when we treat each problem class as a cluster to evaluate our embeddings.
Training:
We use 600 instances from MIPLIB, sorted by size to ensure the resulting bipartite
graphs fit on GPU memory. For additional training data, we generate two instances from each
MIPLIB instance by randomly dropping 5% and 10% of constraints (note that dropping constraints
only relaxes the problem). In total, we obtain 1,800 MIP instances to train FORGE. We use two
GraphSage layers with d = 1024 dimensions and a codebook with k = 5000 codes, the size of the
vocabulary. We conduct an ablation study on the codebook size in Appendix A.4.
Testing:
We evaluate FORGE on clustering 1,050 instances from D-MIPLIB categorized into 21
domain-difficulty pairs. These include Set Cover (SC easy, medium, hard), Max. Independent Set
(MIS easy, medium), Min. Vertex Cover (MVC easy, medium, hard), Generalized Independent
Set (GIS easy, medium, hard, very-hard, very-hard2, ext-hard), Combinatorial Auction (CA very-
easy, easy, medium, very-hard, very-hard2), Item Placement (IP very-hard) and Maritime Inventory
Routing (MIRP medium), covering a broad spectrum of problem domain, sizes and difficulty levels.
4


--- Page 5 ---
(A) Mean Readout 
NMI: 0.087 
 0.035
±
(B) Label Propagation 
NMI: 0.790 
 0.025
±
(C) FORGE Embedding 
NMI: 0.843 
 0.003
±
Figure 2: Visualization of MIP embeddings and NMIs from (a) the mean readout in FORGE, (b) two-
hop label propagation of input node features, and (c) the distribution of discrete codes of FORGE.
MIP Embeddings:
These 1,050 unseen instances are passed into the pre-trained FORGE model
to generate one embedding per MIP instance. For comparison, we consider two alternatives. As a
baseline, we use the Mean Readout of the GNN embeddings within the trained FORGE model. This
generates the embedding of an instance by averaging all node features from the GNN (Fig.1-B).
This behaves as an ablation for FORGE without vector quantization. Given the weakness of GNN
embeddings in capturing global structure, we expect this to perform poorly. Alternatively, starting
from the 10-dimensional static node features of the bipartite graph (Fig. 1-A), we run two-hop label
propagation and average the resulting node vectors (Zhu & Ghahramani, 2002). Note that hand-
crafted, static instance descriptors (e.g., (Kadioglu et al., 2010)) cannot be used, since every instance
within the same category has identical statistics (# of vars, constraints, etc.) and is non-informative.
Clustering Visualization: Figure 2 visualizes these embeddings vectors, projected into two dimen-
sions using PaCMAP (Wang et al., 2021). Each dot represents an instance colored by its category.
As expected, the Mean Readout method loses the global structure leading to arbitrary clusters. The
Label Propagation performs much better capturing the structure, while some problems and sizes are
mixed. FORGE embeddings performs the best where each problem domain are separated cleanly.
Moreover, within each domain, the difference in problem difficulty is also observed from the easy
to hard categories. Recall that FORGE is not trained on these instances; but only on MIPLIB.
Clustering Accuracy: For quantitative evaluation, we run k-means with 21 clusters, expecting one
cluster for each category. We calculate the normalized mutual information score (NMI) between
the ground truth categories and clusters, averaged over 10 runs of k-means, for each method. If the
predicted clusters are identical to the original categories, the NMI score is 1.0, and 0.0 otherwise.
As qualitatively observed from the 2D visualization, the Mean Readout performs poorly with an
NMI score of 0.087. This is only slightly better than random cluster predictions with an NMI
score of 1/21 = 0.047. This is likely due to over-smoothing of averaging dense GNN embedding
vectors across a large number of constraints and variables. In contrast, Label Propagation performs
better with an NMI score of 0.790. This method operates directly on the sparse input features of
the bipartite graph, hence avoiding the over-smoothing problem encountered in GNNs. The best
performance is achieved by FORGE with an NMI score of 0.843. Interestingly, the mean readout
embeddings, which perform very poorly, is based on the the same pre-trained GNN backbone in
FORGE. By utilizing the distribution of the discrete codes of constraints and variables, FORGE
circumvents the over-smoothing issue and captures the global structure of unseen MIP instances. As
a proof of concept, we apply vector arithmetic on these MIP embeddings, drawing inspiration from
language models and the well-known King - Man + Woman ≈Queen example (Ethayarajh et al.,
2018), to evaluate Vertex Cover - Cover + Packing ≈Independent Set (see Appendix A.5).
5
EXPERIMENTS
So far, we only demonstrate that FORGE embeddings reliably cluster unseen instances from diverse
problem classes. Our ultimate goal is to improve MIP solving, hence we now shift to supervised
evaluations. We design the next set of experiments on downstream tasks that (1) provide utility
to enhance solving MIPs, (2) commonly applied in the literature to enable a fair comparison, (3)
radically different from each other, whereby we use the same FORGE model to validate its general
applicability across tasks, problems, and sizes, and (4) agnostic to the underlying MIP solver, i.e.,
we do not depend on internal access to specific solver procedures within the branch-and-bound tree.
5


--- Page 6 ---
c1
c2
c3
c4
cn
v1
v2
v3
v4
vm
Input Bipartite 
Representation of 
a MIP Instance
Code-word for v1
Code-word for v2
Code-word for c1
Code-word for c2
Code-word for cn
Code-word for vm
 Mean Read-out
Integrality Gap  
Prediction Head
Search Guidance 
Prediction Head
Sigmoid
Predicted 
Integrality Gap
Search Guidance 
Probabilities
Codewords 
generated by 
Fine Tuning 
Heads
Predictions 
c1
c2
c3
c4
cn
v1
v2
v3
v4
vm
Input Bipartite 
Representation of 
a MIP Instance
# of Solutions 
each Variable has 
Appeared In
0
2
2
5
5
Make 
Similar
Make 
Similar
Make 
Dissimilar
Positive
Anchor
Negative
(A) Supervised Fine Tuning
(B) Distribution of Integrality Gaps
(C) Triplet Generation
Figure 3: (A) Supervised fine-tuning flow for FORGE. (B) Distribution of integrality gap across
problem types. (C) Triplet generation for search guidance by grouping positive/negative variables.
We therefore study two fundamentally different downstream tasks: predicting the integrality gap of a
given MIP instance, as also studied in (Li et al., 2025), and predicting variables for search guidance,
as also studied in (Han et al., 2023). Despite being unrelated, both tasks serve as primal heuristics
to speed-up MIP solving by obtaining better solutions faster. The integrality gap is used to generate
a pseudo-cut added to the original problem formulation to tighten its bound at the beginning of the
search, whereas variable guidance is used to provide hints to the solver during search.
The critical aspect of these experiments is that we use the same pre-trained FORGE model to obtain
general-purpose MIP embeddings that are then fine-tuned on a small number of cheaply labeled data
to learn prediction heads for completely different tasks, as shown in Figure 3-A. An analogy from
NLP is to generate pre-trained word embeddings using a foundational model, and then to fine-tune
prediction heads for entity extraction in a specific domain, e.g., finance, using a small set of labels.
Our goal is to revive the success of foundational models from NLP and CV in the context of CO.
Training the Foundational FORGE Model: The setup for training FORGE is identical to the setting
in the previous clustering analysis, except that we now train on both 1,800 MIPLIB instances as well
as the 1,050 D-MIPLIB instances. In total, FORGE is trained on a corpus of 2,850 MIP instances
a model with 3.25 million parameters. We again use two GraphSage layers with d = 1, 024 and
k = 5000. Details of our experimental setup, parameters, and machines are in Appendix A.6.
5.1
TASK - I: PREDICTING THE INTEGRALITY GAP FOR PSEUDO-CUT GENERATION
Integrality Gap Prediction: As briefly mentioned in (§ 2), the integrality gap measures the ratio
between the optimal solution of the LP relaxation and the optimal solution of the original integer
program. Intuitively, this gap quantifies the quality of the approximation offered by the LP relax-
ation. A smaller gap means the LP relaxation is a good approximation and is close to the value of
the best integral solution. Here, we are interested in predicting the integrality gap of a given MIP
instance, without solving for its optimal integral solution value, as also studied in (Li et al., 2025).
Pseudo-Cut Generation: If we can predict the integrality gap, then we can generate a pseudo-
cut and add it as an additional constraint to the model to immediately bound the optimal objective
value from the root node LP relaxation. Note that, this cut is not guaranteed to be a valid cut at all
times, hence it is a pseudo-cut. If the integrality gap prediction is incorrect, it risks over (or under)
estimating the best objective value. This makes integrality gap prediction a challenging problem.
Training Instances: We do not expect this task to generalize between problem classes and/or sets
of varying complexities of a given problem class. For instance, there is no reason for an LP gap
of 70% to be the same between easy vs. hard SC instances. Figure 3-B shows the distribution of
integrality gap across different categories, and as expected, the integrality gap can be anywhere from
5% to 95% with wide distributions in between. As such, there is no magic constant that one could
use heuristically at all times, which makes integrality gap prediction a deliberate learning task. For
training, we only consider CA (very-easy, easy, medium), SC (easy, medium, hard), and GIS (easy,
medium, hard) with 50 instances for each. In total, we obtain 450 training instances. Note that this
is a considerably smaller training set than initially used for pre-training FORGE embeddings.
Label Collection: To generate training labels, each training instance is solved using GUROBI with
120s time limit. Note that, this does not require solving instances to optimality, which can be costly.
The numeric label is defined as the ratio between the integer solution at the time-out and the the LP
6


--- Page 7 ---
(A) Combinatorial Auction 
Primal Gap Gain: 76.77%   
(B) Set Cover 
Primal Gap Gain: 29.59%
(C) Generalized Ind. Set 
Primal Gap Gain: 84.52%
(D) Minimum Vertex Cover 
Primal Gap Gain: 32.38%
Figure 4: Gurobi vs. Gurobi + FORGE Pseudo-Cuts. Each subplot shows the primal gap (the lower,
the better) averaged across 50 very-hard instances in each problem.
relaxation. As mentioned, overestimating the integrality gap (for minimization problems) can lead
to suboptimal solutions, as the solver may terminate prematurely. In contrast, underestimating the
gap is generally acceptable, as it still facilitates faster solve times without compromising solution
quality. This asymmetry is accounted for by adopting a conservative labeling strategy by setting
a timeout when collecting labels. This often results in underestimating the true integrality gap,
especially for hard instances. By doing so, we reduce the risk of the model overestimating the gap,
thereby improving the reliability of the predicted cut.
Supervised Fine-Tuning: Given this small labeled data, a dense prediction head is added to the
pre-trained FORGE model, as shown in Figure 3-A, that takes codewords assigned to each node as
input and outputs a real number using mean readout across all nodes. As a regression task, this is
trained with the mean absolute error loss in an end-to-end manner.
Test Instances & Setup: We use the fine-tuned FORGE to predict the integrality gap of 50 very-hard
instances each of CA, SC, GIS, and MVC. Our fine-tuning does not include ‘very hard’ category, and
MVC is entirely unseen in fine-tuning. Given the prediction, a pseudo-cut is generated by adjusting
the initial LP relaxation objective and incorporating into the original formulation as an additional
constraint. This enforces the integral objective to exceed (or fall below) the generated pseudo-cut.
Prediction Accuracy: We measure the deviation in mean absolute error between the known inte-
grality gap and the gap predicted by FORGE. On these very-hard test instances, FORGE achieves a
deviation of 15.42%, 13.55%, 12.03% and 19.077% for CA, SC, GIS, and MVC, respectively. As an
ablation, training for this task from scratch, and not using pre-trained FORGE as starting weights
worsens the error by ∼33% on average across all categories. This highlights the importance of
unsupervised pre-training to capture transferable structural patterns across diverse MIP instances.
Comparison with Commercial MIP Solver: We compare the commercial GUROBI solver on these
very-hard instances with and without our predicted pseudo-cut. Figure 4 shows the primal gap
averaged over 50 instances of each problem with 3600s time limit. Without exception, across all
problem types, the use of pseudo-cuts generated by FORGE consistently results in better primal gaps.
The solver improves the gap early in the search, and our pseudo-cuts, make these gains immediately
more pronounced. The performance gains in the primal gap reach up to 85%. Recall that
fine-tuning for this task only needed 50 instances per problem type, MVC was not included in the
fine-tuning, and fine-tuning had no dependency on optimal solutions to generate the labeled data.
Comparison with SOTA ML: To further evaluate generalization across problem types and sizes,
we compare against the setup in Li et al. (2025), where a GNN is trained on 38,256 instances from
643 generated problem types and tested on 11,584 instances from 157 problem types. FORGE is
used as is, without any additional training, and tested on 17,500 previously unseen instances from
400 generated problem types. FORGE achieves a mean deviation of 18.63% in integrality gap
prediction, improving over the 20.14% deviation reported in (Li et al., 2025).
5.2
TASK - II: GUIDING THE SEARCH FOR OPTIMAL SOLUTIONS
The previous task evaluates the global FORGE representations at the instance level while our next
task evaluates the local FORGE representations, specifically the variable embeddings for search
guidance. The idea is to fine-tune FORGE, on a smaller dataset with a labeling strategy that does not
depend on solving to optimality, and provide variable hints to the GUROBI solver.
Training & Labeling: We collect 100 instances from CA (easy, medium), SC (easy, medium, hard)
and GIS (easy, medium) for a total of 700 training instances. Each instance is solved using Gurobi
to find a pool of five feasible solutions within five minutes. Optimality is not required for labeling.
7


--- Page 8 ---
(A) Combinatorial Auction 
Primal Gap Gain: 31.16%   
(B) Set Cover 
Primal Gap Gain: 39.17%
(C) Generalized Ind. Set 
Primal Gap Gain: 31.62%
(D) Minimum Vertex Cover 
Primal Gap Gain: 48.75%
Figure 5: Gurobi vs. Gurobi + FORGE Search Guidance. Each subplot shows the primal gap (the
lower, the better) averaged across 50 medium instances in each problem.
Supervised Fine-Tuning: Given five feasible solutions, variables that never appear in any solution
is marked as ‘negative’ and variables that appear in a solution at least once is marked as ‘positive’.
FORGE is fine-tuned using a combination of binary cross-entropy (BCE) and triplet loss. For BCE,
we add a dense prediction head to pre-trained FORGE as in integrality gap prediction (Figure 3-A).
In parallel, we use the standard triplet loss (Schroff et al., 2015), where variables that appear in the
same number of solutions are treated as ‘positive’ and ‘anchor’ pairs (Figure 3-C). A key challenge
of the triplet loss is to identify good negatives, as trivial negatives do not help learning. Our pre-
trained FORGE helps circumvent this issue: for every positive/anchor pairs of variables, we select
the negative variable that is closest to the anchor variable in the unsupervised FORGE embedding
space. We fine-tune FORGE to minimize the sum of the BCE and triplet losses, weighted equally.
One loss minimizes the binary labeling error and the other loss minimizes the distance between the
embeddings of the ‘anchor’ and ‘positive’ variables while ensuring the ‘negative’ variable is at least
‘margin’ distance away from the ‘anchor’ variables. Details on the triplet loss are in Appendix A.7.
Test Instances & Setup: We test on 50 medium instances from each of CA, SC, GIS, and MVC.
Again, MVC is unseen in fine-tuning. We use our fine-tuned FORGE to predict the likelihood of
variables to appear in the solution. For search guidance to the solver, we begin with a feasible
solution found by Gurobi within 1s. Variables appearing in this solution serve as anchors. The
neighbors within a fixed radius of the positive anchors in the embedding space, that are also in the
top-decile of the FORGE prediction head, are hinted to the solver for inclusion. Conversely, the
neighbors of the negative anchors that are in the bottom-decile of the FORGE predictions are hinted
to the solver for exclusion. This strategy exploits our training objective that optimizes for variable
prediction using BCE loss and clustering of positive and negative variables using triplet loss.
Comparison with the Commercial MIP Solver: We compare the performance of GUROBI solver
on these instances with and without our search guidance. Figure 5 shows primal gaps averaged over
50 instances for each problem under a 3600s time limit. As in the previous experiments, the com-
mercial solver, when powered by the search guidance from FORGE, achieves consistently better
primal gaps (up to 48% improvements) and converges to optimal solutions significantly faster
(up to 35% speed-ups). In short, FORGE makes Gurobi faster and better on all tested problems.
Comparison with SOTA ML: As a final experiment, we test the ability of FORGE to augment not
only a MIP solver but also other ML-methods. For this, we augment the SOTA ML method, PS-
Gurobi (Han et al., 2023), which also studies search guidance for GUROBI, and already demonstrates
strong performance against previous learning-based approaches such as (Nair et al., 2020). We use
our pre-trained FORGE embeddings as-is and concatenate variable and node embeddings of PS-
Gurobi with our unsupervised embeddings (after PCA to reduce to 64 dimensions to fit into to the
architecture of PS-Gurobi).
Figure 6: PS-Gurobi vs. PS-Gurobi + FORGE Search Guid-
ance. Each subplot shows primal gap (the lower, the better)
averaged across 50 medium instances in each problem.
We evalaute on the common subset
of problems, CA and GIS, used in
PS-Gurobi experiments.
As shown
in Figure 6, augmenting PS-Gurobi
with our FORGE embeddings yields
significant improvements: over 40%
reduction in primal gap on aver-
age for CA instances, and over 50%
reduction on average for GIS in-
stances. Additional randomized con-
trol ablations are provided in Ap-
pendix A.8.
8


--- Page 9 ---
6
RELATED WORK
We cover immediately relevant work here and elaborate further in Appendix A.9. In terms of un-
supervised learning, our model is closest to unsupervised approaches studied in (Sanokowski et al.,
2024; Karalias & Loukas, 2020; Bu et al., 2024). However, these works aim to reformulate the
discrete, combinatorial objective of specific problems into a differentiable one to learn a solution
using gradient descent in an end-to-end manner. FORGE is different as it learns the structure of
the instance in an unsupervised manner. This gives us the ability to represent any MIP instance
off-the-shelf with a single pre-trained model. Other successful ML-based optimization methods
show that generalization is possible, e.g., Cai et al. (2025a) introduce multi-task learning using a
shared model for predicting both backdoors and solver configuration, albeit trained per problem
type. Problem-specific works such as (Zhou et al., 2023) shows generalizes across variants of ve-
hicle routing and Shafi et al. (2025) for variants of set covering problems. The existing work either
generalizes across multiple tasks but remains specific to one problem, or scales to different sizes and
problem variants but is specific to one task, or remains supervised. FORGE is the first to generate
MIP embeddings that generalize across multiple tasks, different problems and sizes, and trained in
an unsupervised fashion, without dependency on solutions. Regarding downstream optimization
tasks, (Li et al., 2025) addresses integrality gap prediction and (Han et al., 2023) focuses on search
guidance, both of which we evaluate and compare against. In both cases, with minimal additional
training and cheap labeling strategy, FORGE consistently matches and improves their performance.
There exists other important downstream tasks, such as predicting solver parameters (Hosny & Reda,
2024), learning to branch (Khalil et al., 2016; Liberto et al., 2016), node selection (He et al., 2014a),
and cut selection (Paulus et al., 2022). Beyond MIPs, meta-heuristics (Cai et al., 2025b), constraint
satisfaction (T¨onshoff et al., 2023), and SAT (Duan et al., 2022) show benefits from learning-based
approaches. While most of these works, including ours, is based on GNN representations (Gasse
et al., 2019), Drakulic et al. (2024) avoids GNNs, and instead, uses mixed attention.
7
LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
We present FORGE, a novel unsupervised framework for learning structural representations of opti-
mization problems at the instance, variable, and constraint levels, without requiring access to solvers
or ground-truth solutions. Inspired by NLP and CV, FORGE introduces a discrete vocabulary of op-
timization codes employing vector quantization to capture global structure.
A single pre-trained FORGE model clusters unseen instances from diverse benchmarks and gen-
eralizes across two distinct optimization tasks on diverse problem domains with varying difficulty
levels. These embeddings integrate seamlessly into both a commercial solver and state-of-the-art
ML pipelines, consistently yielding measurable performance improvements. Our study is subject to
several limitations and opens the door for promising directions for future research:
• Scale: FORGE is compact in size (3.25M parameters trained on ∼2.8 instances), and is much
smaller compared to large-scale models in other domains. In principle, it is feasible to train
our framework on all publicly available and synthetically generated MIP instances.
• Interpretability: The semantics of the learned optimization vocabulary remain completely
unexplored. Our preliminary evidence suggests that certain codes capture local structure, such
as cliques of variables and constraints, enabling generalization to larger problems.
• Solver Integration: Current experiments are one-shot, using embeddings to generate a
pseudo-cut or guide the solver once. Extending this to operate throughout the branch-and-
bound tree could enable tighter integration with the solving process for further improvements.
• Downstream Tasks: Many other important optimization tasks remain unexplored. FORGE
embeddings can be leveraged for warm-starts, variable selection, node selection, cut selection,
solver configuration, and portfolio construction, among others.
• Generalization: The underlying principles of FORGE may extend beyond optimization to con-
straint satisfaction problems as well as from complete branch-and-bound search to incomplete
search methods and meta-heuristics.
To enable these future directions and support reproducible research, we open-source our datasets,
training pipelines, pre-trained and fine-tuned FORGE models, readily available MIP embeddings
across problem distributions from MIPLIB, D-MIPLIB, and strIPlib, and release FORGE-OS
optimization-as-a-service for on-demand retrieval and generation of optimization embeddings.
9


--- Page 10 ---
REFERENCES
Michael Bastubbe, Alexander Helber, Lukas Kirchhart, Marco L¨ubbecke, Niklas Rieken, and Jonas
Witt. strIPlib: Structured Integer Programming Library. Unpublished, 2025. URL https:
//striplib.or.rwth-aachen.de.
Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost. Machine learning for combinatorial optimiza-
tion: A methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2):405–
421, 2021a. ISSN 0377-2217. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2020.07.063. URL https:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221720306895.
Yoshua Bengio, Andrea Lodi, and Antoine Prouvost.
Machine learning for combinatorial opti-
mization: a methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of Operational Research, 290(2):
405–421, 2021b.
Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Nayeli Gast Zepeda, Andr´e Hottung, Niels Wouda, Leon Lan, Kevin
Tierney, and Jinkyoo Park. Routefinder: Towards foundation models for vehicle routing problems.
In ICML 2024 Workshop on Foundation Models in the Wild, 2024.
Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Nayeli Gast Zepeda, Andr´e Hottung, Niels Wouda, Leon Lan, Juny-
oung Park, Kevin Tierney, and Jinkyoo Park. Routefinder: Towards foundation models for vehicle
routing problems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.15007.
L´eo Boisvert, H´el`ene Verhaeghe, and Quentin Cappart. Towards a generic representation of combi-
natorial problems for learning-based approaches. In International Conference on the Integration
of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research, pp. 99–108, 2024.
Fanchen Bu, Hyeonsoo Jo, Soo Yong Lee, Sungsoo Ahn, and Kijung Shin. Tackling prevalent con-
ditions in unsupervised combinatorial optimization: Cardinality, minimum, covering, and more.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 4696–4729, 2024.
Junyang Cai, Taoan Huang, and Bistra Dilkina. Learning backdoors for mixed integer linear pro-
grams with contrastive learning. In European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 392,
pp. 2418–2425, 2024a.
Junyang Cai, Serdar Kadioglu, and Bistra Dilkina.
Balans: Multi-armed bandits-based adap-
tive large neighborhood search for mixed-integer programming problem.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.14382, 2024b.
Junyang Cai, Taoan Huang, and Bistra Dilkina. Multi-task representation learning for mixed inte-
ger linear programming. In Guido Tack (ed.), Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial
Intelligence, and Operations Research, pp. 134–151, Cham, 2025a. Springer Nature Switzerland.
ISBN 978-3-031-95973-8.
Junyang Cai, Serdar Kadioglu, and Bistra Dilkina. Balans: Multi-armed bandits-based adaptive
large neighborhood search for mixed-integer programming problem. In Proceedings of the Thirty-
Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-25. International Joint Con-
ferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 2025b.
Furkan Cant¨urk, Taha Varol, Reyhan Aydo˘gan, and Okan ¨Orsan ¨Ozener. Scalable primal heuristics
using graph neural networks for combinatorial optimization. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 80:327–376, 2024.
Ziang Chen, Jialin Liu, Xinshang Wang, and Wotao Yin. On representing linear programs by graph
neural networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Ziang Chen, Jialin Liu, Xiaohan Chen, Wang Wang, and Wotao Yin.
Rethinking the capacity
of graph neural networks for branching strategy. Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
123991–124024, 2024.
Darko Drakulic, Sofia Michel, and Jean-Marc Andreoli. Goal: A generalist combinatorial optimiza-
tion agent learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15079, 2024.
10


--- Page 11 ---
Haonan Duan, Pashootan Vaezipoor, Max B Paulus, Yangjun Ruan, and Chris Maddison. Aug-
ment with care: Contrastive learning for combinatorial problems. In International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 5627–5642, 2022.
Kawin Ethayarajh, David Duvenaud, and Graeme Hirst. Towards understanding linear word analo-
gies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04882, 2018.
Shengyu Feng, Weiwei Sun, Shanda Li, Ameet Talwalkar, and Yiming Yang. A comprehensive
evaluation of contemporary ml-based solvers for combinatorial optimization.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.16952, 2025.
Aaron M. Ferber, Jialin Song, Bistra Dilkina, and Yisong Yue. Learning pseudo-backdoors for
mixed integer programs. In Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and
Operations Research, volume 13292, pp. 91–102, 2022.
Teodor Gabriel Crainic, Michel Gendreau, and Bernard Gendron. Network Design with Applications
to Transportation and Logistics. Springer, 2021.
Maxime Gasse, Didier Ch´etelat, Nicola Ferroni, Laurent Charlin, and Andrea Lodi. Exact combi-
natorial optimization with graph convolutional neural networks. Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32:15554–15566, 2019.
Nayeli Gast Zepeda, Andr´e Hottung, and Kevin Tierney. Deep learning in search heuristics. In
Handbook of Heuristics, pp. 1–18. Springer, 2025.
Ambros Gleixner, Gregor Hendel, Gerald Gamrath, Tobias Achterberg, Michael Bastubbe, Timo
Berthold, Philipp M. Christophel, Kati Jarck, Thorsten Koch, Jeff Linderoth, Marco L¨ubbecke,
Hans D. Mittelmann, Derya Ozyurt, Ted K. Ralphs, Domenico Salvagnin, and Yuji Shinano.
MIPLIB 2017: Data-Driven Compilation of the 6th Mixed-Integer Programming Library. Math-
ematical Programming Computation, 2021.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual, 2024. URL https://www.
gurobi.com.
William L. Hamilton, Zhitao Ying, and Jure Leskovec. Inductive representation learning on large
graphs. In Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 1024–1034, 2017.
Qingyu Han, Linxin Yang, Qian Chen, Xiang Zhou, Dong Zhang, Akang Wang, Ruoyu Sun, and Xi-
aodong Luo. A gnn-guided predict-and-search framework for mixed-integer linear programming.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
He He, Hal Daume III, and Jason M Eisner.
Learning to search in branch and bound
algorithms.
In Z. Ghahramani, M. Welling, C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, and K.Q. Wein-
berger (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 27. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2014a. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2014/file/
757f843a169cc678064d9530d12a1881-Paper.pdf.
He He, Hal Daume III, and Jason M Eisner. Learning to search in branch and bound algorithms.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 27, 2014b.
Abdelrahman Hosny and Sherief Reda. Automatic milp solver configuration by learning problem
similarities. Annals of Operations Research, 339(1):909–936, 2024.
Andr´e Hottung and Kevin Tierney. Neural large neighborhood search for routing problems. Artificial
Intelligence, 313:103786, 2022.
Taoan Huang, Aaron M. Ferber, Yuandong Tian, Bistra Dilkina, and Benoit Steiner. Searching large
neighborhoods for integer linear programs with contrastive learning. In International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 202, pp. 13869–13890, 2023.
Weimin Huang, Taoan Huang, Aaron M Ferber, and Bistra Dilkina. Distributional miplib: a multi-
domain library for advancing ml-guided milp methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06954, 2024.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Serdar Kadioglu, Yuri Malitsky, Meinolf Sellmann, and Kevin Tierney. ISAC - instance-specific
algorithm configuration. In Helder Coelho, Rudi Studer, and Michael J. Wooldridge (eds.), ECAI
2010 - 19th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Lisbon, Portugal, August 16-20,
2010, Proceedings, volume 215 of Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, pp. 751–
756. IOS Press, 2010. doi: 10.3233/978-1-60750-606-5-751. URL https://doi.org/10.
3233/978-1-60750-606-5-751.
Serdar Kadioglu, Yuri Malitsky, Ashish Sabharwal, Horst Samulowitz, and Meinolf Sellmann.
Algorithm selection and scheduling.
In Jimmy Ho-Man Lee (ed.), Principles and Practice
of Constraint Programming - CP 2011 - 17th International Conference, CP 2011, Perugia,
Italy, September 12-16, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6876 of Lecture Notes in Computer Sci-
ence, pp. 454–469. Springer, 2011a.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-23786-7\ 35.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23786-7_35.
Serdar Kadioglu, Eoin O’Mahony, Philippe Refalo, and Meinolf Sellmann. Incorporating variance
in impact-based search. In International Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint
Programming, pp. 470–477. Springer, 2011b.
Serdar Kadioglu, Yuri Malitsky, and Meinolf Sellmann. Non-model-based search guidance for set
partitioning problems. In J¨org Hoffmann and Bart Selman (eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, July 22-26, 2012, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. AAAI
Press, 2012. URL http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AAAI/AAAI12/paper/
view/5082.
Serdar Kadioglu, Meinolf Sellmann, and Markus Wagner. Learning a reactive restart strategy to
improve stochastic search. In International conference on learning and intelligent optimization,
pp. 109–123. Springer, 2017.
Serdar Kadıo˘glu, Bernard Kleynhans, and Xin Wang. Integrating optimized item selection with
active learning for continuous exploration in recommender systems. Annals of Mathematics and
Artificial Intelligence, 92(6):1585–1607, 2024.
Nikolaos Karalias and Andreas Loukas. Erdos goes neural: an unsupervised learning framework for
combinatorial optimization on graphs. Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6659–6672,
2020.
Robin Kemminer, Jannick Lange, Jens Peter Kempkes, Kevin Tierney, and Dimitri Weiß. Configur-
ing mixed-integer programming solvers for large-scale instances. In Operations Research Forum,
volume 5 Issue 2, pp. 48. Springer, 2024.
Elias Khalil, Pierre Le Bodic, Le Song, George Nemhauser, and Bistra Dilkina. Learning to branch
in mixed integer programming. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 30 Issue 1, 2016.
Elias B. Khalil, Bistra Dilkina, George L. Nemhauser, Shabbir Ahmed, and Yufen Shao. Learning
to run heuristics in tree search. In International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp.
659–666, 2017.
Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin Han. Autoregressive image
generation using residual quantization. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pp. 11513–11522, 2022.
Sirui Li, Janardhan Kulkarni, Ishai Menache, Cathy Wu, and Beibin Li. Towards foundation models
for mixed integer linear programming. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025.
Giovanni M. Di Liberto, Serdar Kadioglu, Kevin Leo, and Yuri Malitsky. DASH: dynamic approach
for switching heuristics. Eur. J. Oper. Res., 248(3):943–953, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.ejor.2015.08.
018. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2015.08.018.
Andrea Lodi and Giulia Zarpellon. On learning and branching: a survey. Top, 25(2):207–236, 2017.
12


--- Page 13 ---
Benjamin A Miller, Zohair Shafi, Wheeler Ruml, Yevgeniy Vorobeychik, Tina Eliassi-Rad, and Scott
Alfeld. Attacking shortest paths by cutting edges. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery
from Data, 18(2):1–42, 2023.
Vinod Nair, Sergey Bartunov, Felix Gimeno, Ingrid Von Glehn, Pawel Lichocki, Ivan Lobov, Bren-
dan O’Donoghue, Nicolas Sonnerat, Christian Tjandraatmadja, Pengming Wang, et al. Solving
mixed integer programs using neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.13349, 2020.
Max B Paulus, Giulia Zarpellon, Andreas Krause, Laurent Charlin, and Chris Maddison. Learning to
cut by looking ahead: Cutting plane selection via imitation learning. In International conference
on machine learning, pp. 17584–17600. PMLR, 2022.
Sebastian Sanokowski, Sepp Hochreiter, and Sebastian Lehner. A diffusion model framework for
unsupervised neural combinatorial optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pp. 43346–43367, 2024.
Elias Schede, Moritz Seiler, Kevin Tierney, and Heike Trautmann. Deep reinforcement learning
for instance-specific algorithm configuration. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary
Computation Conference, pp. 1190–1198, 2025.
Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A unified embedding for face
recognition and clustering. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
815–823, 2015.
Zohair Shafi, Benjamin A Miller, Tina Eliassi-Rad, and Rajmonda S Caceres. Accelerated discovery
of set cover solutions via graph neural networks. In International Conference on the Integration
of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research, pp. 191–208, 2025.
Jialin Song, Yisong Yue, Bistra Dilkina, et al. A general large neighborhood search framework for
solving integer linear programs. Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:20012–20023, 2020.
Emily Strong, Bernard Kleynhans, and Serdar Kadioglu.
Mabwiser: A parallelizable contex-
tual multi-armed bandit library for python.
In 31st IEEE International Conference on Tools
with Artificial Intelligence, ICTAI 2019, Portland, OR, USA, November 4-6, 2019, pp. 909–914.
IEEE, 2019. doi: 10.1109/ICTAI.2019.00129. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/ICTAI.
2019.00129.
Emily Strong, Bernard Kleynhans, and Serdar Kadioglu.
MABWiser: parallelizable contextual
multi-armed bandits. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Tools, 30(4):2150021:1–2150021:19, 2021. doi: 10.
1142/S0218213021500214. URL https://doi.org/10.1142/S0218213021500214.
Yunhao Tang, Shipra Agrawal, and Yuri Faenza. Reinforcement learning for integer programming:
Learning to cut. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 9367–9376. PMLR, 2020.
Jan T¨onshoff, Berke Kisin, Jakob Lindner, and Martin Grohe. One model, any CSP: graph neural
networks as fast global search heuristics for constraint satisfaction. In International Joint Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 4280–4288, 2023.
Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al. Neural discrete representation learning. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 30, 2017.
Yingfan Wang, Haiyang Huang, Cynthia Rudin, and Yaron Shaposhnik. Understanding how dimen-
sion reduction tools work: an empirical approach to deciphering t-sne, umap, trimap, and pacmap
for data visualization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22(201):1–73, 2021.
Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Learning large neighborhood search policy
for integer programming. Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:30075–30087, 2021.
Lin Xu, Frank Hutter, Holger H. Hoos, and Kevin Leyton-Brown. Satzilla: Portfolio-based algo-
rithm selection for sat. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 32:565–606, 2008.
Ling Yang, Ye Tian, Minkai Xu, Zhongyi Liu, Shenda Hong, Wei Qu, Wentao Zhang, Bin Cui,
Muhan Zhang, and Jure Leskovec. Vqgraph: Rethinking graph representation space for bridging
gnns and mlps. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Morris Yau, Nikolaos Karalias, Eric Lu, Jessica Xu, and Stefanie Jegelka. Are graph neural networks
optimal approximation algorithms? Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:73124–73181,
2024.
Alican Yilmaz, Junyang Cai, Serdar Kadioglu, and Bistra Dilkina. Parbalans: Parallel multi-armed
bandits-based adaptive large neighborhood search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06736, 2025.
Jiahui Yu, Xin Li, Jing Yu Koh, Han Zhang, Ruoming Pang, James Qin, Alexander Ku, Yuanzhong
Xu, Jason Baldridge, and Yonghui Wu. Vector-quantized image modeling with improved vqgan.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi. Sound-
stream: An end-to-end neural audio codec.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and
Language Processing, 30:495–507, 2021.
Jiayi Zhang, Chang Liu, Xijun Li, Hui-Ling Zhen, Mingxuan Yuan, Yawen Li, and Junchi Yan.
A survey for solving mixed integer programming via machine learning. Neurocomputing, 519:
205–217, 2023.
Jianan Zhou, Yaoxin Wu, Wen Song, Zhiguang Cao, and Jie Zhang. Towards omni-generalizable
neural methods for vehicle routing problems. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pp. 42769–42789, 2023.
Xiaojin Zhu and Zoubin Ghahramani. Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propa-
gation. ProQuest number: information to all users, 2002.
14


--- Page 15 ---
A
APPENDIX
A.1
DETAILS OF THE RECONSTRUCTION LOSS
As mention in §3, our loss function minimizes the edge reconstruction loss, the node feature recon-
struction loss and losses related to the vector quantization. Concretely, the loss function is:
L = LRec + LCodebook + LCommitment
(1)
where given N nodes, input node feature vi ∀i ∈N, the adjacency matrix A and a matrix ˆX com-
posed of reconstructed input features vi, the reconstruction loss, LRec, the codebook loss, LCodebook,
and commitment loss, LCommitment are given by:
LRec = (A −ˆX ˆ
XT )2 + 1
N
N
X
i=1
( ˆvi −vi)2
(2)
LCodebook = 1
N
N
X
i=1
∥sg[hi] −cwi∥2
2
(3)
LCommitment = α
N
N
X
i=1
∥sg[cwi] −hi∥2
2
(4)
Here, sg[.] is the stop-gradient operator, hi is the hidden layer representation of node i after the GNN
forward pass and cwi is the codeword corresponding to the code that node i has been assigned.
Intuitively, the codebook loss in Eq. 3 can be interpreted as k-means clustering, where the codewords
cwi (akin to cluster centroids) are moved closer to the node embeddings hi and the node embeddings
hi are fixed in place due to the stop-gradient operator. Conversely, the commitment loss in Eq. 4
fixes the codewords cwi using the stop-gradient operator, and instead, moves the embeddings hi
towards the codewords. The hyperparameter α weighs the importance of the commitment loss.
A.2
EXAMPLE OF INSTANCE LEVEL MIP EMBEDDINGS
As mentioned in §3, instance-level MIP embeddings are generated by computing the distribution
of codes that each variable and constraint in a MIP instance has been assigned. This process is
shown in Figure 7 with a codebook of size 5 (for brevity) and the resulting MIP embedding
⃗
emb =
[3, 2, 3, 2, 0].
c1
c2
c3
c4
cn
v1
v2
v3
v4
vm
Code 1
Code 2
Code 1
Code 2
Code 1
Code 4
Code 3
Code 4
Code 3
Code 3
Frequency
0
1
2
3
Code 1 Code 2 Code 3 Code 4 Code 5
3
2
3
2
0
MIP Embedding:
(A)
(B)
Figure 7: (A) Each node in the bipartite graph representation of the MIP instance is assigned a
discrete code. (B) The distribution of these assigned codes yields the embedding of the MIP instance.
The embedding dimension is the size of the codebook, i.e., vocabulary = |codebook|. This example
uses 5 codes leading to the MIP embedding
⃗
emb = [3, 2, 3, 2, 0].
15


--- Page 16 ---
Figure 8: Visualization of MIP embeddings from strIPlib. FORGE has never seen these instances,
was only trained on 1,800 MIPLIB instances, yet still, manages to cleanly cluster strIPlib problems.
A.3
ADDITIONAL CLUSTERING RESULTS ON STRIPLIB
To further validate our clustering results from §4, where we pre-trained FORGE on 1,800 MIPLIB
instances and clustered instances from D-MIPLIB, we repeat the experiment using our MIPLIB-pre-
trained FORGE to cluster instances from strIPlib (Bastubbe et al., 2025). We select 50 instances from
each of 10 previously unseen problem types: Bin Packing, Capacitated Warehouse Location, Cut-
packing, General Assignment, Job Shop Scheduling, Map Labeling, Scheduling, Stochastic Server
Location, Train Timetabling, and Vertex Coloring.
Figure 8 shows 2D clustering visualizations using PaCMAP. As in our previous study, these strIPlib
instances were unseen by FORGE, yet the model still clusters different problems cleanly. For ex-
ample, all packing instances group together in the top-left, while warehouse and server location
instances cluster in the bottom-left. Other interesting patterns emerge, such as Train Timetabling
and Map Labeling appearing close to each other, suggesting potential transfer learning opportunity.
A.4
ABLATION STUDY ON THE CODEBOOK SIZE
An important consideration in vector quantization is determining the appropriate codebook size to
effectively capture global structural patterns. While increasing the number of codes might intuitively
enhance representation capacity, empirical evidence shows this relationship is non-monotonic due
to code under-utilization, where some codes remain unused during training. This phenomenon has
been extensively studied in domains such as speech and computer vision (Yu et al., 2022; Zeghidour
et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022). To examine this trade-off, we conduct an ablation study measuring
NMI scores for clustering across 1,050 D-MIPLIB instances. Following the setup in §4, we generate
FORGE embeddings with varying codebook sizes.
Table 1 reports our results showing no statistically significant difference in clustering performance,
measured by NMI against the ground truth, across different codebook configurations. We attribute
this stability to the clustering objective, which appears less sensitive to codebook size variations
compared to downstream predictive tasks.This observation aligns with Yang et al. (2024), who re-
ported consistent classification accuracy across various graph datasets until codebook sizes exceeded
16,000, at which point performance began to degrade. Based on these findings, we set the codebook
size to 5,000 in our experiments (§5.1 and §5.2). While our pre-trained FORGE model was trained
on 2,850 MIP instances, making 5,000 codes potentially excessive, the framework is designed as a
foundational architecture ready for extension to much larger datasets.
Codebook Size
NMI
500
0.810 ± 0.027
1,000
0.818 ± 0.030
2,500
0.822 ± 0.026
5,000
0.843 ± 0.031
10,000
0.805 ± 0.022
Table 1: Ablation study on codebook size of the FORGE architecture measuring NMI scores.
16


--- Page 17 ---
A.5
VECTOR ARITHMETIC IN THE LATENT MIP EMBEDDING SPACE
Given that we have embeddings for each MIP instance across various problem types, we ask if we
can identify certain ‘directions’ in this latent optimization embedding space that could shift a MIP
instance from one problem type to the other based on our theoretical understanding. This line of
reasoning is inspired by the earlier work on understanding analogies in word embeddings, as in the
famous King −Man + Woman ≈Queen example (Ethayarajh et al., 2018).
Concretely, we inspect the relationship among the following covering and packing problems:
A.5.1
SET COVER PROBLEM (SCP)
Given a universe of elements and a collection of subsets, find the smallest number of subsets that
cover all elements.
min
X
S∈S
xS
X
S:e∈S
xS ≥1
∀e ∈U
xS ∈{0, 1}
∀S ∈S
A.5.2
VERTEX COVER PROBLEM
Given a graph, find the smallest set of vertices such that every edge has at least one endpoint in the
set.
min
X
v∈V
xv
xu + xv ≥1
∀(u, v) ∈E
xv ∈{0, 1}
∀v ∈V
A.5.3
BIN PACKING PROBLEM
Given a set of items and a collection of bins with a capacity, find the smallest number of bins that
pack all items within bin capacities.
min
n
X
j=1
yj
n
X
j=1
xij = 1
∀i ∈{1, . . . , m}
m
X
i=1
wixij ≤C · yj
∀j ∈{1, . . . , n}
xij ∈{0, 1},
yj ∈{0, 1}
A.5.4
INDEPENDENT SET PROBLEM
Given a graph, find the largest set of vertices such that no two selected nodes are adjacent.
max
X
v∈V
xv
xu + xv ≤1
∀(u, v) ∈E
xv ∈{0, 1}
∀v ∈V
17


--- Page 18 ---
Figure 9: A (stretch) analogy of King−Men+Woman ≈Queen for Combinatorial Optimization:
V ertex Cover −Set Cover + Bin Packing ≈Independent Set. The updated Vertex Cover
instances are shown in black which move closer to the Maximal Independent Set instances.
Observation: In these problem definitions and formulations, notice how Set Cover and Vertex Cover
are similar to each other as covering problems, and Bin Packing and Independent Set are similar to
each other as packing problems. Conversely, the pairs are complementary to each other, e.g, the sum
of minimum vertex cover and maximum independent set equals to the number of vertices.
Research Question: We ask the following question: if we identify the difference in dimensions
between covering and packing, and then push Minimum Vertex Cover instances along that direction,
do we obtain embeddings that are closer to Maximal Independent Set instances? The intuition
behind this is to remove the ‘cover’ aspect from Vertex Cover, and then add to that the ‘packing’
aspect of Bin Packing, to obtain Independent Set as a result.
To validate this experimentally, we fix the graph size to 1,000 vertices and select 50 random instances
each for Set Cover, Vertex Cover, Independent Set from D-MIPLIB (Huang et al., 2024). and 50
random Bin Packing from strIPlib (Bastubbe et al., 2025). We also control for the problem difficulty
by ensuring all instances are solvable by GUROBI within 60 seconds.
Vector Arithmetic for Optimization: Next, we apply vector arithmetic on the embeddings of MIP
instances to verify our intuition, as a (stretch) analogy to the famous King −Man + Woman ≈
Queen example, and test for V ertexCover −SetCover + BinPacking ≈IndependentSet.
We note that this analogy is not perfect, as there is no single ‘King’ instance in the optimization
embedding space, but instead, we are averaging over multiple instances while controlling for the
same graph size and similar difficulty across problems.
Given the embeddings of instances for Set Cover, esc, Set Packing, ebp, Vertex Cover, emvc, and
Independent Set, emis, where e ∈R|instances|×|codes|, we compute the difference in dimensions
between covering and packing, dsc−bp, as follows:
µsc = mean(esc, axis = 0) ∈R1×|codes|
(5)
µbp = mean(ebp, axis = 0) ∈R1×|codes|
(6)
dsc−bp = µsc −µbp ∈R1×|codes|
(7)
Given the difference between covering and packing, dsc−bp, we update the embedding of the in-
stances of minimum vertex cover problem:
eupdated mvc = emvc −dsc−bp ∈R|instances|×|codes|
(8)
Results: Figure 9 visualizes these vector operations in the latent MIP embedding space using
PaCMAP in Figure 9-A and PCA in Figure 9-B. In both visualizations, notice how the embed-
dings of updated Vertex Cover move closer to the embeddings of Independent Set compared to
their initial starting point, once they are modified by the direction obtained from the difference of
embeddings of covering and packing instances.
18


--- Page 19 ---
Figure 10: A (stretch) analogy of King −Man + Woman ≈Queen for Combinatorial Optimiza-
tion: Set Cover −V ertex Cover + Independent Set ≈Bin Packing. The updated Set Cover
instances are shown in black that move closer to the Bin Packing instances.
Similarly, we further examine the vector arithmetic results for:
• In Figure 10 above, Set Cover −V ertex Cover + Independent Set = Bin Packing:
Intuitively, this is can be understood as removing the ‘cover’ direction from Set Cover by
subtracting Vertex Cover and adding the ‘packing’ direction from Independent Set to push the
updated Set Cover instances closer to the Bin Packing instances from the initial Set Cover
instances.
• In Figure 11 below, Independent Set −Set Packing + Set Cover = V ertex Cover:
Intuitively, this is can be understood as removing the ‘packing’ direction from Independent
Set by subtracting from Bin Packing and adding the ‘cover’ direction from Set Cover to push
the updated Independent Set instances closer to the Vertex Cover instances from the initial
Independent Set instances.
Figure 11: A (stretch) analogy of King −Men + Woman ≈Queen for Combinatorial Optimiza-
tion: Independent Set−Bin Packing+Set Cover ≈V ertex Cover. The updated Independent
Set instances are shown in black that move closer to the Minimum Vertex Cover instances.
A.6
DETAILS OF OUR EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
For the experiments presented in §5, we train on the ml.g5.xlarge AWS instance with a GPU with 24
GB of memory. Inference experiments were run on the ml.c5.12xlarge instance with 48 cores and
96 GB of RAM. To ensure consistency and fairness, all experiments were executed with GUROBI
(v12.0.3), a state-of-the-art commercial MIP solver (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2024), restricted
to a single thread and a time limit of 3600 seconds. Unsupervised pre-training and integrality gap
fine-tuning are run for 10 epochs with a learning rate of 10−4, while the search guidance prediction
task is trained for 25 epochs using a learning rate of 10−5. The fixed radius in search guidance is set
to 0.1.
19


--- Page 20 ---
(A) Combinatorial Auction 
Primal Gap Gain: 41.07%   
(B) Generalized Ind. Set 
Primal Gap Gain: 50.51%
Figure 12: PS-Gurobi vs. PS-Gurobi + FORGE vs. PS-Gurobi + Random Search Guidance. Each
subplot shows primal gap (the lower, the better) averaged across 50 medium instances in each prob-
lem.
A.7
DETAILS OF THE TRIPLET LOSS
Recall that FORGE generates embedding vectors per instance and per variable/constraint. A straight-
forward method of predicting which variables are likely to be part of the solution is to treat it as a
binary classification problem and use binary cross entropy (BCE) loss. However, this poses chal-
lenges due to the large class imbalance where most variables are not part of the solution.
Triplet Construction: To address this issue, we generate 5 feasible solutions for each instance.
Variables in the instance are grouped by how many of the 5 solutions each variable was repeated in.
A variable is considered a ‘negative’ variable if and only if it appears in none of the 5 solutions. Next,
we use the standard triplet loss (Schroff et al., 2015) to fine tune the embeddings of the variables.
The triplet loss is given by:
L(a, p, n) = max{d(ai, pi) −d(ai, ni) + margin, 0}
(9)
Here, a is the ‘anchor’ node, p is the ‘positive’ node, n is the ‘negative’ node and d is a distance
function (euclidean distance in our case). Triplet loss aims to minimize the distance between the
‘anchor’ and ‘positive’ nodes while ensuring the ‘negative’ node is at least ‘margin’ distance away
from the ‘anchor’ node (margin is set to 2 in our case). In our setting, as shown in Figure 3(C),
all variables appearing in the same number of solutions are treated as ‘positive’ and ‘anchor’ pairs.
A key challenge of triplet loss is finding good negative nodes, as picking trivially negative nodes
does not aid learning. We pick variables that have not appeared in any solution but are closest to the
positive node in the unsupervised embedding space as negative nodes. Finally, the FORGE model
is fine-tuned to predict warm start variables using a combination of triplet loss and BCE loss.
A.8
ABLATION STUDY ON SEARCH GUIDANCE
In §5.2, as part of our comparison with state-of-the-art ML methods, we augmented PS-Gurobi (Han
et al., 2023) with FORGE embeddings and observed performance gains from their combination.
More precisely, in PS-Gurobi, the input node features for constraints and variables are 4 and 6 di-
mensions, respectively. To minimize architectural changes, we applied Principal Component Anal-
ysis (PCA) to reduce the dimensionality of FORGE embeddings from 1024 down to 64. This raises
an important question: how much of the improvement is due to FORGE versus the increased model
capacity from higher-dimensional inputs? To control for this effect, we repeated the experiments
from §5.2, augmenting PS-Gurobi with 64-dimensional random vectors. This comparison isolates
the contribution of our pre-trained embeddings to overall performance. Each PS-Gurobi model for
each problem type and augmentation was trained from scratch.
Figure 12 compares PS-Gurobi, PS-Gurobi augmented with FORGE, and PS-Gurobi with random
vectors. Our ablation shows that adding random vectors occasionally improves performance, likely
due to the increase in input dimensionality, from 4 and 6 features for constraints and variables
to 68 and 70, resulting in greater model capacity. However, semantic embeddings from FORGE
consistently dominate, delivering the strongest performance across both problem types.
20


--- Page 21 ---
A.9
ADDITIONAL RELATED WORK
Recent advances in applying machine learning to combinatorial optimization, particularly Mixed-
Integer Programming (MIP), have led to a wealth of literature. These methods can be broadly
categorized based on their focus areas, such as solver configuration, branching strategies, heuristic
design, and generalization across problem types.
Learning-based Methods to Enhance MIP Solvers: Several works have explored integrating su-
pervised and reinforcement learning into traditional MIP solving pipelines. The survey by Zhang
et al. (2023) categorizes these methods into two main groups: those enhancing the Branch-and-
Bound process (e.g., branching variable prediction (Kadioglu et al., 2012; Liberto et al., 2016; He
et al., 2014b; Lodi & Zarpellon, 2017; Bengio et al., 2021a), cutting plane selection (Tang et al.,
2020; Paulus et al., 2022), node selection He et al. (2014a)), and those improving heuristic algo-
rithms such as Large Neighborhood Search, Feasibility Pump, and Predict-and-Pick. These models
are typically trained end-to-end, with reinforcement learning often relying on imitation learning. We
refer to (Gast Zepeda et al., 2025) for recent survey.
In the context of solver configuration, the earlier work of Kadioglu et al. (2010) propose the ISAC
framework that takes a clustering-based approach to instance-specific algorithm configuration. It
uses g-means to cluster problem instances and assigns configurations based on cluster membership.
The method considers domain-specific features such as cost-density ratios and root cost metrics
for problems such as SCP, MIP, and SAT. Algorithm selection, scheduling and portfolios have also
been studied (Xu et al., 2008; Kadioglu et al., 2011a; Schede et al., 2025; Kemminer et al., 2024).
More recently, Hosny & Reda (2024) propose predicting solver parameters by leveraging similarities
between problem instances. Their key assumption is that instances with similar costs under one
configuration will behave similarly under other configurations. Their features include pre-solve
statistics and tree-based metrics, with a triplet loss guiding the learning process using solved instance
objectives.
To improve generalization, Boisvert et al. (2024) propose a generic representation for combinatorial
problems using abstract syntax trees with five node types - variables, constraints, values, operators
and a model node. While expressive, this approach results in large, computationally expensive
graphs.
Multi-Task and Generalist Models: Similar to our work here, efforts to unify learning across tasks
and problem types have also emerged. Cai et al. (2025a) introduce a multi-task representation learn-
ing framework for MIP, training a shared backbone across tasks such as backdoor prediction and
solver configuration prediction, followed by fine-tuning for specific problem types. Their method
uses a bipartite graph representation, Graph Attention Networks (GAT), and contrastive loss, and
is evaluated on problems such as CA, MVC, and (MIS). Similarly, Drakulic et al. (2024) present
GOAL, a generalist agent for combinatorial optimization. It avoids GNNs, instead using mixed
attention over edge and node matrices derived from bipartite graphs. Li et al. (2025) propose an
LLM-based evolutionary framework that can generate a large set of diverse MIP classes and can be
fine tuned to predict integrality gaps and branching nodes.
Graph Neural Networks for Branching and Heuristics: Graph-based representations have be-
come standard for encoding MIP instances.
One of the earliest work on graph-based learning
by Gasse et al. (2019) uses GNNs to learn strong branching policies, introducing a bipartite graph
structure and dual half-convolutions for message passing between constraints and variables. Chen
et al. (2024) revisit GNN for MIPs and show that higher-order GNNs can overcome limitations iden-
tified via the 1-Weisfeiler-Lehman test, making all instances tractable for message passing. Cant¨urk
et al. (2024) introduce improvements to the standard GNN workflow for CO so that they generalize
on instances of a larger scale than those used in training and propose a two-stage primal heuristic
strategy based on uncertainty quantification to automatically configure how solution search relies on
the predicted decision values.
Along the lines of Backdoor learning, Cai et al. (2024a) use Monte Carlo Tree Search to identify ef-
fective backdoors, training a GAT to score variables. Ferber et al. (2022) propose pseudo-backdoors,
using one model that characterizes if a subset of variables is a good backdoor and another model to
predict whether prioritizing this subset would lead to a smaller run time.
21


--- Page 22 ---
Learning Heuristics and Large Neighborhood Search (LNS): Earlier works such as (Kadioglu
et al., 2017; 2011b) proposes learning reactive restart and impact-based strategies to improve search.
Recently, a growing body of work focuses on learning heuristics, particularly for Large Neighbor-
hood Search (LNS). Huang et al. (2023) use expert heuristics to create training data followed by
random perturbations to create ‘negative’ samples. Then contrastive learning is used to train GATs
to predict node probabilities. Other works by Wu et al. (2021) and Song et al. (2020) use deep re-
inforcement learning to learn destroy operators or decompositions, with rewards based on objective
improvements. Khalil et al. (2017) model the success of heuristics at specific nodes by examining
instance based characteristics and use logistic regression over a rich feature set, including LP relax-
ation and scoring metrics. Cai et al. (2025b) propose BALANS, an adaptive meta-solver for MIPs
with online learning capability that does not require any supervision or apriori training. During
the search, the selection among different neighborhood definitions is guided on the fly via multi-
armed bandit algorithms (Strong et al., 2021; 2019).Yilmaz et al. (2025) extend BALANS Cai et al.
(2024b) using solver- and algorithmic-level parallelism into PARBALANS to improve performance
on challenging MIP instances.
Problem Specific Methods: The vehicle routing problem (VRP) has garnered special attention from
the community (Berto et al., 2025; Hottung & Tierney, 2022).Zhou et al. (2023) introduce a meta-
learning framework for VRPs, enabling generalization across problem sizes and distributions. Berto
et al. (2024) explore ML solutions for different kinds of VRPs like those including backhauls, multi-
depots, duration limits, mixed backhaul, line hauls, among others. They use a common encoder for
all VRP types with global attributes for problem type and local node attributes to capture customer
specific attributes such as location and demands.
Another problem that has garnered attention is the constraint satisfaction problem. T¨onshoff et al.
(2023) use GNNs to predict soft assignments, with reinforcement learning rewards based on con-
straint satisfaction improvements. Duan et al. (2022) propose a contrastive learning framework that
generates label-preserving augmentations for SAT problems. These include techniques such as unit
clause propagation, pure literal elimination, and clause resolution, ensuring that the satisfiability
of the instance remains unchanged while enhancing the model’s robustness. Shafi et al. (2025) in-
troduce Graph-SCP, a method that leverages features extracted from both bipartite and hypergraph
representations of SCP instances. A GNN is then trained with these features to predict a promising
subproblem where the optimal solution is likely to reside. This predicted subproblem is passed to a
solver, effectively accelerating the overall solution process.
Unsupervised Approaches: Unsupervised learning has also been explored in various forms. Kar-
alias & Loukas (2020) introduce a framework that learns a probability distribution over nodes, op-
timizing a loss that bounds the probability of finding a solution. These are then decoded using a
derandomization process. Bu et al. (2024) build on the work by Karalias & Loukas (2020) by for-
malizing objective construction and derandomization strategies. They derive explicit formulations
tailored to a range of combinatorial problems, including facility location, maximum coverage, and
robust graph coloring. Sanokowski et al. (2024) provide an approach for solving combinatorial op-
timization problems without labeled data by leveraging diffusion models to sample from complex
discrete distributions. Their method avoids the need for exact likelihoods by optimizing a loss that
upper bounds the reverse KL divergence. While FORGE falls in the domain of unsupervised ap-
proaches, we differ in that our goal is to not solve a given instance in an unsupervised manner, but
rather to learn the graphical structure of various MIP instances in an unsupervised manner followed
by supervised fine-tuning to aid in finding the solution.
22
