--- Page 1 ---
Optimal Micro-Transit Zoning via Clique
Generation and Integer Programming
Hins Hu*
Systems Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
zh223@cornell.edu
Rhea Goswami*
Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
rkg62@cornell.edu
Hongyi Jiang
Systems Engineering
City University of Hong Kong
Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
hongyi.jiang@cityu.edu.hk
Samitha Samaranayake
Civil and Environmental Engineering
Cornell University
Ithaca, New York, USA
samitha@cornell.edu
Abstract—Micro-transit services offer a promising solution
to enhance urban mobility and access, particularly by comple-
menting existing public transit. However, effectively designing
these services requires determining optimal service zones for
these on-demand shuttles, a complex challenge often constrained
by operating budgets and transit agency priorities. This paper
presents a novel two-phase algorithmic framework for designing
optimal micro-transit service zones based on the objective of
maximizing served demand. A key innovation is our adaptation
of the shareability graph concept from its traditional use in
dynamic trip assignment to the distinct challenge of static spatial
zoning. We redefine shareability by considering geographical
proximity within a specified diameter constraint, rather than
trip characteristics. In Phase 1, the framework employs a highly
scalable algorithm to generate a comprehensive set of candidate
zones. In Phase 2, it formulates the selection of a specified
number of zones as a Weighted Maximum Coverage Problem,
which can be efficiently solved by an integer programming
solver. Evaluations on real-world data from Chattanooga, TN,
and synthetic datasets show that our framework outperforms
a baseline algorithm, serving 27.03% more demand in practice
and up to 49.5% more demand in synthetic settings.
Index Terms—Micro-Transit Zoning, Shareability Graph,
Algorithm Design, Integer Linear Programming
I. INTRODUCTION
Public transit systems are fundamental to sustainable urban
development, contributing to reduced emissions and energy
consumption [1] while fostering economic development and
social equity [2]. However, inadequate public transit in-
vestments along with car-centric planning have resulted in
very restricted transit coverage in most U.S. cities, leaving
many communities with limited access to essential services
and opportunities via public transit. Micro-transit, a small-
scale demand-responsive transit service characterized by flex-
ible routes and adaptable scheduling, has recently emerged
as a promising complement to traditional fixed-route mass
transit—with the potential for improving access in areas with
restricted coverage, such as lower-density areas [3].
One of the primary decisions for an operator when plan-
ning a micro-transit service is to decide where to operate
the service given budgetary constraints and other opera-
tional requirements/constraints. This optimal micro-transit
zone design problem is a complex optimization problem and
typically solved either directly via expert opinion or through
heuristic methods. While zoning methodologies exist, many
are adapted from different contexts like freight logistics (e.g.,
using clustering techniques) [9] or, when specific to micro-
transit, may prioritize objectives like equity without directly
optimizing for demand coverage based on origin-destination
patterns. Consequently, these approaches fall short in iden-
tifying zone configurations that maximize service coverage
under operator constraints.
To address the zoning problem, this paper proposes a
novel, optimal, and highly scalable algorithmic framework.
The core idea of this framework is inspired by the concept of
the shareability graph, originally developed for taxi-sharing
systems [4]. The original shareability graph is a spatiotem-
poral network abstraction used to characterize which taxi
requests can share a taxi given user constraints such as
waiting time, that can be used to efficient compute optimal
sharing strategies on large-scale taxi trip datasets. It has sub-
sequently been applied to other operations research problems
in transportation systems, such as high-capacity ride-pooling
assignment [12] and school bus routing [5]
In this paper, we adapt the shareability graph concept
specifically for the micro-transit zoning problem. Instead
of focusing on whether specific trips can be shared (as in
the original concept), our key modification is to focus on
whether locations are close enough to be grouped. In our
model, we represent locations as “nodes”, where each node
stands for a small neighborhood and captures the travel
demand originating or ending in that area. Two nodes are
considered “shareable" if the shortest-path distance between
them is within a specified diameter constraint D, which
defines the maximum geographical extent permitted for any
single service zone.
Based on this modified shareability concept, we design
a two-phase algorithmic framework to find optimal zones.
Phase 1 is an algorithm called CLIQUEGEN, which leverages
the modified shareability structure to iteratively construct all
valid candidate zones, represented as “cliques” of mutually
shareable nodes, that adhere to the diameter constraint D.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
arXiv:2509.11445v1  [math.OC]  14 Sep 2025


--- Page 2 ---
If a zone is selected, all travel demand where both origin
and destination fall within that zone’s constituent nodes will
be served. Phase 2 formulates the zone selection task as a
Weighted Maximum Coverage Problem, taking the candidate
zones from Phase 1 as input. An Integer Linear Program
(ILP) called ZONINGILP is then solved to select the m
zones that collectively cover the maximum possible intra-
zone travel demand. The effectiveness of this framework was
validated through numerical experiments using real-world
trips from Chattanooga, TN, USA, demonstrating practical
applicability in an operational setting. We complement this
with synthetically generated datasets that enable systematic
sensitivity analysis across varying problem parameters, in-
cluding network size and diameter constraints, which would
be difficult to control with real-world data alone.
work for designing effective micro-transit zones, contribut-
ing novel modeling techniques, an efficient solution ap-
proach, and its validation. Several key points are summarized
as follows:
1) We propose a highly scalable two-phase algorithm to
optimally solve the micro-transit zoning problem.
2) We validate the algorithm through numerical exper-
iments, demonstrating a substantial increase in total
demand served compared to a baseline algorithm.
II. RELATED WORK
This section first examines existing methodologies for
transportation zoning, with a particular focus on approaches
relevant to micro-transit design. Second, it discusses the
development and application of shareability graphs within
transportation research, a concept central to our proposed
framework.
a) Transportation Zoning Approaches: Zoning is funda-
mental to urban planning and infrastructure management,
influencing land use patterns [6] and correlating with urban
development trajectories [7]. However, poorly designed or
outdated zoning can exacerbate urban inequalities [8]. Within
transportation planning, computational approaches have been
developed to automate or optimize zone design. For instance,
in freight transportation planning, methodologies have been
proposed to update zoning systems by clustering geographi-
cally similar spatial units using techniques like K-means clus-
tering [9] or multi-objective genetic algorithms for improved
scalability [10]. In micro-transit contexts, [17] developed a
framework incorporating expert judgment for zone evalua-
tion, while [18] focused on operational dispatching within
pre-determined zones using reinforcement learning.
While the benefits of micro-transit are increasingly rec-
ognized, the specific problem of computationally designing
optimal micro-transit zones is less explored. Existing research
often focuses on different objectives or employs distinct
methodologies. For example, Bonner & Miller-Hooks [11]
developed a mixed-integer programming approach to gener-
ate equitable micro-transit zones, maximizing equity-based
objective functions that prioritize fair service distribution
across populations and geographic areas, rather than directly
targeting demand coverage. Our work differs by introducing
a optimal and highly-scalable graph-based methodology built
upon an efficient candidate zone generation and selection
process.
b) Shareability Graph: The concept of the shareabil-
ity graph, introduced by Santi et al. [4] for taxi sharing,
has proven influential in addressing various transportation
optimization problems. This graph-abstraction captures the
potential for individual requests to be grouped together
based on spatio-temporal constraints. It was initially used to
quantify the benefits of taxi sharing by efficiently computing
optimal sharing strategies [4]. Subsequently, variations of the
shareability graph have been applied to complex operational
problems in many specific contexts, including, most promi-
nently, the real-time matching of riders and drivers in high-
capacity ride-pooling systems [12].
Guo et al. [5] adopted the shareability graph to solve large-
scale school bus routing problems via a decomposition based
on feasible bus trips. Shah et al. [15] extended shareability
graph approaches with neural network-based value functions
to overcome the myopic nature of ride-pooling assignments.
Vazifeh et al. [16] adapted the shareability graph concept to
create “vehicle-sharing networks" that model the sharing of
vehicles rather than rides. Relevant to micro-transit’s role in
complementing mass transit, Edirimanna et al. [13] modified
the graph construction to model ride-sharing for first-and-
last-mile trips in a multi-modal setting, defining feasibility
based on subgraph structures and quality-of-service con-
straints.
While such work advances the operational planning of
ride-sharing services, our research addresses the distinct,
foundational challenge of designing the geographical service
zones themselves. We apply the shareability graph concept
differently, shifting to a static, node-level perspective based
on geographical proximity. This novel adaptation allows us
to specifically tackle the a priori zoning problem, providing a
method to strategically define optimal service areas to allow
effective operational deployment.
III. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
We formulate the micro-transit zoning problem as a com-
binatorial optimization problem with the following inputs:
1) A planar directed graph G = (V, E) abstracted from
an urban region, where each node v ∈V represents a
small neighborhood that aggregates all travel demand
from and to that area. An edge (i, j) ∈E exists only if
node i and j are connected by a segment of a road. The
edge weight w(i, j) is defined as the center-to-center
distance between node i and j.
2) A demand table d : V 2 →R+, where each entry d(i, j)
represents a nominal travel demand from node i to j.


--- Page 3 ---
3) A distance matrix c : V 2 →R+, where each entry
c(i, j) denotes the shortest-path distance from node i
to j in graph G.
4) A maximum diameter D ∈R+ constrains the spatial
extent of each zone, defined as the maximum pairwise
distance between any two nodes assigned to the zone.
5) An integer m ∈N indicating the number of zones to
be set up.
The goal is to select m micro-transit zones, where each zone
is defined as a subset of connected nodes S ⊆V satisfying
the diameter constraint maxi,j∈S c(i, j) ≤D, such that the
total intra-zone demand served in Equation 1 is maximized.
X
i,j∈V
d(i, j) I(i, j in the same zone)
(1)
IV. METHODOLOGY
We approach the micro-transit problem via a two-phase
algorithmic framework, which is illustrated in the schematic
diagram in Figure 1.
Fig. 1: A schematic diagram of the two-phase algorithmic
framework.
In Phase 1, we design a candidate zone generation algo-
rithm, called CLIQUEGEN, to efficiently enumerate all valid
zones with diameters less than D, with the full procedure
described in Section IV-A. Inspired by the definition of
shareability graph [4], the algorithm iteratively constructs
cliques1 – special subgraph structures – of cardinality k by
progressively extending cliques of cardinality k−1. A clique
can be regarded as a valid zone and is defined below.
Definition 1 (D-bounded Clique): Given a graph G =
(V, E), a D-bounded clique is a subset of nodes S ⊆V , such
that the longest shortest-path distance between any two nodes
i, j ∈S, called the diameter, is less than D. The cardinality
of a clique is the number of nodes in it, namely |S|.
Although the number of valid zones grows exponentially
when the diameter constraint is relaxed, CLIQUEGEN lever-
ages a pruning sub-routine called COVEXHULLEXTEND to
exclude a large number of zones that do not make physical
sense and are dominated by other zones that we keep. Any
such dominated zone does not cover all nodes within its
convex hull, and thus cannot contribute to an optimal solution
to our problem. This significantly reduces the computational
overhead and enables practical tractability, as demonstrated
in Section V. The number of candidate zones generated by
CLIQUEGEN for different parameters is detailed in Table I.
In Phase 2, we formulate an Integer Linear Program
(ILP), denoted by ZONINGILP, to select the optimal m
zones given the full list of cliques generated in Phase 1.
Such an optimization problem is a variant of the classical
Weighted Maximum Coverage Problem (WMCP) [14]. The
full formulation and discussions are in Section IV-B.
A. Candidate Zone Generation
Given a diameter bound D, CLIQUEGEN builds up the
list of cliques in an iterative manner. It begins by initializing
a list L with all cardinality-1 cliques (i.e., single nodes).
Then, at any arbitrary iteration k, CLIQUEGEN attempts to
construct all possible cliques of cardinality k that can be
directly extended from at least one cardinality-(k-1) clique.
Specifically, if a clique such as {1, 5, 9} is deemed invalid
at iteration k −1, any superset, like {1, 5, 9, v} with v being
any other nodes, will be excluded by the algorithm for further
consideration. A new cardinality-k clique formed by adding
node v to an existing clique S ∈V k−1 is retained in list
L only if max{c(i, v), c(v, i)} ≤D for all i ∈S. This
condition ensures that v lies within the diameter constraint
relative to all members of S, effectively enforcing a local
geographic proximity requirement.
This idea is analogous to the the notion of shareability
in prior works [4] [12] [13], where trip-level shareability is
verified based on the temporal or spatial proximity between
origin-destination pairs. However, our setting is even simpler
in two key ways: (1) CLIQUEGEN assesses the shareability at
the node level rather than the trip level, and (2) pairwise node-
level shareability suffices to guarantee clique-level validity.
The latter is in contrast to trip-based models, where verifying
1Following prior work on shareability graphs, we adopt the term clique
for our subgraph structure of interest, though our definition differs from the
classical graph-theoretic one that a clique is a complete subgraph.


--- Page 4 ---
group shareability typically requires solving an NP-hard
Pick-up and Delivery Problem (PDP) for all origins and
destinations, whereas our clique validation takes only at most
 |S|
2

distance checks.
At an iteration k, once CLIQUEGEN identifies a new
clique S′ = S ∪{v} from an existing clique S, it in-
vokes a sub-routine called CONVEXHULLEXTEND to check
whether the new clique S′ can be further extended by adding
nodes within its convex hull, Conv(S′), geographically. If
CONVEXHULLEXTEND can find a set of additional nodes
Q contained in Conv(S′), the convex-hull-extended clique
S′ ∪Q is added to the list L, and clique S′ is discarded.
Otherwise, clique S′ is added to L. Once all cardinality-k
clique extensions are processed, CLIQUEGEN moves to iter-
ation k+1. The algorithm terminates when k cannot increase
anymore, which occurs when cliques are over-extended (i.e.,
new nodes are far away) and the diameter constraint is near
violation. The pseudo-code for CLIQUEGEN is provided in
Algorithm 1.
1
2
3
4
5
8
6
7
9
10
11
Fig. 2: An example: clique S1 = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8} are valid
zones but dominated by clique S2 = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8}.
Integrating nodes 9, 10, or 11 to S1 requires shareability
checks, but 6 and 7 should be automatically included through
CONVEXHULLEXTEND.
The rationale behind the convex hull extension is that
a “hollow” clique, one that omits nodes contained within
its convex hull, will always be dominated by the zone that
includes the omitted nodes, as illustrated in Figure 2. This
is because it has the same diameter as the “hollow” clique
(i.e., it is also feasible), but potentially serves more travel
demand. Therefore, CLIQUEGEN will only include convex
cliques, formalized in Definition 2, into the list L.
Definition 2 (Convex Clique): A clique S is convex if it
is closed under the convex hull extension in the node set V .
Equivalently, S = {v ∈Conv(S) | v ∈V }.
The sub-routine CONVEXHULLEXTEND is executed as
follows: given a clique S and the node set V , it iteratively
examines each node v ∈V \ S and determines if v is share-
able with all nodes in S, using the same pairwise shareability
check as in CLIQUEGEN. Since the internal shareability of S
is already validated, each new candidate node v only requires
O(|S|) checks to complete the validation. If v is shareable
with the entire S, an oracle is further invoked to check
Algorithm 1: CliqueGen
Input: Nodes V , Distances c, Max Diameter D
Output: Clique List L
L ←[{v} | v ∈V ]
k ←1
while true do
if no valid clique of cardinality k then
break
foreach clique S of cardinality k in L do
foreach v ∈V \ S do
if max{c[v, u], c[u, v]} ≤D, ∀u ∈S then
S′ ←
CONVEXHULLEXTEND(S, V, c, D)
if S′ = ∅then
L.append(S)
else
L.append(S′)
k ←k + 1
return L
whether v is contained in Conv(S) before integrating v into
S. The original clique S keeps expanding along the loop until
no more new node is found within Conv(S). Given that the
“point-in-convex-hull” oracle takes O(|S|) steps, the overall
time complexity of CONVEXHULLEXTEND is O(|S|2). The
pseudo-code is provided in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: ConvexHullExtend
Input: Clique S, Nodes V , Distances c, Max
Diameter D
Output: Convex-hull-extended clique S′
while V is not empty do
v ←V.pop()
if max{c[v, u], c[u, v]} ≤D for all u ∈S then
if v ∈Conv(S) then
S ←S ∪{v}
S′ ←S
return S′
It is important to note that a naive implementation of
CLIQUEGEN can be highly inefficient due to extensive re-
computation in the following aspect: the algorithm may
repeatedly examine the same set of nodes as it checks the
formation of an identical valid clique from different lower-
cardinality cliques. To address this issue, we design a data
structure called visited that maps the sorted tuple of
cliques to a binary flag indicating whether the combination
has been explored in previous steps. CLIQUEGEN always
checks visited before extending an existing clique S with
a new node v, or with a new set of nodes Q contained in
Conv(S). If visited returns true for a combination, the


--- Page 5 ---
step is skipped to save computation. Similarly, whenever
CLIQUEGEN inserts a newly found clique S into the list L,
it updates the map with visited[sorted(S)] = 1.
B. Optimal Zoning via Maximum Coverage
Given the comprehensive list L of all the candidate valid
zones generated by CLIQUEGEN, the goal in Phase 2 is to
select m zones from L that maximizes the total demand
served, as described in Equation 1. Since the demand table is
defined over node pairs, allowing zones to overlap can lead to
higher total coverage and thus better solutions. This problem
reduces to a Weighted Maximum Coverage Problem with m
sets.
Let xS ∈{0, 1} be a binary decision variable indicating
whether a candidate valid zone S ∈L is selected. Let
yij ∈{0, 1} be a binary decision variable indicating whether
both nodes i, j ∈V are jointly covered by at least one
selected zones. For each zone S ∈L, define a binary
vector zS = [z1
S, . . . , zi
S, . . . , z|V |
S ] ∈{0, 1}V capturing the
mapping between zone S and all the nodes in V . In particular,
zi
S = 1 if node i ∈S, and 0 otherwise. These vectors
{zS}S∈L are provided as input as they can be directly derived
from the clique list L generated in Phase 1. With the notations
properly defined, we formulate ZONINGILP, consisting of
the objective function and constraints from (2a) to (2e), to
solve this maximum coverage problem exactly.
max
x, y
X
i,j∈V
dij yij
(2a)
s.t.
X
S∈L
xS ≤m,
(2b)
yij ≤
X
S∈L
zi
S zj
S xS,
∀i, j ∈V,
(2c)
xS ∈{0, 1},
∀S ∈L,
(2d)
yij ∈{0, 1},
∀i, j ∈V
(2e)
The objective function in (2a) collects the travel demand
of all node pairs covered by at least one zone (with yi,j = 1).
Constraint (2b) limits the number of selected zones to be m.
The inequality is tight at optimality due to the maximization.
Constraints (2c) link x and y, forcing yij to be 0 if node i
and j are not assigned simultaneously to any zone S (with
at least one of zi
S, zj
S, and xS being 0). In the maximization
setting, it also raises yij to 1 if node i and j are assigned
to at least one zone (with zi
S = 1, zj
S = 1, and xS = 1 for
at least one S ∈L). Constraints (2d) and (2e) enforce the
integrality of decision variables.
The size complexity of ZONINGILP is O(|L|+|V |2) as it
involves O(|L| + |V |2) decision variables and O(|V |2) con-
straints. While the power set of V has size O(2|V |), providing
a natural upper bound on the number of candidate cliques |L|,
this worst case is rarely realized in practice. The diameter
constraint D, the pruning effect of CONVEXHULLEXTEND,
and implementation techniques discussed in Section IV-A
all substantially reduce |L|, making the ILP tractable for
medium-to-large size city, as demonstrated in Section V.
Moreover, we conjecture that, due to the convexity prop-
erty of valid zones in Definition 2, the theoretical upper
bound on L could be sub-exponential or even polynomial
in sufficiently regular graphs (e.g., uniform grids). A formal
complexity analysis for graphs with additional structure is
beyond the scope of this work and is left for future research.
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
We conduct extensive numerical experiments using both
real-world travel demand data from Chattanooga, TN and
synthetic datasets based on a pruned Delaunay graph.
To benchmark the performance of our proposed method,
we implement a simple baseline algorithm based on a con-
struction heuristic, referred to as SIMPLEZONING, which
generates m high-quality zones under the same diameter
constraint D and in the same problem setting.
SIMPLEZONING begins by selecting node pair (u, v) with
the highest travel demand as the initial zone seed S = {u, v}.
It then incrementally expands S by adding one node i at a
time that yields the greatest marginal gain in total demand
served, computed as in Equation 3, until no further node
can be added without violating the diameter constraint D.
Next, the algorithm removes S from V and repeats the same
process until m zones are found.
∆i = max
i∈V \S
X
v∈S
d[i, v] + d[v, i]
(3)
A. Real-World Data
For the real-world experiments, we obtain a set of origin-
destination estimates derived from a proprietary dataset. Due
to the sensitivity of anonymized individual trip records, we
are unable to publicly release the dataset. However, we share
our codebase and the synthetic datasets for reproducibility.
We apply a geo-fencing filter to retain only trips with both
origins and destinations within the city boundary. Addition-
ally, we exclude very short trips whose origins and destina-
tions are within a walkable distance (less than 500 meters).
After data cleaning and pre-processing, a total number of
33,256 trips are included in the experiments.
To spatially aggregate the travel demand into small, con-
tiguous neighborhoods, with each corresponding to a node
as defined in Section III, we use the open-source Hexagonal
Hierarchical Spatial Index (H3) developed by Uber. H3 par-
titions geographic space into a grid of hexagons at multiple
resolutions, originally designed to cover the entire planet.
Since the resolution is restricted to 16 discrete levels and
cannot be finely tuned between levels, we fix the resolution
to a reasonable level 7, which divides the city into 78
connected hexagonal cells. Each hexagon is treated as a node,
representing a small neighborhood. Trips are assigned to
hexagons by mapping their origin and destination coordinates
to the corresponding cells. The resulting aggregated demand


--- Page 6 ---
pattern, where each cell represents the sum of all trips
either originating from or ending at that cell, is visualized
in Figure 3.
Fig. 3: Visualization of H3-aggregated demand pattern in
Chattanooga, TN, USA
To better reflect practical conditions, we use pre-computed
nominal driving times on the real-world road network for the
distance matrix c. Under this consideration, the maximum
diameter represents the longest driving time between the
central locations of any two hexagons within a zone. We set
the number of zones to m = 2 and the maximum diameter
to D = 480 seconds, equivalent to an 8-minute drive.
The zoning results of CLIQUEGEN + ZONINGILP (our
method) and SIMPLEZONING (the baseline algorithm) are
shown in Figure 4. Both approaches select zones that align
well with the demand hot spots illustrated in Figure 3.
Notably, our method serves 27.03% more trips than the
baseline. Given that the budget only allows for two zones
(i.e., m = 2), identifying the optimal subset of nodes
among three prominent high-demand areas is nontrivial even
for expert city planners. While the baseline converges to a
local optimum by selecting nodes in the lower-right (orange)
region, our optimization framework correctly prioritizes the
lower-left (green) region as more beneficial for establishing
a micro-transit zone.
B. Sensitivity Analysis in Synthetic Datasets
In the synthetic setting, we construct a Delaunay graph
with |V | nodes uniformly distributed within a 10 × 10
bounding box. Each undirected edge is converted into two
directed edges with a probability of 0.2, and then a pruning
step removes existing edges independently with probability
0.2. This pre-processing emulates the mixed road types and
irregular connectivity patterns commonly observed in urban
environments.
Compared to real-world datasets constrained by the H3
spatial index, the synthetic setting offers finer-grained control
over key parameters. To systematically evaluate the perfor-
mance and scalability of our framework, we vary the number
Fig. 4: Micro-transit zones generated by both algorithms
of nodes |V | ∈{50, 100, 150, 200} and the maximum diam-
eter constraint D ∈{1.5, 2, 2.5, 3}. The number of zones is
set to m = 4.
Figure 5 presents the ratio of demand served within
selected zones to the total demand generated across the entire
graph. Our framework consistently outperforms the baseline
across all combinations of maximum diameter and node
count, achieving an average improvement of 20.44% and a
maximum improvement of 49.5% (at D = 3, |V | = 50) in
total demand served. As the diameter constraint D increases,
the demand served by CLIQUEGEN + ZONINGILP increases
monotonically for all values of |V |. In contrast, SIMPLEZON-
ING is less robust as the ratio of demand served drops from
6.66% to 4.62% when D increases from 2.5 to 3.
(a) SIMPLEZONING
(b) CLIQUEGEN + ZONINGILP
Fig. 5: Ratios of demand served to total demand with varying
numbers of nodes and maximum diameters
Table I shows the actual number of cliques generated by
CLIQUEGEN across all combinations of both parameters. At
the largest setting with 200 nodes, the range can cover the
entire area of a medium-to-large size city in the U.S., given
that each hexagon in H3 at resolution 7 spans approximately
an 1 km by 1 km neighborhood. The total number of cliques


--- Page 7 ---
in this setting expands up to 25, 000. Despite this scale, the
instance remains tractable for ZONINGILP, as the under-
lying Weighted Maximum Coverage Problem belongs to a
relatively simple class of NP-hard problems [14]. Moreover,
Figure 5 empirically confirms that problems of this size
are solvable within reasonable computational limits. These
findings support the conclusion that our framework is scalable
for addressing micro-transit zoning in most medium-sized
cities worldwide.
Max Diameter
50 Nodes
100 Nodes
150 Nodes
200 Nodes
1.5
123
603
1314
3308
2.0
199
1357
4804
14182
2.5
293
3134
14665
56050
3.0
495
8257
44324
253552
TABLE I: Total number of candidate zones generated by
CLIQUEGEN in Phase 1 with varying numbers of nodes and
maximum diameters
VI. CONCLUSION & FUTURE DIRECTIONS
This paper introduced a novel framework for designing
micro-transit zones, featuring a modified shareability graph
model and an efficient two-phase algorithm. Experiments
using real-world and synthetic data validated the approach,
demonstrating its effectiveness in identifying high-demand
zones and its improved performance over a natural baseline
method.
One important future direction is to conduct further anal-
ysis on the growth of the number of zones as a function of
the problem parameters, i.e., provide explicit bounds on the
number of zones to consider under various assumptions re-
garding the network characteristics. Another important future
direction is to tackle the problem of optimal micro-transit
zones when allowing for inter-zone travel via traditional
fixed-route transit, enabling micro-transit to function as both
an intra-zone service and the first-and-last-mile connector to
mass public transit.
While
our
experiments
demonstrate
tractability
for
medium-sized cities, larger metropolitan areas may require
further computational optimizations such as lazy constraint
generation, parallelization of clique generation, and memory-
efficient data structures. Additionally, real-world implemen-
tations should consider metrics beyond maximizing coverage,
such as likelihood that each potential traveler uses the service,
by extending the objective function to incorporate weighted
demand functions that prioritize access in certain regions,
ensuring micro-transit serves as a tool for maximizing the
social welfare.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the Aizen Cli-
mate Scholars Research Fund, US National Science Founda-
tion under award CMMI 2144127 and the US Department
of Energy Vehicle Technologies Office under award DE-
EE0009212.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Hodges, Public transportation’s role in responding to climate change.
Diane Publishing, 2010.
[2] P. Miller, A. G. de Barros, L. Kattan, and S. C. Wirasinghe, “Public
transportation and sustainability: A review,” KSCE Journal of Civil
Engineering, vol. 20, Apr. 2016, pp. 1076–1083.
[3] A. M. Liezenga, T. Verma, J. R. Mayaud, N. Y. Aydin, and B. van Wee,
“The first mile towards access equity: Is on-demand microtransit a
valuable addition to the transportation mix in suburban communities?,”
Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, vol. 24, Mar.
2024.
[4] P. Santi, G. Resta, M. Szell, S. Sobolevsky, S. H. Strogatz, and C.
Ratti, “Quantifying the benefits of vehicle pooling with shareabil-
ity networks,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 111, no. 37, pp.
13290–13294, 2014.
[5] X. Guo and S. Samaranayake, “Shareability network based decomposi-
tion approach for solving large-scale single school routing problems,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 140,
2022, Art. no. 103691.
[6] M. C. Lens, “Zoning, land use, and the reproduction of urban inequal-
ity,” Annu. Rev. Sociol., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 421–439, 2022.
[7] D. Domingo, G. Palka, and A. M. Hersperger, “Effect of zoning plans
on urban land-use change: A multi-scenario simulation for supporting
sustainable urban growth,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 69,
2021, Art. no. 102833, 2021.
[8] A. E. Dingil, “Fostering inclusive urban transportation in planning
and policy-making: An umbrella review using ALARM methodology,”
Sustainable Futures, vol. 9, 2025.
[9] A. Chandra, A. Pani, and P. K. Sahu, “Designing zoning systems for
freight transportation planning: A GIS-based approach for automated
zone design using public data sources,” Transportation Research
Procedia, vol. 48, pp. 605–619, 2020.
[10] A. Chandra, M. N. Sharath, A. Pani, and P. K. Sahu, “A multi-
objective genetic algorithm approach to design optimal zoning systems
for freight transportation planning,” Journal of Transport Geography,
vol. 92, 2021.
[11] T. Bonner and E. Miller-Hooks, “Achieving equitable outcomes
through optimal design in the development of microtransit zones,”
Journal of Transport Geography, vol. 112, 2023.
[12] J. Alonso-Mora, S. Samaranayake, A. Wallar, E. Frazzoli, and D.
Rus, “On-demand high-capacity ride-sharing via dynamic trip-vehicle
assignment,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., vol. 114, no. 3, pp.
462–467, 2017.
[13] D. Edirimanna, H. Hu, and S. Samaranayake, “Integrating on-
demand ride-sharing with mass transit at-scale,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.07691, 2024.
[14] S. Khuller, A. Moss, and J. (S.) Naor, “The budgeted maximum
coverage problem,” Information Processing Letters, 1999.
[15] S.
Shah,
M.
Lowalekar,
and
P.
Varakantham,
"Neural
Ap-
proximate Dynamic Programming for On-Demand Ride-Pooling,"
arXiv:1911.08842, 2019.
[16] M. M. Vazifeh, P. Santi, G. Resta, S. H. Strogatz, and C. Ratti,
"Addressing the minimum fleet problem in on-demand urban mobility,"
Nature, vol. 557, pp. 534-538, 2018.
[17] S. Erdo˘gan, A. Nohekhan, A. Shokputov, and K. F. Sadabadi, "Multi-
criteria decision-making framework for determining public microtransit
service zones," Transportation Research Record, vol. 2678, no. 6, pp.
504–522, 2024.
[18] M. T. M. Ng, R. Engelhardt, F. Dandl, H. S. Mahmassani, and K. Bo-
genberger, "Semi-on-demand transit feeders with shared autonomous
vehicles and reinforcement-learning-based zonal dispatching control,"
in 2024 IEEE 27th International Conference on Intelligent Transporta-
tion Systems (ITSC), Edmonton, Canada, 2024, pp. 2863–2868.
