--- Page 1 ---
Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average
Approximation
Hassaan Khalid
Department of Information and Decision Sciences
University of Illinois Chicago, hkhali23@uic.edu
Bradley Sturt
Department of Information and Decision Sciences
University of Illinois Chicago, bsturt@uic.edu
We consider a simple approach to solving assortment optimization under the random utility maximization
model. The approach uses Monte-Carlo simulation to construct a ranking-based choice model that serves as a
proxy for the true choice model, followed by finding an assortment that is optimal with respect to that proxy.
In this paper, we make that approach more viable by developing faster algorithms for finding assortments that
are optimal under ranking-based choice models. Our algorithms are based on mixed-integer programming
and consist of stronger formulations as well as new structural and algorithmic results related to Benders cuts.
We demonstrate that our algorithms—without any heuristics or parameter tuning—can offer more than a
20x speedup in real-world settings with thousands of products and samples. Equipped with our algorithms,
we showcase the value of using the sample average approximation to solve assortment optimization problems
for which no practically efficient algorithms are known.
Key words : Stochastic programming; assortment optimization; large-scale mixed-integer programming.
History : First version: Sept. 30, 2025.
1. Introduction
The sample average approximation is one of the most celebrated and effective methods for solving
stochastic programs—optimization problems in which the goal is to maximize the expectation of
a reward function. This method has been deployed by organizations in nearly every subfield of
operations research and management science, ranging from inventory control to energy planning.
The attractiveness of the sample average approximation can be attributed to its versatility: it can
be used to obtain near-optimal solutions for stochastic programs with virtually any probability
distribution, as long as it is possible using Monte-Carlo simulation to obtain a large number of
samples from the underlying probability distribution (Shapiro et al. 2021).
Assortment optimization has emerged over the past two decades as a fundamental and practically
significant class of stochastic programs. Widely studied in revenue management and marketing,
assortment optimization refers to a class of stochastic programs in which the goal is to select a
subset of products for a firm to offer to its customers that maximizes the firm’s expected revenue.
In the most common setting, the customer preferences are captured in the stochastic program by
a random utility vector that is drawn from a joint probability distribution; when presented with a
subset of products, the customer will purchase the product from the subset with the highest utility.
Tailoring the probability distribution of the random utility vector gives rise to assortment opti-
mization problems under canonical choice models such as the multinomial logit, nested logit, and
mixed multinomial logit as well as more modern variants like neural network-based choice models.
1
arXiv:2510.00850v1  [math.OC]  1 Oct 2025


--- Page 2 ---
2
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
In contrast to many other classes of stochastic programs, assortment optimization problems are
not typically solved using the sample average approximation. Instead, most of the algorithms that
have been developed in the past two decades for solving assortment optimization problems have
been tailored to parametric probability distributions for the random utility vector. For example, in
the case where the random utility vector is comprised of independent Gumbel random variables—
in which the demand model is known as the multinomial logit model—a number of algorithms
have been developed for solving the assortment optimization problem. Exact and approximation
algorithms that run in practical computation times have also been developed for numerous other
parametric probability distributions such as those corresponding to the mixed MNL choice model
(Rusmevichientong et al. 2014), the Markov-chain choice model (Blanchet et al. 2016), and many
others. These so-called distribution-specific algorithms usually rely on the probability distribution
generating an expected revenue for each assortment that has a simple closed-form representation.
Yet there are many probability distributions for which no practically efficient distribution-specific
algorithms for solving the assortment optimization problem are known. Examples range from ran-
dom utility vectors with simple parametric probability distributions (e.g., when the random utilities
are a mixture of exponential random variables (Aouad et al. 2023, Section 8.2)) to random utility
vectors with complex probability distributions (e.g., when the random utilities are generated using
an artificial neural network (Aouad and Désir 2022)). The prevalence of complex probability distri-
butions for the random utility vector is likely to accelerate as deep learning and artificial intelligence
become increasingly used in the construction of probability distributions for the random utility
vector. In such situations, the lack of practically efficient algorithms is a key bottleneck for firms to
operationalizing new probability distributions that accurately represent customer behavior.
In view of the above, the sample average approximation has the potential to serve as a valuable tool
for solving assortment optimization problems for which no practically efficient distribution-specific
algorithms are known. Indeed, the combination of the sample average approximation and Monte-
Carlo simulation can be used to solve assortment optimization problems under any probability
distribution. This combination can hence provide firms a means to decouple the tasks of estimating
a probability distribution that accurately captures customer behavior from the task of optimizing
the expected revenue. This decoupling of estimation and optimization, in turn, can offer firms the
flexibility to estimate probability distributions that most accurately capture their customer behavior.
The sample average approximation can also play an important role in designing new distribution-
specific algorithms for assortment optimization. In many real-world applications—such as recom-
mendation systems and online retail—it is crucial to develop algorithms that can scale to problems
involving tens or even hundreds of thousands of products. A central challenge firms face when con-
sidering a new choice model is determining whether it is promising enough to justify the investment
in building a distribution-specific algorithm. This challenge is especially salient because, counterin-
tuitively, a new choice model may not improve predictive accuracy but can still lead to substantially
better assortments (Aouad et al. 2023, p.2830). In such cases, the sample average approximation can
provide a practical way for firms to test the performance of a new choice model on smaller instances
(e.g., with hundreds of products) before committing resources to developing a scalable approxima-
tion algorithm (e.g., a PTAS or FPRAS) for real-world use with hundreds of thousands of products.
Thus motivated, our goal of the present paper is to make the sample average approximation a
more viable approach to solving assortment optimization problems. We pursue this goal by focusing


--- Page 3 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
3
on the task of algorithm design. On one hand, the combination of the sample average approximation
and Monte-Carlo simulation can, at least in principle, solve any assortment optimization problem to
any desired level of accuracy. On the other hand, the viability of this combination hinges on being
able to solve the sample average approximation in practical computation times when the number
of samples and the number of products are large. This is problematic because solving the sample
average approximation is equivalent to solving assortment optimization under the ranking-based
choice model, a class of problems that is known to be computationally demanding. The need for
practically efficient algorithms for solving assortment optimization under the ranking-based choice
model has thus been the key roadblock to deploying the sample average approximation to solve
assortment optimization problems in practice.
Our main contribution of this paper contends with that challenge by developing faster algorithms
for solving assortment optimization under the ranking-based choice model. We do this in two ways.
First, we introduce a new mixed-integer programming formulation of these problems, the relative
strength of which improves as the number of samples increases. Second, we develop an accelerated
Benders decomposition method based on novel structural insights and algorithmic results related
to Pareto-optimal cuts in the context of assortment optimization under the ranking-based choice
model. Theoretically, we prove that our solution methods are strict improvements over the state-of-
the-art solution methods from the literature, with the improvements being most significant when
the numbers of products and samples are large. Empirically, we show across numerical experiments
with synthetic and real-world data that our solution methods can lead to substantial speedups
in solve times for the sample average approximation, thereby offering the state-of-the-art solution
methods for several classes of assortment optimization problems from the literature. Our develop-
ments thus make the sample average approximation a more viable approach to solving assortment
optimization problems for which no practically efficient distribution-specific algorithms are known.
1.1. Related Literature
The study of assortment optimization under the ranking-based choice model has a rich history.1 As
best as we can tell, McBride and Zufryden (1988) were the first to formalize this class of assortment
optimization problems and present methods based on mixed-integer programming for solving them.
The design of solution methods based on mixed-integer programming continued in the ensuing
decades, with alternative formulations for this class of problems developed by Belloni et al. (2008),
Bertsimas and Mišić (2019), and Ma (2023), among many others. The theoretical intractability
and approximability of these mixed-integer programs were established by Aouad et al. (2018) and
Feldman et al. (2019), and special cases of these mixed-integer programs that can be solved in
polynomial time have been discovered by Honhon et al. (2012), Aouad et al. (2021), and Ma (2023).
A two-phase Benders decomposition method was proposed by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019), which
was rediscovered by Zhang et al. (2024) and extended to more general settings by Akchen and Mišić
(2021). Heuristics based on local search have been developed and studied by Jagabathula (2014) and
Gallego et al. (2024), and algorithms for solving robust versions of these assortment optimization
problems were developed by Farias et al. (2013) and Sturt (2025).
1 The equivalence of random utility models and distributions over rankings, as well as the construction of rankings
by sampling, was established by Block and Marschak (1959, Sections III and VII).


--- Page 4 ---
4
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Up to this point, the state-of-the-art solution methods for assortment optimization under ranking-
based choice models are those developed by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019). Their solution methods
are two-fold. First, they developed a mixed-integer programming formulation that is more compact
and provably stronger (i.e., has a tighter linear programming relaxation) than the formulations
of McBride and Zufryden (1988) and Belloni et al. (2008). Second, Bertsimas and Mišić (2019)
developed a two-phase Benders decomposition method for solving their mixed-integer program. The
first phase of their decomposition method consists of solving the linear programming relaxation
of their mixed-integer programming formulation using constraint generation. The second phase of
their decomposition method consists of solving the mixed-integer programming formulation using
constraint generation, which is warm-started with the cuts generated in the first phase. At the crux of
their two-phase Benders decomposition method are custom algorithms for computing cuts, including
a O(KN 2) algorithm for generating cuts in the first phase and an O(KN) algorithm for generating
cuts in the second phase, where N is the number of products and K is the number of rankings.
Despite significant efforts in subsequent years, there has been limited progress on developing
solution methods that are more practically efficient than those of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) in
the context of problems with large numbers of products and rankings. For example, Ma (2023)
introduced a new class of valid inequalities to tighten the mixed-integer programming formulation
from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019); however, Ma found that adding those constraints does not lead
to faster solution times, because the resulting formulation has “... quadratically many constraints
in K instead of linearly many, and hence the relaxation itself can be slower to solve if K is large"
(Ma 2023, Page 2103). This issue is particularly acute because the approximation gap of the sample
average approximation decreases as the number of samples—and thus the number of rankings—
becomes large. Our main contribution of this paper contends with that fundamental challenge by
developing solution methods that scale more gracefully with the number of products and rankings.
1.2. Contributions
In this paper, we make the sample average approximation a more viable approach to solving assort-
ment optimization problems. We do this by developing the first solution methods for the sample
average approximation that are theoretical improvements over the state-of-the-art methods by Bert-
simas and Mišić (2019). Our developments include a new mixed-integer programming formulation as
well as a novel algorithm for computing cuts in Benders decomposition. Empirically, we show that
these developments lead to significant speedups in problems with many products and/or samples in
real-world settings from the literature. Our theoretical and empirical results thus expand, as well
as offer a more nuanced understanding of, the viability of using the sample average approximation
to solve assortment optimization problems for which no practically efficient distribution-specific
algorithms are known.
In greater detail, the main contributions of this paper are as follows.
1. We propose a new mixed-integer programming formulation for assortment optimization under
the ranking-based choice model (Section 3). Our new formulation, which we dub the “exclusion
set formulation”, is valuable because it is both stronger and more compact than the formulation
of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019). In other words, our formulation has a tighter linear programming
relaxation, and we show that our formulation has fewer decision variables and constraints,


--- Page 5 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
5
both for finite numbers of samples as well as asymptotically as the number of samples tends to
infinity. As such, our new formulation can be solved in faster computation times as the number
of samples grows large. At the crux of our new formulation is an aggregation of decision variables
and constraints from the formulation of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) that is made possible by
adding to their formulation a particular subset of the valid inequalities proposed by Ma (2023).
2. Our second development is an acceleration of the two-phase Benders decomposition method
proposed by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (Section 4). In general, the practical efficiency of
any Benders decomposition method depends on the computation time for generating cuts
and on the strength of the generated cuts. In Section 5.2, we show that those two factors—
computation time to generate cuts and strength of those cuts—were the primary contributors
to the computation time of the two-phase Benders decomposition method in the numerical
experiments studied by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019). Motivated by these empirical findings, our
paper develops an acceleration of the two-phase Benders decomposition method by developing
faster algorithms for computing optimal cuts, and, in particular, computing optimal cuts that
are the strongest possible from a theoretical standpoint. Our developments are as follows.
(a) We show that solving the dual of the inner problem of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) can be
transformed into solving a separable convex minimization problem over chain constraints,
which is a generalization of the isotonic regression problem from statistics (Section 4.1).
(b) We use this reformulation to obtain faster algorithms for computing optimal cuts in the
two-phase Benders decomposition method (Section 4.2). In comparison to the algorithms
from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019), our algorithms reduce the computation time for comput-
ing optimal Benders cuts from O(KN 2) to O(PK
k=1 Lk log Lk) in the first phase and from
O(NK) to O(PK
k=1 Lk) in the second phase, where Lk ≤N + 1 is the position of the no-
purchase option for each ranking k. These algorithms can thus lead to reductions in compu-
tation time per iteration of the Benders decomposition method when the numbers of prod-
ucts and rankings are large or when Lk ≪N for most rankings k. Our algorithm for the first
phase is also simple, consisting of a reduction to an algorithm by Ahuja and Orlin (2001).
(c) We present the first characterization of Pareto-optimal cuts for the two-phase Benders
decomposition method (Section 4.3). Pareto cuts, which are the gold standard property
for cuts in Benders decomposition, are cuts for which there do not exist any other cuts
that are strictly stronger; see Magnanti and Wong (1981). More specifically, we introduce
four properties of Benders cuts, and we prove that a Benders cut is a Pareto cut if and
only if it satisfies those four properties simultaneously (Theorems 3 and 4 in Section 4.3).
(d) Equipped with our characterization of Pareto cuts, we present an O(PK
k=1 Lk) algorithm
for transforming optimal Benders cuts into Pareto-optimal cuts (Section 4.4). Our
algorithm thus accelerates the Benders decomposition method by reducing the number of
cuts needed to obtain an optimal solution for the sample average approximation.
We demonstrate empirically that our improved solution methods can lead to significant speedups
in representative assortment planning problems, thereby enabling the sample average approximation
to be solvable in practical computation times in a much wider scope of problem settings.
• First, we consider assortment optimization under the multinomial logit with rank cutoffs, a
parametric joint probability distribution for the random utility vector proposed by Bai et al.


--- Page 6 ---
6
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
(2024). This is a representative setting for assortment optimization because the multinomial
logit with rank cutoffs captures the well-known phenomenon that customers often have small
consideration sets, while at the same time this class of assortment optimization problems is com-
putationally demanding. In numerical experiments across various settings, our new algorithms
lead to significant speedups over existing solution methods, where the speedups of our new algo-
rithms is most pronounced when the number of samples is large. This showcases the value of our
improved algorithms in enabling the sample average approximation to solve assortment opti-
mization problems for which no practically-efficient distribution-specific algorithms are known.
• Second, to investigate the performance of our algorithms in setting with huge numbers of prod-
ucts and samples, we consider a widely-studied product line design problem by Belloni et al.
(2008). The setting involves more than 3000 products and more than 300 samples which are
obtained using conjoint analysis, and thus provides a realistic approximation of settings in which
samples are drawn from a known probability distribution. The time required to find an assort-
ment with a cardinality constraint of five products for this setting using the mixed-integer pro-
gramming formulation of Belloni et al. (2008) was reported to be one week. Bertsimas and Mišić
(2019), using their Benders decomposition method, reduced the computation time to six min-
utes.2 Without parameter tuning or heuristics, our accelerated Benders decomposition method
in this setting reduces the computation time down to around 18 seconds. These results show the
viability of the sample average approximation in realistic settings with thousands of products.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we formalize the problem setting and
review existing solution methods. In Section 3, we present our new mixed-integer programming
formulation. In Section 4, we develop the accelerated Benders decomposition method. In Section 5,
we present numerical experiments. In Section 6, we conclude and discuss directions for future work.
All omitted proofs are found in the appendices.
2. Preliminaries
In this section, we formalize the problem setting of assortment optimization under the random utility
maximization model and the sample average approximation, as well as review the state-of-the-art
solution methods for the sample average approximation.
2.1. Problem Setting
We consider assortment optimization under the random utility maximization model. These assort-
ment optimization problems can be represented as stochastic programming problems of the form
maximize
S∈S
E
"X
i∈S
riI

Ui = max
j∈S Uj
#
(1)
The above stochastic program is defined by a universe of products denoted by [N + 1] ≡
{1,...,N + 1}. We assume without loss of generality that product N + 1 is the no-purchase option,
2 The running time of six minutes for Bertsimas and Mišić (2019), shown in Section 5.2, reflects improvements in
computer hardware as well as improvements in the Gurobi solver.


--- Page 7 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
7
and the revenues of the products are denoted by r1,...,rN > 0 and rN+1 = 0. A subset of products
S ⊆[N +1] that satisfies N +1 ∈S is referred to as an assortment, and we denote the set of feasible
assortments that the firm can offer to its customers by S ⊆{S ⊆{1,...,N + 1} : N + 1 ∈S}.
The random utility maximization model is captured in the stochastic program (1) by the joint
probability distribution of the random utility vector (U1,...,UN+1) ∈RN+1. The random utility
vector has the interpretation that each randomly arriving customer will purchase a product if and
only if that product has the maximum utility among all products in the assortment. We do not
make any structural assumptions on the joint probability distribution, in the sense that we assume
that the utilities U1,...,UN+1 are random variables that can be correlated in possibly complex ways.
Our only assumption about the random utility vector is the usual requirement that the utilities are
unique almost surely; see, e.g., Block and Marschak (1959, Section III).
Assumption 1. The distribution of (U1,...,UN+1) satisfies Ui ̸= Uj for all i ̸= j almost surely.
A large portion of the assortment optimization problems that have been studied in revenue man-
agement are special cases of (1) with different parametric families of joint probability distributions.
For example, if the random utilities U1,...,UN+1 are independent Gumbel random variables, then
(1) is an assortment optimization problem under the multinomial logit (MNL) model. Other popular
classes of assortment optimization problems that are special cases of (1) include the Markov-chain
choice model (Blanchet et al. 2016), the mixed MNL choice model (Rusmevichientong et al. 2014),
the exponomial choice model (Aouad et al. 2023), the Mallows smoothed choice model (Désir et al.
2021), and neural network-based models (Aouad and Désir 2022), among many others.
As discussed in Section 1, the computational difficulty of the stochastic programming problem (1)
depends on the joint probability distribution of the random utility vector as well as the constraints
on the set of feasible assortments. In special cases of joint probability distributions in the random
utility maximization model—like those that correspond to the MNL model, mixed MNL model, and
Markov chain choice model—it is possible to derive compact, closed-form representations for the
expectation in the objective function of (1). But even when its objective function has a compact
representation, (1) is often challenging to solve in the presence of simple constraints on the set
of feasible assortments. The challenge of solving (1) is further exacerbated by the fact that the
expectation of (1) does not in general have a simple closed-form structure. Against this backdrop,
our focus in this paper is on methods for obtaining near-optimal solutions to (1) that do not make
any parametric assumptions on the joint probability distribution of the random utility vector.
2.2. Sample Average Approximation
This paper considers the combination of the sample average approximation and Monte-Carlo simu-
lation for solving the assortment optimization problem (1). The primitive of sample average approx-
imation in the context of assortment optimization is a set of samples that are drawn independently
from the joint probability distribution of the random utility vector. We denote these samples by
(U
˜k
1 ,...,U
˜k
N+1) for ˜k ∈
n
1,..., ˜K
o
It is worthwhile to emphasize that this paper is not focused on a setting in which the joint probabil-
ity distribution is unknown and the samples come directly from historical data. Rather, we assume


--- Page 8 ---
8
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
throughout this paper that we are in the typical setting of assortment planning, where the joint
probability distribution of the random utility vector has been estimated by a firm (for instance, by
fitting a possibly complex parametric choice model to historical data), and where our goal is to solve
(1) under that estimated joint probability distribution. For this setting, we assume that the samples
are generated from the estimated joint probability distribution using Monte-Carlo simulation.
Given the set of samples, we approximate (1) by replacing the true joint probability distribution
with the empirical probability distribution constructed from the samples. This approximation, which
is known as the sample average approximation, is denoted by the optimization problem
maximize
S∈S
1
˜K
˜
K
X
˜k=1
X
i∈S
riI

U
˜k
i = max
j∈S U
˜k
j

(2)
The optimal objective value of (2) serves as our estimate of the optimal objective value of (1), and
the assortment obtained by solving (2) constitutes our approximate solution for (1). This algorithmic
technique of using Monte-Carlo simulation and the sample average approximation to solve stochastic
programming problems with known distributions was popularized by Kleywegt et al. (2002), and this
algorithmic technique is widely considered to be a foundational tool in the stochastic programming
literature. For a modern introduction to using the sample average approximation and Monte-Carlo
simulation to solve stochastic programs, see Kim et al. (2014) and Shapiro et al. (2021).
The statistical properties of the sample average approximation for stochastic discrete optimization
have been studied extensively over the past several decades, and these general results apply readily to
the specific case of (2). In particular, it follows from existing results that the optimal objective value
and set of optimal solutions for the sample average approximation (2) will converge to those of the
stochastic program (1), almost surely, as the number of samples ˜K tends to infinity (Kleywegt et al.
2002). As such, the sample average approximation (2) can approximate the stochastic program (1)
to any desired level of accuracy by choosing a sufficiently large number of samples ˜K to generate
using Monte-Carlo simulation. While the number of samples needed to obtain a desired level of
accuracy is not known a priori, we can empirically assess the approximation gap of (2) for any finite
choice of ˜K by using an out-of-sample validation set, which can also be obtained using Monte-Carlo
simulation; see Section 5 for details.
We conclude Section 2.2 by noting that there is an extensive literature on convergence rates
and asymptotics of the sample average approximation for stochastic discrete optimization, all of
which immediately apply to (2). For these and related results, we refer the interested reader to
Kleywegt et al. (2002) and Shapiro et al. (2021, Chapter 5). Because the scope of this paper is
centered on algorithm design, and because the aforementioned guarantees apply to (2), we do not
focus in this paper on developing improved convergence rates of the optimal objective value of (2),
with the exception of discussions of future work in Section 6. We also remark that our numerical
experiments suggest that the number of samples needed to achieve a small approximation gap can
be reasonably small in practice; see Section 5 for details.


--- Page 9 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
9
2.3. Assortment Optimization under the Ranking-Based Choice Model
The state-of-the-art methods for solving the sample average approximation are based on reformu-
lating (2) as an assortment optimization problem under the ranking-based choice model. In the
present Section 2.3, we formally derive this reformulation.
The ranking-based choice model is a choice model defined by a distribution over preference rank-
ings. A ranking in our context refers to a bijection of the form σ : {1,...,N + 1} →{1,...,N + 1},
with the interpretation that a customer has preferences that correspond to ranking σ if and only if
the customer prefers product i to product j for all i,j ∈{1,...,N + 1} that satisfy σ(i) < σ(j). It
follows from Assumption 1 that each sample (U
˜k
1 ,...,U
˜k
N+1) of the random utility vector corresponds
to exactly one ranking, almost surely.3 Given a set of samples (U
˜k
1 ,...,U
˜k
N+1) for ˜k ∈{1,..., ˜K}, we
denote the unique rankings that correspond to those samples by σ1,...,σK with K ≤˜K. For each
k ∈{1,...,K}, we let the proportion of samples that map to ranking σk be denoted by
λk ≜1
˜K

n
˜k ∈
n
1,..., ˜K
o
: σk(i) < σk(j) for all i,j that satisfy U
˜k
i > U
˜k
j
o
It is easy to see that the rankings σ1,...,σK and proportions λ1,...,λK can be computed efficiently
from the set of samples and that PK
k=1 λk = 1. It thus follows from the above reasoning and from
algebra that the sample average approximation (2) can be reformulated as the following assortment
optimization problem under the ranking-based choice model.
maximize
S∈S
K
X
k=1
λk
X
i∈S
riI

i = arg min
j∈S
σk(j)

(3)
For notational convenience, we will let the number of products that are preferred by ranking
k ∈[K] ≡{1,...,K} to the no-purchase option be denoted by Lk ≜σ−1
k (N + 1) −1. We will also
make the following standing assumption.
Assumption 2. Lk ≥1 for all k ∈[K].
This assumption is without loss of generality because if σ−1
k (N +1) = 1, then the no-purchase option
is the most preferred option by ranking k. This implies that ranking k will never purchase a product
from the assortment other than the no-purchase option, which in turn implies that that ranking can
be removed from the assortment optimization problem (3).
2.4. Existing Solution Methods
The state-of-the-art general solution methods for assortment optimization under the ranking-based
choice model (3) are those of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019). Their first solution method is a mixed-
integer programming formulation of (3), and their second solution method is a two-phase Benders
decomposition method for solving (3) to optimality. We review these two solution methods below.
3 Specifically, the corresponding ranking σ is the ranking that sorts (U
˜k
1 ,...,U
˜k
N+1) in descending order.


--- Page 10 ---
10
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
2.4.1. Mixed-integer programming formulation.
The mixed-integer programming for-
mulation of (3) from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 3.2) requires the following notation. For
each ranking k ∈[K], let ik,1,...,ik,N+1 denote the products sorted in order of preference, in the
sense that σk(ik,1) < ··· < σk(ik,N+1). In other words, let ik,1 be the most preferred product by
ranking k, let ik,2 be the second-most preferred product, and so on and so forth. To simplify our
exposition, we will assume for the remainder of this section that there are no constraints on the
set of feasible assortments: that is, S = {S ⊆{1,...,N + 1} : N + 1 ∈S}. Given that assumption,
we will let the set of binary vectors corresponding to feasible assortments be denoted by X ≜{x ∈
{0,1}N+1 : xN+1 = 1}. Given this notation, the mixed-integer programming formulation of (3) given
by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 3.2) is equivalent to
maximize
x∈X,y∈RK×(N+1)
K
X
k=1
N+1
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
(4a)
subject to
N+1
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ= 1
∀k ∈[K]
(4b)
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[N + 1]
(4c)
yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[N + 1]
(4d)
yk,ℓ≥0
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[N + 1]
(4e)
The above formulation can be interpreted as follows. The first type of decision variables, xi ∈
{0,1}, specify whether product i is included in the assortment. The second type of decision variables,
yk,ℓ∈R, encodes whether ranking k purchases its ℓth most preferred product, i.e., whether the
product in the assortment that is purchased by ranking k is product ik,ℓ. The constraints (4b) enforce
that each ranking purchases exactly one product. The constraints (4c) enforce that if product ik,ℓ
is in the assortment, then ranking k must purchase either product ik,ℓor purchase a product that
is preferred to product ik,ℓ. The constraints (4d) and (4e) enforce that ranking k purchases product
ik,ℓonly if product ik,ℓis in the assortment. All combined, the constraints of (4) enforce that there
exists an optimal solution in which each decision variable yk,ℓis binary and satisfies yk,ℓ= 1 if and
only if product ik,ℓis purchased by ranking k.
Remark 1. The mixed-integer optimization formulation given by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Sec-
tion 3.2) uses slightly different notation than (4); a formal equivalence of their formulation and (4)
is given in Appendix A.1.
Remark 2. We observe that any constraints on the set of feasible assortments can be incorporated
into (4) by adding constraints on the binary decision variables x1,...,xN.
2.4.2. Benders decomposition method.
The Benders decomposition method from Bert-
simas and Mišić (2019, Section 4) finds an optimal solution for (4) by separating it into an outer
problem, in which we optimize over x, and inner problems, in which we calculate the revenue received


--- Page 11 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
11
from each ranking based on the assortment corresponding to x. In greater detail, their Benders
decomposition method is based on the observation that (4) can be represented equivalently as
maximize
x∈X,q∈RK
K
X
k=1
λkqk
subject to
qk ≤ρk(x)
∀k ∈[K]
(5)
where ρk(x) is defined as
ρk(x) ≜
maximize
y∈RN+1
N+1
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyℓ
subject to
N+1
X
ℓ=1
yℓ= 1
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yℓ′
∀ℓ∈[N + 1]
0 ≤yℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀ℓ∈[N + 1]
(6)
We observe that the dual of the linear program (6) is
ρk(x) ≜
minimize
α,β∈RN+1,γ∈R
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
subject to
γ + αℓ−
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ ≥rik,ℓ
∀ℓ∈[N + 1]
αℓ,βℓ≥0
∀ℓ∈[N + 1]
(7)
and we let the set of feasible solutions for (7) be denoted by Dk.
The solution method proposed in Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 4) finds an optimal solution
for (5) using a two-phase Benders decomposition method. Phase 1 of their method consists of
applying Benders decomposition to the linear programming relaxation of (5), i.e., the modification
of (5) in which X is replaced with its convex hull X c ≜{x ∈[0,1]N+1 : xN+1 = 1}. The Benders cuts
obtained from Phase 1 are then used to warm start Phase 2, in which Benders decomposition is
applied to (5) with the integrality constraints on x. In both phases, cuts are obtained by solving the
linear program (7) for each ranking. Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) develop an an O(N) algorithm for
solving (7) when x ∈X and an O(N 2) algorithm for solving (7) when x ∈X c. A formal description
of Phase 1 and Phase 2 from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 4), which provably converges to
an optimal solution for (5) after finitely many iterations, can be found in Appendix A.2.
3. The Exclusion Set Formulation
In this section, we present our new mixed-integer programming formulation of (3), which we dub the
exclusion set formulation. We prove that this new formulation is stronger and more compact than
the mixed-integer programming formulation (4). By stronger, we mean that the new formulation
has a tighter linear programming relaxation than (4). By more compact, we mean that the new


--- Page 12 ---
12
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
formulation has fewer decision variables and constraints than (4), both for finitely many products
and samples as well as asymptotically as the number of samples tends to infinity. For these reasons,
the exclusion set formulation is viewed as a theoretical improvement over (4) and can lead to faster
solve times using modern mixed-integer programming solvers (see Section 5.1).
3.1. The New Formulation
In this section, we derive our new mixed-integer programming formulation of (3). The derivation
of our new formulation is relatively simple, and consists of reducing the size of the formulation (4)
from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) by adding a particular subset of the valid inequalities proposed
by Ma (2023). Our formulation of (3) is derived in three steps.
3.1.1. Step 1.
We begin our derivation by removing from (4) the decision variables yk,ℓfor
all products ik,ℓthat are less preferred than the no-purchase option. Indeed, consider any x ∈X
that is feasible for (4). It follows from the definition of X that xN+1 = 1, and so it follows from
the definition of Lk that xik,Lk+1 = 1.4 Therefore, it follows from constraints (4b), (4c), and (4e)
that every feasible solution for (4) satisfies yk,Lk+2 = ··· = yk,N+1 = 0. By removing those decision
variables from (4) for each ranking k, and by removing the decision variable xN+1, we conclude that
(4) can be written equivalently as
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
(8)
3.1.2. Step 2.
We next add a particular subset of the valid inequalities proposed by Ma
(2023) into the formulation (8). Specifically, consider the following valid inequalities:
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≥
L
X
ℓ=1
yk′,ℓ
∀k,k′ ∈[K],L ∈[Lk] : {ik,1,...,ik,L} = {ik′,1,...,ik′,L}
(9)
The fact that the inequalities (9) are valid for (8) follows from Ma (2023, Proposition 12). The
above constraints can be interpreted as requiring that the sum of the decision variables yk,ℓfor the
L most preferred products by ranking k must be equal to the sum of the decision variables yk′,ℓfor
the L most preferred products by ranking k′, whenever the sets of L most preferred products for
both rankings are equal. It follows from symmetry that the inequalities in (9) can be replaced by
equalities, as formalized by the following lemma, the proof of which is found in Appendix B.1.
4 Recall from Section 2.3 that Lk is the number of products that are preferred by ranking k to the no-purchase option,
which implies that ik,Lk+1 = N + 1 for each ranking k.


--- Page 13 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
13
Lemma 1. The constraints (9) are equivalent to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ=
L
X
ℓ=1
yk′,ℓ
∀k,k′ ∈[K],L ∈[Lk] : {ik,1,...,ik,L} = {ik′,1,...,ik′,L}
(10)
In view of Lemma 1, we observe that (8) with the valid inequalities from (9) can be written as
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ=
L
X
ℓ=1
yk′,ℓ
∀k,k′ ∈[K],L ∈[Lk] : {ik,1,...,ik,L} = {ik′,1,...,ik′,L}
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
(11)
We observe that (11) is at least as strong as (8), since the constraints in (11) are a superset of the
constraints in (8). Moreover, the linear programming relaxation of (11) can be strictly tighter than
the linear programming relaxation of (8). In Appendix B.2, we give a simple example in which the
optimal objective value of the linear programming relaxation of (11) is strictly less than that of (8).
While (11) is a stronger formulation than (8), the former has more constraints. Specifically,
the number of constraints in (8) grows linearly in the number of rankings, while the number of
constraints in (11) grows quadratically in the number of rankings. Our main result of Section 3,
which will be formalized in Step 3 as Theorem 1, consists of showing that (11) can be reformulated
as a mixed-integer linear program with fewer decision variables and constraints than (8).
3.1.3. Step 3.
Our final step consists of showing that (11) can be reformulated as a mixed-
integer linear program in which the numbers of decision variables and constraints grow sublinearly
in the number of rankings K. Our reformulation of (11) is motivated by an observation that if
two different rankings k,k′ have the same sets of L most preferred products, E = {ik,1,...,ik,L} =
{ik′,1,...,ik′,L}, then we can introduce a single aggregated decision variable zE = PL
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ=
PL
ℓ=1 yk′,ℓto encode whether each of the two rankings purchase one of their L most preferred
products. These aggregated decision variables are useful because they will enable bookkeeping in a
mixed-integer linear program formulation to be performed on subsets of products instead of permu-
tations of products. In what follows, we will refer to these subsets of products as exclusion sets.
The derivation of our reformulation requires the following additional notation and terminology.
We will say that a subset of products E ⊆[N] is an exclusion set if and only if there exists k ∈[K]
and L ∈{0,...,Lk} for which E is the set of the L most preferred products for ranking k. We let
the collection of all exclusion sets be denoted by
E ≜

E ∈2[N] : ∃k ∈[K],L ∈{0,...,Lk} such that E = {ik,1,...,ik,L}
	


--- Page 14 ---
14
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Given an exclusion set E ∈E and a product i /∈E, we will say that product i is a continuation of
exclusion set E if and only if there exists a ranking for which E is the set of the ranking’s L most
preferred products and for which i is the ranking’s L + 1th most preferred product. We let the
collection of all exclusion set and continuation pairs be denoted by
P ≜{(E,i) ∈E × [N] : ∃k ∈[K],L ∈{0,...,Lk −1} such that E = {ik,1,...,ik,L} and i = ik,L+1}
Finally, let the probability of an exclusion set and continuation pair (E,i) ∈P be defined as
λE,i ≜
K
X
k=1
I

E = {ik,1,...,ik,|E|} and i = ik,|E|+1
	
λk
Equipped with the above notation, we now state our main mixed-integer programming formulation
of Section 3, which we refer to as the ‘exclusion set formulation’:
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,z
X
(E,i)∈P
riλE,i
 zE∪{i} −zE

subject to
0 ≤zE∪{i} −zE ≤xi
∀(E,i) ∈P
xi ≤zE∪{i}
∀(E,i) ∈P
zE ≤1
∀E ∈E
z∅= 0
(12)
Our main theorem, the proof of which can be found in Appendix B.3, is the following.
Theorem 1. The mixed-integer linear programs (11) and (12) are equivalent.
We conclude Section 3.1 by giving an interpretation of the exclusion set formulation (12). Indeed,
it follows from the proof of Theorem 1 that every feasible solution for (12) satisfies the equality
zE = maxj∈E xj for all E ∈E . Therefore, for each (E,i) ∈P, we have that zE∪{i} −zE ∈{0,1} is
equal to one if and only if xj = 0 for all j ∈E and xi = 1. Our terminology of ‘exclusion set’ comes
from the interpretation that if E is the unordered set of a ranking’s |E| most preferred products,
and if i is that ranking’s |E|+1th most preferred product, then that ranking can purchase product
i only if all products j ∈E are excluded from the assortment.
3.2. Comparison of Two Formulations
We conclude Section 3 by discussing the settings in which the exclusion set formulation (12) offers
practical value over the original mixed-integer programming formulation (8).
The primary advantages of (12) compared to (8) are two-fold. First, we observe that (12) is a
stronger formulation than (8). Indeed, Theorem 1 shows that (12) is equivalent to (11), and we
showed in Section 3.1.2 that (11) is stronger than (8). Second, we observe that (12) has fewer deci-
sion variables and constraints than (8), both for finite as well as asymptotic number of rankings.
Indeed, for any finite number of rankings K, we observe that (8) has approximately PK
k=1 Lk deci-
sion variables and 3PK
k=1(Lk + 1) constraints. In contrast, the exclusion set formulation (12) has
approximately |E | decision variables and 3|P| + |E | constraints, where |E | −1 ≤|P| ≤PK
k=1 Lk.


--- Page 15 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
15
Moreover, as the number of samples in the sample average approximation (2) grows to infinity, we
observe that the exclusion set formulation (12) will converge to at most O(2N) decision variables
and O(N2N) constraints (since the number of subsets of products is at most 2N), whereas (8) will
have at most O(N!) decision variables and constraints (since there are N! possible rankings).
The advantages of the exclusion set formulation can be expected to be most significant in settings
where the rankings that correspond to the samples in (2) have significant numbers of what we
will henceforth refer to as collisions. Specifically, we say that a set of rankings K ⊆[K] collide at
an exclusion set E ∈E if {ik,1,...,ik,|E|} = E for all rankings k ∈K. The notion of collisions is
useful because a large number of collisions translates to a smaller number of decision variables and
constraints in (12) as well as more of the valid equalities (10) that are included in formulation (11).
When considering the sample average approximation (2), there are various situations in which
a large number of collisions can be expected. One situation is that in which the number of
samples ˜K is very large relative to the number of products N. Another situation is where the
most preferred products are often similar across many samples. A third situation is where the
joint probability distribution in (1) typically produces small consideration sets, meaning that the
rankings corresponding to the samples frequently have Lk ≪N. These situations in which the
numbers of collisions are expected to be large are studied empirically in Section 5.1.2.
We conclude by noting two structural difference between (12) and (8). First, in contrast to (8),
the revenue calculations for each ranking in (12) are not decomposable, because (12) inherits the
linking constraints in (11) across rankings. Because of this, it is not straightforward to develop a
Benders decomposition method for (12) in which a cut can be computed separately for each ranking.
For this reason, our accelerated Benders decomposition method in Section 4 focuses on the original
mixed-integer programming formulation. Second, we note that the advantages of (12) with respect to
formulation strength appear to be most significant in assortment optimization problems where there
either is no cardinality constraint, or where the cardinality constraint is not particularly small. This
observation is formalized by the following proposition, the proof of which is found in Appendix B.4,
which shows that the relative strength of the exclusion set formulation (12) compared to (8) disap-
pears for assortment optimization problems that have a cardinality constraint of a single product.
Proposition 1. If the set of feasible assortments is S = {S ⊆{1,...,N +1} : N +1 ∈S and |S| ≤
2}, then the linear programming relaxations of (12) and (8) are equivalent and are both integral.
4. The Accelerated Benders Decomposition
At a high level, the practical efficiency of the Benders decomposition method in Section 2.4.2 (see
also Appendix A.2) depends on two factors. The first factor is the computation time for generating
optimal cuts, i.e., the time required to find an optimal solution for the linear program (7) for each
ranking in each iteration of Phase 1 and Phase 2. The second factor is the strength of the optimal cuts
that are generated in each iteration. Considering the strength of cuts will be important in our context
because, as we will show throughout Section 4, the linear program (7) will often have many optimal
solutions, and the strength of the cuts corresponding to those optimal solutions can vary widely.
Stronger cuts improve the practical efficiency of Benders decomposition because they can lead to a
fewer total number of cuts for the Benders decomposition method to converge to an optimal solution.


--- Page 16 ---
16
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
We focus in particular in Section 4 on the gold-standard class of cuts in the Benders decomposition
literature, which are known as Pareto cuts (Magnanti and Wong 1981, Section 2). Pareto cuts are
attractive because they are the strongest possible cuts, in the sense that a cut is a Pareto cut if and
only if there do not exist any other cuts that are strictly stronger. Recall from Section 2.4.2 that
Dk denotes the set of feasible solutions for the linear program (7). The definition of Pareto cuts in
our context of (7) from Section 2.4.2 is as follows.
Definition 1. We say that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk dominates (α′,β′,γ′) ∈Dk if
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ≤γ′ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(α′
ℓ−β′
ℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c
with the above inequality being strict at some ¯x ∈X c.5 We say that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk is a Pareto cut
if there does not exist (α′,β′,γ′) ∈Dk that dominates it.
In view of the above, our main contribution of Section 4 are new algorithms for computing optimal
solutions for the linear program (7). Our algorithms are attractive for two reasons. The first reason
is their computational efficiency. Specifically, our algorithms compute an optimal solution for (7) in
O(Lk log Lk) time for any x ∈X c and in O(Lk) time for any x ∈X, where we recall from Section 2.3
that Lk ≤N is the number of products that are preferred to the no-purchase option in ranking k. Our
algorithms are thus significantly faster than those from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) if the number of
products is large or if the no-purchase option satisfies Lk ≪N. The second attractive aspect of our
algorithms is that they output optimal solutions to (7) that are guaranteed to be Pareto cuts in the
sense of Definition 1. This property is not satisfied by any previous algorithms from the literature,
and we show in Section 5 that the Pareto optimality of our cuts leads to significant reductions in the
total number of cuts for Benders decomposition to find optimal solutions in Phase 1 and Phase 2.
The rest of Section 4 is organized as follows. In Section 4.1, we derive a new reformulation of the
linear program (7). In Section 4.2, we use that new reformulation to develop faster algorithms for
computing optimal solutions for (7). In Section 4.3, we use the reformulation from Section 4.1 to
characterize the structure of Pareto cuts. In Section 4.4, we exploit the structure of Pareto cuts to
develop an efficient algorithm for obtaining optimal solutions for (7) that are Pareto cuts.
4.1. A New Reformulation
Our algorithms in Section 4 are based on a novel reformulation of (7). Specifically, we show through
a transformation of decision variables that (7) can be represented as a separable convex optimization
problem under chain constraints. By utilizing this reformulation of (7), we will derive a number of
structural and algorithmic results for the linear program (7).
Our novel reformulation of (7) requires the following notation. Recall that Lk = σ−1
k (N + 1) −1
denotes the number of products that are preferred by ranking k to the no-purchase option, and
recall from Section 2.4.1 that ik,1,...,ik,N+1 denote the products sorted by preference for ranking
5 It follows from linearity that each instance of X c in Definition 1 can without loss of generality be replaced by X.


--- Page 17 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
17
k. Let the unique revenues among the products that are not less preferred than the no-purchase
option for ranking k be denoted by
Rk ≜{r : ∃ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} such that r = rik,ℓ}
Let the highest revenue among the products that are not less preferred than the no-purchase option
for ranking k be denoted by
¯rk ≜max{r ∈Rk}
It follows from r1,...,rN > 0 and Assumption 2 that the inequalities |Rk| ≥2 and ¯rk > 0 always hold.
Equipped with the above notation, we now introduce our main optimization problem of Section 4:
minimize
δ∈RLk+1
Jk(x,δ) ≜δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
subject to
0 ≤δ1 ≤··· ≤δLk+1 ≤¯rk
(13)
Let the set of feasible solutions for (13) be denoted by ∆k, and note that Jk(x,δ) refers to the objec-
tive function of the above optimization problem. We readily observe that Jk(x,·) is a convex function
for any fixed x, and it is easy to show (see Section 4.2.1) that (13) is an instance of a particular
class of optimization problems known as separable convex optimization under chain constraints.
Our main result of Section 4.1, which is stated below as Theorem 2, establishes the equivalence of
(13) and (7). This result will make use of the following analogous definition of Pareto cuts for (13).
Definition 2. We say that δ ∈∆k dominates δ′ ∈∆k if
Jk(x,δ) ≤Jk(x,δ′) for all x ∈X c
where the above inequality is strict at some ¯x ∈X c.6 We say that δ ∈∆k is a Pareto cut if there
does not exist δ′ ∈∆k that dominates it.
In view of the above definition, our main result of Section 4.1 is the following.
Theorem 2. If δ ∈∆k is an optimal solution for (13), then there exists (α,β,γ) ∈Dk that is an
optimal solution for (7) and satisfies
Jk(x,δ) = γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
∀x ∈X c
Moreover, if δ is a Pareto cut in the sense of Definition 2, then (α,β,γ) is a Pareto cut in the
sense of Definition 1.
The above theorem can be interpreted as follows. First, Theorem 2 establishes the equivalence of
(7) and (13); that is, it implies that the optimal objective values for the two problems are equal and
that every optimal solution for (13) yields an optimal solution for (7). Second, Theorem 2 says that
if we can find an optimal solution for (13) that is a Pareto cut in the sense of Definition 2, then we
have found an optimal solution for (7) that is a Pareto cut in the sense of Definition 1. For these
6 It follows from linearity that each instance of X c in Definition 2 can without loss of generality be replaced by X.


--- Page 18 ---
18
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
reasons, Theorem 2 implies that we can reduce the problem of finding an optimal solution for (7)
that is a Pareto cut to the problem of finding an optimal solution for (13) that is a Pareto cut.
Our proof of Theorem 2 is found in Appendix C. The difficulty of proving Theorem 2 stems
from the lower bound 0 ≤δ1 and the upper bound δLk+1 ≤¯rk on the decision variables in (13).
These bounds play a critical role in Sections 4.3 and 4.4 by enabling a succinct characterization of
feasible solutions that are Pareto cuts. However, these bounds require the use of a piecewise linear
mapping from the decision variables of (7) to the decision variables of (13), which in turn leads to
numerous cases to analyze when comparing the objective functions of (7) and (13). Our approach
that circumvents a tedious case-by-case analysis can be found in Proposition EC.4 in Appendix C.2.
4.2. Fast Algorithms for Computing Optimal Cuts
Equipped with the reformulation (13) from Section 4.1, we now present two efficient algorithms for
computing an optimal solution for (13). The first is an O(Lk log Lk) time algorithm for computing
optimal solution for (13) that can be applied to any x ∈X c. The second is a O(Lk) time algorithm
for computing an optimal solution for (13) that can be applied to any x ∈X. The algorithms can
thus be applied in Phase 1 and Phase 2 of the Benders decomposition method from Section 2.4.2.
4.2.1. Algorithm for Phase 1.
We begin with our algorithm for solving (13) for any x ∈
X c. It follows from algebra that the objective function of (13) can be rewritten as
Jk(x,δ) =
 max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
+ δ1

xik,1
|
{z
}
Ck,1(x,δ1)
+
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
+ δℓ

xik,ℓ−δℓxik,ℓ−1
|
{z
}
Ck,ℓ(x,δℓ)
+

1 −xik,Lk

δLk+1
|
{z
}
Ck,Lk+1(x,δLk+1)
It follows from the above equality that (13) is equivalent to
minimize
δ
Lk+1
X
ℓ=1
Ck,ℓ(x,δℓ)
subject to
0 ≤δ1 ≤··· ≤δLk+1 ≤¯rk
We observe for any fixed x ∈X c that the functions Ck,ℓ(x,·) for ℓ∈[Lk + 1] are piecewise linear
convex functions, which makes (13) a separable convex optimization problem with chain constraints.
This particular class of separable convex optimization problems under chain constraints has been
extensively studied in statistics as a generalization of the isotonic regression problem, i.e., the
problem of finding a regression line for a dependent variable that is monotonically increasing in
the independent variable. The most common algorithm for solving separable convex optimization
problems under chain constraints is known as the pool adjacent violators (PAV) algorithm; see
De Leeuw et al. (2010). The idea of this algorithm is to first solve (13) without any constraints,
and then iteratively add in violated constraints by merging the convex functions. In our context, we
observe for any fixed x ∈X c that each of the convex functions Ck,ℓ(x,·) for ℓ∈[Lk + 1] is piecewise


--- Page 19 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
19
linear and can be evaluated in O(1) time. As such, the implementation of the PAV algorithm given
by Ahuja and Orlin (2001, Theorem 3) can be applied to solve (13) in O(Lk log Lk) time. Our
algorithm for solving (13) is thus the algorithm of Ahuja and Orlin (2001, Theorem 3).
4.2.2. Algorithm for Phase 2.
For the case where x ∈X, we have a simple O(Lk) algo-
rithm for solving (13). Specifically, given x ∈X and ranking k ∈[K], we first compute the most-
preferred product by ranking k that is in the assortment x; that is, we compute the index
ℓ∗←min{ℓ∈[Lk + 1] : xik,ℓ= 1}
(14)
It is clear that ℓ∗can be computed in O(Lk) time, and it follows from the fact that x ∈X that
xik,Lk+1 = xN+1 = 1, which implies that the index ℓ∗is well defined. Given that index, we then
construct a vector δ ∈RLk+1 that is defined for each ℓ∈[Lk + 1] as
δℓ←
(
rik,ℓ∗,
if ℓ∈{1,...,ℓ∗},
¯rk,
if ℓ∈{ℓ∗+ 1,...,Lk + 1}
(15)
We observe from the above definition that 0 ≤δ1 = ··· = δℓ∗≤δℓ∗+1 = ··· = δLk+1 = ¯rk, which implies
that δ is a feasible solution for (13). One can also clearly compute δ in O(Lk) time. The optimality
of this solution is formalized by the following proposition, the proof of which is found in Appendix D.
Proposition 2. Let k ∈[K] and x ∈X. If δ is defined by (14) and (15), then δ is an optimal
solution for (13).
4.3. Characterization of Pareto cuts
Our algorithms from Section 4.2 are guaranteed to yield optimal solutions for (13), but those opti-
mal solutions are not guaranteed to be Pareto cuts in the sense of Definition 2. To address this,
Sections 4.3 and 4.4 develop an efficient algorithm for transforming optimal solutions for (13) into
optimal solutions for (13) that are Pareto cuts. The present Section 4.3 establishes an exact charac-
terization of feasible solutions for (13) that are Pareto cuts, and Section 4.4 uses that characterization
to develop an algorithm for transforming optimal solutions for (13) into Pareto cuts.
Our characterization of Pareto cuts for (13) makes use of four properties, which are denoted below
by Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4. For each δ ∈∆k, let Tk(δ) ∈{1,...,Lk +1} denote the maximum integer
L that satisfies δL ≤rik,L, that is,
Tk(δ) ≜max

L ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} : δL ≤rik,L
	
(16)
We observe that Tk(δ) is well defined for all δ ∈∆k.7 Equipped with that notation, we now state
four properties that may be satisfied by a feasible solution δ ∈∆k.
Property 1. Tk(δ) > 1.
7 We recall from the definition of (13) that if δ ∈∆k, then δ1,...,δLk+1 ≤¯rk. We also recall from Section 4.1 that
¯rk = max{r ∈Rk} > 0, which together with the definition of Rk and the fact that rik,Lk+1 = 0 implies that there
exists ˆL ∈{1,...,Lk} that satisfies rik, ˆ
L = ¯rk. Therefore, it follows from (16) that ˆL ≤Tk(δ) ≤Lk + 1 for all δ ∈∆k.


--- Page 20 ---
20
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Property 2. δ1 ≤rik,1.
Property 3. For all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, we have that if δℓ< rik,ℓ, then δℓ= δℓ+1.
Property 4. δTk(δ) = ··· = δLk+1.
In Appendix E, we provide an interpretation of Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 by discussing four examples.
Each example in Appendix E shows how removing any one of those four properties allows for feasible
solutions for (13) that are not Pareto cuts in the sense of Definition 2.
Our main result of Section 4.3 shows that Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 provide an exact characteriza-
tion of the structure of Pareto cuts. That is, we show that the combination of those four properties
constitutes a necessary as well as sufficient condition for a feasible solution of (13) to be a Pareto
cut in the sense of Definition 2. This main result is split into the following two theorems.
Theorem 3. If δ ∈∆k does not satisfy Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4, then δ is not a Pareto cut.
Theorem 4. If δ ∈∆k satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4, then δ is a Pareto cut.
Stated in words, Theorem 3 shows that the combination of Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 is a necessary
condition for a feasible solution for (13) to be a Pareto cut, in the sense of Definition 2, and
Theorem 4 shows that condition is also sufficient. The proof of Theorem 3 is constructive and found
in Section 4.4. The proof of Theorem 4, which is found in Appendix F, consists of an intricate
construction of five mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive cases that relate any two vectors
δ,δ′ ∈∆k that satisfy Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4.
4.4. The Transformation Algorithm
In this section, we prove Theorem 3. We do this by developing an O(Lk) algorithm for transforming
any feasible solution for (13) that does not simultaneously satisfy Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 into
a feasible solution for (13) that dominates the original feasible solution and satisfies Properties 1,
2, 3, and 4. We will henceforth refer to this algorithm as the ‘transformation’ algorithm. Because
the feasible solution obtained by the transformation algorithm satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4, it
follows from Theorem 4 that the output of the transformation algorithm is a Pareto cut. Moreover,
the fact that the transformation algorithm runs in O(Lk) time implies that this transformation
algorithm can be applied to optimal solutions obtained in Phase 1 and Phase 2 without increasing
the computation time of the algorithms from Section 4.2. Our algorithms from Section 4 thus consists
of using the algorithms from Section 4.2 to find an optimal solution for (13), followed by using the
transformation algorithm from Section 4.4 to obtain an optimal solution for (13) that is a Pareto cut.
Our transformation algorithm consists of the following steps. The input to the transformation
algorithm is a feasible solution δ ∈∆k for (13). We then modify that feasible solution by applying
four subroutines, which are presented as Subroutines 1, 2, 3, and 4 in Algorithm 1. We apply
the subroutines sequentially, in the sense the feasible solution δ is the input to Subroutine 1, the
output of Subroutine 1 is the input into Subroutine 2, the output of Subroutine 2 is the input
into Subroutine 3, and the output of Subroutine 3 is the input into Subroutine 4. The output of
Subroutine 4 is the output of the transformation algorithm. It is straightforward to show that each
of the four subroutines from Algorithm 1 can be implemented in O(Lk) time.


--- Page 21 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
21
The four examples in Appendix E provide an illustration of the four subroutines from Algo-
rithm 1. Specifically, Example EC.1 from Appendix E shows an example of an input to Subroutine
1 and the corresponding output of that subroutine. Example EC.2 from Appendix E shows an
example of an input to Subroutine 2 and the corresponding output. Examples EC.3 and EC.4 from
Appendix E show similar examples for Subroutines 3 and 4. These four examples thus illustrate not
only the necessity of Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4, but also the correctness of Subroutines 1, 2, 3, and 4.
We conclude Section 4.4 by proving the correctness of the four subroutines from Algorithm 1.
Specifically, the following Propositions 3, 4, 5, and 6 establish that Subroutines 1, 2, 3, and 4 are
guaranteed to give their specified outputs. Moreover, the combination of the following propositions
constitutes the proof of Theorem 3, since they show that any δ ∈∆k that does not simultaneously
satisfy Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 can, by using Subroutines 1, 2, 3, and 4, be transformed into a
feasible solution δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 and dominates δ. The proofs of the
following propositions are found in Appendices G, H, I, and J.
Proposition 3. Let δ ∈∆k. If δ is the input to Subroutine 1, then the output δ′ of Subroutine 1
satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Property 1. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then δ′ dominates δ.
Proposition 4. Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Property 1. If δ is the input to Subroutine 2, then the output
δ′ of Subroutine 2 satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Properties 1 and 2. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then δ′
dominates δ.
Proposition 5. Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Properties 1 and 2. If δ is the input to Subroutine 3, then the
output δ′ of Subroutine 3 satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Properties 1, 2, and 3. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ,
then δ′ dominates δ.
Proposition 6. Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Properties 1, 2, and 3. If δ is the input to Subroutine 4, then
the output δ′ of Subroutine 4 satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4. Moreover if
δ′ ̸= δ, then δ′ dominates δ.
Despite the simplicity of Subroutines 1, 2, 3, and 4, the proofs of the correctness of these subroutines
are fairly involved. The difficulty of the proofs of Propositions 3 and 5 (Appendices G and I), for
example, lies in showing that the outputs of Subroutines 1 and 3 dominate their inputs. The proof of
Proposition 6 (Appendix J), in particular, requires handling the two cases in the definition of ˆr from
Subroutine 4, and showing for each case that the properties of the input (Properties 1, 2, and 3) are
retained in the process of obtaining an output that satisfies Property 4 and dominates the input.
5. Numerical Experiments
In this section, we conduct numerical experiments using synthetic and real-world data. Our goal
in these experiments is to investigate the practical efficiency of our proposed algorithms, and the
viability of the sample average approximation to solve assortment optimization problems more
generally. A detailed discussion about the implementation of the various solution methods can be
found in Appendix K. All experiments are performed on a MacBook Pro with 16GB RAM and 10
Cores. The Gurobi version is 12.0.1.


--- Page 22 ---
22
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Subroutine 1
Input:
• A vector δ ∈∆k.
Output:
• A vector δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies Property 1.
Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then δ′ dominates δ.
Procedure:
1. Let ¯r′
k ←max{r ∈Rk : r < ¯rk} denote the
second-highest revenue in Rk.
2. If Tk(δ) > 1, then let δ′ ←δ and return δ′.
3. Else, define δ′ as
δ′
ℓ←min{δℓ, ¯r′
k}
∀ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}
and return δ′.
Subroutine 2
Input:
• A vector δ ∈∆k that satisfies Property 1.
Output:
• A vector δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies Properties 1
and 2. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then δ′ domi-
nates δ.
Procedure:
1. Let δ′ ←δ.
2. If δ′
1 > rik,1, then let δ′
1 ←rik,1.
3. Return δ′.
Subroutine 3
Input:
• A vector δ ∈∆k that satisfies Properties 1
and 2.
Output:
• A vector δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies Proper-
ties 1, 2, and 3. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then
δ′ dominates δ.
Procedure:
1. Let δ′
Lk+1 ←δLk+1
2. For ℓ←Lk,...,2, let
δ′
ℓ←
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
3. Let δ′
1 ←δ1.
4. Return δ′.
Subroutine 4
Input:
• A vector δ ∈∆k that satisfies Properties 1,
2, and 3.
Output:
• A vector δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies Proper-
ties 1, 2, 3, and 4. Moreover, if δ′ ̸= δ, then
δ′ dominates δ.
Procedure:
1. Let L ←Tk(δ).
2. Let ˆr ←max{δL,maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ}.
3. For ℓ←1,...,Lk + 1, let δ′
ℓ←min{δℓ, ˆr}.
4. Return δ′.
Algorithm 1: The four subroutines constitute the transformation algorithm from Section 4.4. Note
for Subroutine 1 that the fact that |Rk| ≥2 is established in Section 4.1.


--- Page 23 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
23
5.1. Experiments with Synthetic Data
In this section, we consider assortment optimization under the multinomial logit with rank cutoffs, a
parametric joint probability distribution for the random utility vector proposed by Bai et al. (2024).
This is a representative setting for assortment optimization because the multinomial logit with rank
cutoffs captures the well-known phenomenon that customers often have small consideration sets,
while at the same time this class of assortment optimization problems is computationally demanding.
This is also a natural setting to investigate because it offers several parameters that can be tuned,
from the size of the consideration sets to the attraction parameters of the underlying multinomial
logit model, making it attractive for investigating the practical efficiency of our proposed algorithms.
5.1.1. Data Generation.
The multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs is a random utility
maximization model. Similar to a traditional multinomial logit model, the utilities U1,...,UN+1 are
independent Gumbel random variables.8 However, if an assortment does not contain any of the L
products with the highest utilities, then the customer does not make any purchase. Said another
way, this joint probability distribution consists of drawing independent Gumbel random variables
U1,...,UN+1, and if there are more than L products that satisfy Ui > UN+1, then UN+1 is increased
so that it has the (L+1)th highest utility among all products. The fact that this is a random utility
maximization model is established by Bai et al. (2024, Section 3).
Our process for generating instances of the multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs begins by
selecting integer parameters N,M,L. The integer N denotes the number of products. The integer M
is parameter that is used to control the spread of the attraction parameters in the multinomial logit
model, with larger choices of M generally leading to a smaller spread.9 The integer L denotes the
rank cutoff, i.e., the maximum size of the consideration sets. Given these parameters, our process
for generating a random instance of a multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs is as follows.
• Step 1: Our process begins by generating a ranking-based choice model that is supported on
M rankings. Specifically, we first select random rankings over the set of products [N + 1],
with these rankings σ1,...,σM selected uniformly at random over the space of all (N + 1)!
permutations. We then draw a random arrival probability for each of these rankings, λ1,...,λM,
by sampling uniformly at random over the probability simplex.10
• Step 2: We next fit a multinomial logit model to the underlying ranking-based choice model.
We do this by generating transactional data, and then fitting a multinomial logit model to
the transactional data. Specifically, we first generate 25000 random assortments, where each
product i ∈[N] is included in the assortment with probability 0.05; the no-purchase option N +
1 is always included in the assortment. For each random assortment, we generate a transaction
by selecting a random ranking σ1,...,σM using the probabilities λ1,...,λM, and then selecting
8 In a multinomial logit model, the random utilities U1,...,UN+1 are of the form Ui = νi +ϵi, where the deterministic
scalars ν1,...,νN+1 are referred to as the attraction parameters and ϵ1,...,ϵN+1 are independent standard Gumbel
random variables.
9 In Appendix K.2, we demonstrate through numerical experiments that choosing larger values for the parameter M
generally leads to a smaller spread of the attraction parameters ν1,...,νN+1 in the underlying multinomial logit model.
10 This is accomplished by drawing independent exponential random variables β1,...,βM ∼Exponential(1), and then
defining λm = βm/(P
j∈[M] βj).


--- Page 24 ---
24
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
the most preferred product according to that ranking that is available in the assortment. We
then fit the attraction parameters in the multinomial logit model to this transaction data using
maximum likelihood estimation, with the attraction parameter of the no-purchase option fixed
to be equal to zero.
• Step 3: To assign revenues to each of the products, we first sort the products by the attraction
parameters that were obtained from the maximum likelihood estimation. We then generate
random revenues r1,...,rN uniformly over {1,...,10000}. These revenues are then assigned to
the attraction parameters in ascending order, with the lowest revenue being assigned to the
highest attraction parameter, the second lowest revenue being assigned to the second-highest
attraction parameter, and so on.11
• Step 4: To draw a sample from the multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs, we first draw the
utilities U1,...,UN+1 as independent Gumbel random variables with the attraction parameters
obtained from the maximum likelihood estimation in Step 2. If |{i ∈[N] : Ui > UN+1}| > L,
then we increase UN+1 so that it is the (L + 1)th highest utility.
To solve the resulting assortment optimization problem with the sample average approximation,
we follow the process outlined Section 2.2. That is, we first select an integer ˜K, and then we generate
the set of ˜K samples using the process in Step 4. To evaluate the out-of-sample performance of
assortments obtained by the sample average approximation, we independently generate a validation
set of 104 samples using the same process as in Step 4 (see Section 5.1.3). Bai et al. (2024) developed
an algorithm for these assortment optimization problems that finds an (1 −ϵ)-factor approximate
solution that runs in O((N/ϵ)O(1/ϵ2)) time. Because we are interested in computing approximate
solutions that are within several percentage points of optimal for problems with moderate-to-large
numbers of products N, we focus in the following numerical experiments on methods based on the
sample average approximation. Specifically, we compare the algorithms proposed in this paper for
solving the sample average approximation to those from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019).
5.1.2. Experiment 1.
In our first set of experiments, we investigate a setting of assortment
optimization problems in which there is a moderate number of products, N = 50, and where we
choose a very large number of samples ˜K with the goal of the sample average approximation pro-
ducing an assortment that is close to optimal. This setting is essentially that described in Section 3.2
in which the exclusion set formulation is intended to be efficacious.
Table 1 compares the computation times for three different solution methods for the sample aver-
age approximation. The first solution method is our exclusion set formulation (12) from Section 3.
The second solution method is our accelerated Benders decomposition method from Section 4. The
third solution method is the mixed-integer programming formulation (8) from Bertsimas and Mišić
(2019). We solve (8) from Section 3.1.1 instead of their original formulation (4) because the multi-
nomial logit model with rank-cutoffs leads to small consideration sets, which makes the original
formulation (4) much slower to solve. Table 1 does not compare to the original two-phase Benders
11 After performing Step 3, the attraction parameters in the underlying multinomial logit model satisfy ν1 ≥··· ≥νN
and the revenues of the products satisfy r1 ≤··· ≤rN. We perform this step in order to make the downstream
assortment optimization problem less trivial, since if high-revenue products also have high values for attraction
parameters, then optimal assortments are likely to simply contain the highest revenue products.


--- Page 25 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
25
Table 1
Experiments from §5.1.2 - Computation Time.
Computation Time
N
M
˜K
L
Budget
XSET
MIP
ABD
50
5
25000
5
Inf
3.45
23.01
70.01
50
5
50000
5
Inf
8.51
297.58
324.47
50
5
100000
5
Inf
19.50
356.43
551.52
50
15
25000
5
Inf
5.80
36.82
144.08
50
15
50000
5
Inf
15.17
86.91
388.73
50
15
100000
5
Inf
30.51
329.10
724.62
50
25
25000
5
Inf
6.71
28.52
102.25
50
25
50000
5
Inf
13.46
66.79
293.68
50
25
100000
5
Inf
34.78
397.20
720.32
Computation times in seconds of our exclusion set formulation (12) from §3
(XSET), the original mixed-integer programming formulation (8) by Bertsimas and
Mišić (2019) (MIP), and our accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4
(ABD). Results are averaged over ten replications and rounded to two decimal places.
decomposition method by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) from Section 2.4.2 because it is slower than
our accelerated Benders decomposition method (see Sections 5.1.3 and 5.2), which itself is slower
than the exclusion set formulation in Table 1. All results in Table 1 are averaged over ten replications.
There are several main observations from Table 1. First, we observe that the relative speedups
of the exclusion set formulation (12) compared to the other solution methods increases with the
number of samples ˜K. For example, when M = 5, the ratio of computation times of the existing
mixed-integer programming formulation (8) to the exclusion set formulation (12) increases from a
ratio of 23.01/3.45 ≈6.67 (in the case of ˜K = 2.5 × 104) to a ratio of 356.43/19.50 ≈18.27 (in the
case of ˜K = 105). This can be attributed to the fact that the number of ‘collisions’ of rankings in
the exclusion set formulation increases as the number of samples ˜K increases.12 This explanation
is corroborated by Table 2, which shows that increasing the number of samples ˜K leads to larger
ratio in problem sizes between (12) and (8). For example, when M = 5, Table 2 shows that the
ratio of the number of decision variables of the existing mixed-integer programming formulation (8)
to the exclusion set formulation (12) increases from a ratio of 121537/41933 ≈2.9 (in the case
of ˜K = 2.5 × 104) to a ratio of 472752/117683 ≈4.0 (in the case of ˜K = 105). A large number of
collisions not only implies that (12) has a smaller problem size than (8); it also implies that (12)
generally has a tighter linear programming relaxation than (8).13
Table 1 also highlights the impact of the spread of the attraction parameters in the multinomial
logit model. As discussed in Section 5.1.1, larger choices of M generally lead to a lower spread of
the attraction parameters. Indeed, we observe from Table 1 that the ratio of computation times
of the existing mixed-integer programming formulation (8) to the exclusion set formulation (12)
increases as M decreases, everything else held constant. This observation is further corroborated
by comparing the ratios of problem sizes of (12) and (8) in Table 2. We emphasize that even in
the case of M = 5, the resulting attraction parameters are still close enough for the problem to be
12 The notion of collisions is found in Section 3.2.
13 Additional results regarding the linear programming relaxation gaps of (8) and (12) can be found in Appendix K.3.


--- Page 26 ---
26
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Table 2
Experiments from §5.1.2 - Problem Size.
Number of
Decision Variables
Number of
Constraints
N
M
T
˜K
L
XSET
MIP
XSET
MIP
50
5
25000
25000
5
41933
121537
225085
389083
50
5
25000
50000
5
56817
234661
330831
751297
50
5
25000
100000
5
117683
472752
690470
1513579
50
15
25000
25000
5
52779
118578
263446
379954
50
15
25000
50000
5
94916
238601
489692
764422
50
15
25000
100000
5
160192
481439
871195
1541985
50
25
25000
25000
5
56244
119008
275483
381340
50
25
25000
50000
5
100621
239326
510527
766761
50
25
25000
100000
5
174470
482741
925476
1546146
Number of decision variables and constraints for our exclusion set formulation (12) from §3 (XSET)
and the original mixed-integer programming formulation (8) by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (MIP).
Results are averaged over ten replications and rounded to nearest integer.
nontrivial, in the sense that all N products still appear among the L = 5 most preferred products
in at least some of the generated samples; see Appendix K.2 for details.
In summary, this first set of experiments shows that the exclusion set formulation can offer
significant speedups for solving the sample average approximation, where the speedups are most
pronounced in settings with large numbers of samples. This showcases the value of the exclusion
set formulation in applications with small consideration sets, particularly in realistic settings where
some products appear in consideration sets more often than others. We note that the aforemen-
tioned tables compare the solution methods in settings without constraints on the set of feasible
assortments; additional experiments for the exclusion set formulation for settings with cardinality
constraints on the set of feasible assortments can be found in Appendix K.3.
5.1.3. Experiment 2.
In our second set of experiments, we investigate assortment opti-
mization problems in which there are larger numbers of products, N ∈{100,500}, and where the
rank cutoff satisfies L ∈{10,15}. This setting contrasts to that of Section 5.1.2 because the inflated
size of the assortment optimization problems in the present Section 5.1.3 prevents the formulations
(12) and (8) from being solvable in practical computation times when the number of samples ˜K
is large. This second set of experiments also provides a natural setting for empirically assessing
the out-of-sample performance of assortments obtained by the sample average approximation as a
function of the number of samples ˜K in problems with hundreds of products.
Table 3 compares the computation times for the two decomposition methods for the sample aver-
age approximation; namely, our accelerated Benders decomposition method, which is implemented
as described in Section 4, and the original two-phase Benders decomposition method from Bertsimas
and Mišić (2019) from Section 2.4.2.14. The results in Table 3 show significant speedups of our accel-
erated Benders decomposition method over the original two-phase Benders decomposition method.
14 Our implementation of the original two-phase Benders decomposition method from Section 2.4.2 is based on the
publicly available code provided by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019); see Appendix K.1.2 for details.


--- Page 27 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
27
Table 3
Experiments from §5.1.3 - Computation Time.
Computation Time
N
M
˜K
L
Budget
ABD
BD
100
50
2500
10
5
2.40
39.40
100
50
5000
10
5
10.48
277.76
100
50
10000
10
5
61.13
945.10
100
50
20000
10
5
125.97
2398.48
500
50
2500
15
5
2.06
91.63
500
50
5000
15
5
3.85
302.44
500
50
10000
15
5
12.10
987.97
500
50
20000
15
5
11.85
4805.63
Computation times in seconds of our accelerated Benders decomposition
method from §4 (ABD) and the original two-phase Benders decomposition
method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (BD). Results are averaged
over ten replications and rounded to two decimal places.
Table 4
Experiments from §5.1.3 - Computation Time by Phase.
Computation Time
ABD
BD
N
M
˜K
L
Budget
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
100
50
2500
10
5
0.67
1.73
18.73
20.67
100
50
5000
10
5
1.85
8.63
68.01
209.75
100
50
10000
10
5
12.18
48.95
134.04
811.06
100
50
20000
10
5
11.45
114.52
618.38
1780.1
500
50
2500
15
5
1.18
0.88
76.38
15.25
500
50
5000
15
5
3.01
0.85
247.34
55.09
500
50
10000
15
5
9.73
2.37
894.57
93.39
500
50
20000
15
5
2.68
9.17
4464.64
340.99
Computation times in seconds of our accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD) and the
original two-phase Benders decomposition method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (BD), split
by Phase 1 and Phase 2. Results are averaged over ten replications and rounded to two decimal places.
As discussed in Section 4, the improved computation times of our accelerated Benders decompo-
sition method can be attributed to two factors: our faster algorithms for generating cuts, and the
strength of the generated cuts. To better understand the role of those two factors in driving the
speedups of the accelerated Benders decomposition method in Table 3, we present granular results
for the two solution methods in Tables 4 and 5. Table 4 shows the average computation time for
each solution method for Phase 1 and Phase 2, and Table 5 shows the average number of cuts
generated by each solution method in Phase 1 and Phase 2. These tables show significant reductions
in computation time and in number of generated cuts by our accelerated Benders decomposition
method in both phases. In particular, we draw several insights from Tables 4 and 5.
The first insight is that the speedups of the accelerated Benders decomposition method in Phase 1
can be attributed in large part to the reduction in computation times for generating cuts. Specifically,


--- Page 28 ---
28
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Table 5
Experiments from §5.1.3 - Number of Cuts Added by Phase.
Number of Generated Cuts
ABD
BD
N
M
˜K
L
Budget
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
100
50
2500
10
5
2790
341
8235
14156
100
50
5000
10
5
5492
1406
16357
33617
100
50
10000
10
5
10872
4636
32732
74950
100
50
20000
10
5
21402
5933
66355
100202
500
50
2500
15
5
2609
14
7686
3267
500
50
5000
15
5
5164
62
15246
6810
500
50
10000
15
5
10275
268
30380
18660
500
50
20000
15
5
20479
720
60722
23181
Number of cuts generated in the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD) and the
original two-phase Benders decomposition method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (BD), split
by Phase 1 and Phase 2. Results are averaged over ten replications and rounded to nearest integer.
Table 4 shows that the ratios of computation times of Phase 1 of the original two-phase Benders
decomposition method to Phase 1 of our accelerated Benders decomposition method range from
134.04/12.18 ≈11 (in the case of N = 100 and ˜K = 10000) to 4464.64/2.68 ≈1666 (in the case of
N = 500 and ˜K = 20000). These ratios in computation times are much larger than the ratios in the
number of cuts generated in Phase 1 between the two solution methods shown in Table 5, which
range from 7686/2609 ≈2.95 (in the case of N = 500 and ˜K = 2500) to 66355/21402 ≈3.10 (in the
case of N = 100 and ˜K = 20000). Furthermore, it follows from Table 4 that in the case of N = 500,
the total computation times in Table 3 is primarily driven by the computation time of Phase 1.
These results underscore the value of our faster algorithms from Section 4.2 for generating cuts,
which reduced the computation time in Phase 1 from O(KN 2) to O(PK
k=1 Lk log Lk).
The second insight is that the improved strength of our generated cuts in the accelerated Benders
decomposition method also plays a significant role in reducing the overall computation time com-
pared to the original two-phase Benders decomposition method. Indeed, Table 5 shows a significant
reduction in the accelerated Benders decomposition method in the total number of cuts generated
across Phase 1 and Phase 2 compared to the original two-phase Benders decomposition method.
This difference is seen in Table 5 most prominently in Phase 2, which reflects the strength of the
cuts from both Phase 1 and Phase 2. For example, when N = 500 and ˜K = 2500, the number of
Phase 2 cuts reduces from 3267 in the original two-phase Benders decomposition method to 14 in
the accelerated Benders decomposition method.
It is worthwhile to make a couple of additional comments about Table 5 and our implementation
of the solution methods. First, we note that the numbers of cuts shown in this table refers only to the
number of generated cuts, i.e., it does not include the number of initial cuts. To avoid unboundedness
of the outer problem (5), both of the two solution methods initialize the outer problem (5) in Phase 1
with a single constraint for each ranking (see Appendix K.1.3 for details). In both solution methods,
these initial as well as the generated cuts in Phase 1 are passed as warm starts into Phase 2. Second,
we observe that the number of cuts in Phase 1 in Table 5 for the accelerated Benders decomposition
method is typically close to the number of samples ˜K. This suggests that only a small number of


--- Page 29 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
29
Table 6
Experiments from §5.1.3 - Estimated Approximation Gap.
N
M
˜K
L
Budget
˘K
Approximation Gap
100
50
2500
10
5
10000
91.28%
100
50
5000
10
5
10000
94.21%
100
50
10000
10
5
10000
95.71%
100
50
20000
10
5
10000
97.99%
500
50
2500
15
5
10000
77.80%
500
50
5000
15
5
10000
83.85%
500
50
10000
15
5
10000
87.68%
500
50
20000
15
5
10000
91.88%
Estimated approximation gap of optimal assortments obtained by solving the sample
average approximation (2) using the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4.
Calculations performed as described in §5.1.3. Results averaged over ten replications and
rounded to two decimal places.
cuts were actually required in these experiments to determine the optimal solution for the linear
programming relaxation of (5) that is solved in Phase 1. However, this fact is not identified by the
original two-phase Benders decomposition method because its cuts are weaker, as demonstrated by
the high number of cuts for Phase 1 of that solution method in Table 5. This underscores the value
of the Pareto-optimal cuts that are generated by our accelerated Benders decomposition method.
We conclude by calculating the approximation gap of the assortments obtained by the sample
average approximation. Given any assortment S ∈S , let J ∗(S) ≜E
P
i∈S riI{Ui = maxj∈S Uj}

denote the expected revenue, and let v∗≜supS∈S J ∗(S) denote the optimal objective value of the
stochastic program (1). Let ˆv ˜
K and ˆS ˜
K denote the optimal objective value and optimal solution of the
sample average approximation (2), which is shown in Sections 2.3 and 2.4.2 to be equivalent to the
outer problem (5). We recall that the optimal objective value of the sample average approximation
ˆv ˜
K is an upward biased estimate of the optimal objective value of the stochastic program v∗(Shapiro
et al. 2021, Proposition 5.6). Moreover, an unbiased estimate of J ∗( ˆS ˜
K) can be obtained by using
Monte-Carlo simulation to generate an out-of-sample validation set of samples ( ˘U
˜k
1 ,..., ˘U
˜k
N+1) for
˜k ∈{1,..., ˘K} and calculating ˘J ˘
K( ˆS ˜
K) ≜
1
˘
K
P ˘
K
˜k=1
P
i∈ˆS ˜
K riI
n
˘U
˜k
i = maxj∈ˆS ˜
K ˘U
˜k
j
o
. A lower bound
estimate of the approximation gap J ∗( ˆS ˜
K)/v∗× 100% for the sample average approximation (2) is
thus given by ˘J ˜
K′( ˆS ˜
K)/ˆv ˜
K × 100%.
Table 6 reports the lower bound estimate of the approximation gap of the assortments obtained
from solving the sample average approximation, using a validation set of ˘K = 10000 samples. As
expected, the results show that as the number of products N and the rank cutoff L increase, a larger
number of samples ˜K are required for the sample average approximation (2) to yield assortments that
are close to optimal with respect to the stochastic program (1). That said, Tables 3 and 6 together
show for these experiments that assortments that are within 90% of optimal can be found within
one minute. This underscores the value of our accelerated Benders decomposition method, and the
potential of the sample average approximation more generally, for solving assortment optimization
problems with hundreds of products.


--- Page 30 ---
30
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Table 7
Experiments from §5.2 - Computation Time and Objective.
Constraints
Computation Time
Objective
ABD
BD
Phase 1
Phase 2
Pxi = 2
3.40
106.47
59.22
59.22
Pxi = 3
5.87
276.21
66.57
66.29
Pxi = 4
14.05
392.50
71.21
70.24
Pxi = 5
18.09
387.86
73.85
72.82
Pxi = 6
167.14
705.85
75.59
74.33
Pxi = 7
157.88
861.02
76.89
75.32
Pxi = 8
371.61
1396.28
77.88
76.12
Pxi = 9
508.31
2177.62
78.68
76.88
Pxi = 10
2215.70
4240.28
79.36
77.41
Results under different cardinality constraints for the computation time in
seconds for the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD),
the computation time in seconds of the original two-phase Benders decompo-
sition method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (BD), the optimal
objective value of the linear programming relaxation (Phase 1), and the opti-
mal objective value of the mixed-integer program (Phase 2). Results are aver-
aged over three replications to remove variability in solve times, and results
are rounded to two decimal places.
5.2. Experiments with Real Data
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our accelerated Benders decomposition method
(Section 4) and the original two-phase Benders decomposition method of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019)
(Section 2.4.2) using a widely studied dataset from Toubia et al. (2003). This setting is valuable for
three reasons. First, it represents a real-world application, where the samples are generated using
individual-level questionnaire responses designed from conjoint analysis. As such, this setting is
representative of the complexity and scale typically encountered in practical assortment optimization
problems, even though the samples in this dataset are obtained by surveys instead of Monte-Carlo
simulation. Second, in contrast to the experiments from Section 5.1, the samples in this real-world
dataset do not have small consideration sets, which provides a different setting for exploring the
efficacy of the accelerated Benders decomposition method. Third, this dataset has been used by
Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) to benchmark their own Benders decomposition method due to its
large size (N = 3584, ˜K = 330), thereby offering an established point of comparison for assessing the
practical efficiency of our accelerated Benders decomposition method. Additional numerical results
on the out-of-sample performance of the sample average approximation on the dataset from Toubia
et al. (2003) can be found in Appendix K.4.
The results of these experiments using the dataset from Toubia et al. (2003) are shown in Tables 7,
8, and 9. Table 7 presents the computation times of the two solution methods, as well as gives the
optimal objective values after Phase 1 and after Phase 2.15 In the particular case of the cardinality
constraint of five products (P
i xi = 5), our accelerated Benders decomposition method reduces the
computation time from around six minutes to around 18 seconds. Tables 8 and 9 compares the
15 In Table 7, Objective for Phase 1 is the optimal objective value of the linear programming relaxation of (5), and
Objective for Phase 2 is the optimal objective value of (5).


--- Page 31 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
31
Table 8
Experiments from §5.2 - Computation Time by Phase.
Computation Time
Constraints
ABD
BD
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
Pxi = 2
2.78
0.62
102.66
3.80
Pxi = 3
3.31
2.55
263.99
12.22
Pxi = 4
3.40
10.65
332.14
60.36
Pxi = 5
4.22
13.87
333.92
53.94
Pxi = 6
4.05
163.09
404.12
301.73
Pxi = 7
4.75
153.12
464.12
396.90
Pxi = 8
4.94
366.68
497.50
898.79
Pxi = 9
5.23
503.08
590.07
1587.55
Pxi = 10
5.39
2210.31
651.65
3588.63
Results under different cardinality constraints for the computation time in
seconds for the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD)
and the computation time in seconds of the original two-phase Benders
decomposition method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) (BD),
split by Phase 1 and Phase 2. Results are averaged over three replications
to remove variability in solve times, and results are rounded to two decimal
places.
computation times and number of generated cuts of the two solution methods separated by Phase
1 and Phase 2. These tables show that the speedups from the accelerated Benders decomposition
method can be attributed in large part to our faster algorithm for generating cuts in Phase 1. In
particular, the time to generate cuts in Phase 1 for our accelerated Benders decomposition method
remained less than five seconds across all budget settings, demonstrating that our accelerated Ben-
ders decomposition method can rapidly generate high quality upper bounds.
In summary, these experiments show the capability of our accelerated Benders decomposition
method in solving real-world large-scale problems without any heuristics or parameter tuning. We
emphasize that although this setting has considerably fewer rankings than products, we show using
cross validation in Appendix K.4 that the relatively small number of samples is sufficient in this real-
world dataset to obtain a near-optimal assortment for the true assortment optimization problem (1).
As such, these experiments show the potential of the sample average approximation, in combination
with our algorithms, in obtaining near-optimal solutions to problems with thousands of products.
6. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we make the sample average approximation a more viable approach to solving
assortment optimization problems by developing faster algorithms for solving assortment optimiza-
tion problems under the ranking-based choice model. We developed our algorithms by drawing
connections between several streams of literature, ranging from Pareto optimality in Benders
decomposition (Magnanti and Wong 1981) to mechanism design (Ma 2023) and isotonic regression
(Ahuja and Orlin 2001). We believe that our algorithms and their accompanying theoretical
guarantees provide new compelling evidence that the sample average approximation can offer value


--- Page 32 ---
32
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Table 9
Experiments from §5.2 - Number of Cuts Added by Phase.
Number of Generated Cuts
Constraints
ABD
BD
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
Pxi = 2
1140
0
1312
922
Pxi = 3
1887
47
3014
2567
Pxi = 4
1967
286
3636
3408
Pxi = 5
2444
439
3776
5597
Pxi = 6
2606
1857
4267
13220
Pxi = 7
2887
3708
5072
17565
Pxi = 8
3032
5682
5562
25744
Pxi = 9
3361
3989
5851
24357
Pxi = 10
3478
10970
6321
41677
Number of cuts generated under different budget constraints by the accel-
erated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD) and the original two-
phase Benders decomposition method from §2.4.2 by Bertsimas and Mišić
(2019) (BD), split by Phase 1 and Phase 2.
to industry, allowing firms to focus on the task of estimating accurate discrete choice models. These
results also raise a number of interesting directions for future work on the theory and practice of
assortment optimization.
1. Theoretical convergence rates: It is well known for stochastic discrete optimization prob-
lems that the probability that the optimal solution set of the sample average approximation is a
subset of the optimal solution set of the stochastic program converges to one exponentially fast
as the number of samples tends to infinity (Kleywegt et al. 2002, Section 2.2). To the best of our
knowledge, it is unknown for the particular application of assortment optimization (1) whether
the sample average approximation (2) converges even faster to (1), even in simple settings
where the utilities U1,...,UN+1 are independent Gumbel random variables. Future work on
refined convergence rates would lead to an improved theoretical understanding of the settings
where (2) can provide a close approximation of (1) with small or moderate numbers of samples.
2. Faster algorithms under independent random utilities. Much of the assortment
optimization literature has focused on random utility maximization models where the random
utilities U1,...,UN+1 are independent random variables. At the same time, these problems
are known to be computationally demanding, even in the simple case where the utilities are
independent exponential random variables (Aouad et al. 2023). An interesting direction for
future work would be to develop faster Monte Carlo-based algorithms for solving (1) that are
tailored to the setting where the utilities U1,...,UN+1 are independent random variables.
3. Faster algorithms for non-rational choice models. The accelerated Benders decompo-
sition from Section 4 introduces new connections between isotonic regression and develops
structural results for Pareto-optimal cuts. These insights may prove to be useful in the devel-
opment of Benders decomposition methods for classes of assortment optimization problems
under irrational choice models; see Chen and Mišić (2022) and Akchen and Mišić (2021).


--- Page 33 ---
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
33
References
Ravindra K Ahuja and James B Orlin. A fast scaling algorithm for minimizing separable convex functions
subject to chain constraints. Operations Research, 49(5):784–789, 2001.
Yi-Chun Akchen and Velibor V Mišić. Assortment optimization under the decision forest model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2103.14067, 2021.
Ali Aouad and Antoine Désir.
Representing random utility choice models with neural networks.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2207.12877, 2022.
Ali Aouad, Vivek Farias, Retsef Levi, and Danny Segev. The approximability of assortment optimization
under ranking preferences. Operations Research, 66(6):1661–1669, 2018.
Ali Aouad, Vivek Farias, and Retsef Levi. Assortment optimization under consider-then-choose choice mod-
els. Management Science, 67(6):3368–3386, 2021.
Ali Aouad, Jake Feldman, and Danny Segev. The exponomial choice model for assortment optimization: An
alternative to the mnl model? Management Science, 69(5):2814–2832, 2023.
Yicheng Bai, Jacob Feldman, Huseyin Topaloglu, and Laura Wagner. Assortment optimization under the
multinomial logit model with utility-based rank cutoffs. Operations Research, 72(4):1453–1474, 2024.
Alexandre Belloni, Robert Freund, Matthew Selove, and Duncan Simester. Optimizing product line designs:
Efficient methods and comparisons. Management Science, 54(9):1544–1552, 2008.
Dimitris Bertsimas and Velibor V Mišić. Exact first-choice product line optimization. Operations Research,
67(3):651–670, 2019.
Jose Blanchet, Guillermo Gallego, and Vineet Goyal. A markov chain approximation to choice modeling.
Operations Research, 64(4):886–905, 2016.
H.D. Block and Jacob Marschak. Random orderings and stochastic theories of response. Cowles Foundation
Discussion Papers 66, Cowles Foundation for Research in Economics, Yale University, 1959.
URL
https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:cwl:cwldpp:66.
Yi-Chun Chen and Velibor V Mišić. Decision forest: A nonparametric approach to modeling irrational choice.
Management Science, 68(10):7090–7111, 2022.
Jan De Leeuw, Kurt Hornik, and Patrick Mair. Isotone optimization in r: pool-adjacent-violators algorithm
(pava) and active set methods. Journal of statistical software, 32:1–24, 2010.
Antoine Désir, Vineet Goyal, Srikanth Jagabathula, and Danny Segev. Mallows-smoothed distribution over
rankings approach for modeling choice. Operations Research, 69(4):1206–1227, 2021.
Vivek F Farias, Srikanth Jagabathula, and Devavrat Shah. A nonparametric approach to modeling choice
with limited data. Management Science, 59(2):305–322, 2013.
Jacob Feldman, Alice Paul, and Huseyin Topaloglu. Assortment optimization with small consideration sets.
Operations Research, 67(5):1283–1299, 2019.
Guillermo Gallego, Srikanth Jagabathula, and Wentao Lu. Efficient local-search heuristics for online and
offline assortment optimization. Available at SSRN 4828069, 2024.
Dorothee Honhon, Sreelata Jonnalagedda, and Xiajun Amy Pan. Optimal algorithms for assortment selection
under ranking-based consumer choice models. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 14
(2):279–289, 2012.
Srikanth Jagabathula. Assortment optimization under general choice. Available at SSRN 2512831, 2014.
Sujin Kim, Raghu Pasupathy, and Shane G Henderson. A guide to sample average approximation. Handbook
of simulation optimization, pages 207–243, 2014.
Anton J Kleywegt, Alexander Shapiro, and Tito Homem-de Mello.
The sample average approximation
method for stochastic discrete optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 12(2):479–502, 2002.
Will Ma. When is assortment optimization optimal? Management Science, 69(4):2088–2105, 2023.
Thomas L Magnanti and Richard T Wong. Accelerating benders decomposition: Algorithmic enhancement
and model selection criteria. Operations Research, 29(3):464–484, 1981.


--- Page 34 ---
34
Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Richard D McBride and Fred S Zufryden. An integer programming approach to the optimal product line
selection problem. Marketing Science, 7(2):126–140, 1988.
Paat Rusmevichientong, David Shmoys, Chaoxu Tong, and Huseyin Topaloglu. Assortment optimization
under the multinomial logit model with random choice parameters. Production and Operations Man-
agement, 23(11):2023–2039, 2014.
Alexander Shapiro, Darinka Dentcheva, and Andrzej Ruszczynski.
Lectures on stochastic programming:
modeling and theory. SIAM, 2021.
Bradley Sturt. The value of robust assortment optimization under ranking-based choice models. Management
Science, 71(5):4246–4265, 2025.
O. Toubia, D. I. Simester, J. R. Hauser, and E. Dahan.
Fast polyhedral adaptive conjoint estimation.
Marketing Science, 22(3):273–303, 2003.
Jiajie Zhang, Yun Hui Lin, and Gerardo Berbeglia. Approximate resolution of stochastic choice-based discrete
planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12436, 2024.


--- Page 35 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec1
Appendix A: Additional details from Section 2
A.1. Equivalence of MIP formulations
Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 3.2) present the same mixed-integer programming formulation
of (3), with the exception that the constraints
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[N + 1]
(4c)
from the mixed-integer program (4) are replaced in Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 3.2) by
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ+1
yk,ℓ′ ≤1 −xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[N + 1]
We observe that these two sets of constraints are equivalent because constraints (4b) and (4c) imply
that PN+1
ℓ′=ℓ+1 yk,ℓ′ = 1 −Pℓ
ℓ′=1 yk,ℓ′ for all k ∈[K] and ℓ∈[N + 1].
A.2. Benders decomposition method from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019)
As discussed in Section 2.4.2, the Benders decomposition method from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019)
consists of two phases. In the first phase, Benders decomposition is used to solve the linear pro-
gramming relaxation of (5). In the second phase, Benders decomposition is used to solve (5), which
is warm started with the cuts obtained from the first phase. Each iteration of Phase 1 and Phase
2 of the Benders decomposition method of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) requires solving the linear
program (7) to optimality for each ranking k.
In greater detail, the Benders decomposition method consists of the following two phases.
Phase 1: In the first phase of the Benders decomposition method, we solve the linear program-
ming relaxation of (5) using constraint generation. Indeed, it follows from strong duality that the
linear programming relaxation of (5) is equivalent to
maximize
x∈X c,q
K
X
k=1
λkqk
subject to
qk ≤γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],(α,β,γ) ∈Dk
(EC.1)
where we recall from Section 2.4.2 that Dk is the set of feasible solutions for (7). In each iteration of
the constraint generation method in Phase 1, we solve a relaxation of (EC.1) obtained by, for each
ranking k ∈[K], replacing Dk with a finite subset ˆDk ⊂Dk. Given the optimal solution (ˆx, ˆq) for that
relaxation, we then loop over the rankings, and, for each ranking k, we solve (7) to obtain a vector
( ˆαk, ˆβk, ˆγk) ∈Dk that satisfies ρk(ˆx) = ˆγk + PN+1
ℓ=1 (ˆαk,ℓ−ˆβk,ℓ)ˆxik,ℓ. If ˆqk ≤ρk(ˆx) for every ranking
k ∈[K], then we conclude that (ˆx, ˆq) is an optimal solution for (EC.1). Otherwise, for each ranking
that satisfies ˆqk > ρk(ˆx), we add ( ˆαk, ˆβk, ˆγk) into ˆDk, and we then continue to the next iteration.


--- Page 36 ---
ec2
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Phase 2: In the second phase of the Benders decomposition method, we solve (5) using con-
straint generation, which is warm-started using the constraints generated in Phase 1. Indeed, it
follows from strong duality that (5) is equivalent to
maximize
x∈X,q
K
X
k=1
λkqk
subject to
qk ≤γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],(α,β,γ) ∈Dk
(EC.2)
Similarly as in Phase 1, each iteration of the constraint generation method for Phase 2 consists of
solving (EC.2), followed by solving (7) for each ranking k to see if there is a (αk,βk,γk) ∈Dk for
which the constraints are violated. If so, we add the violated constraints and solve again; otherwise,
we conclude that the current integer solution is an optimal solution for (5). The purpose of the first
phase is to generate constraints to warm start the constraint generation method for solving (EC.2).
Remark EC.1. Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Appendix EC.2) shows that the constraint generation
methods for Phase 1 and Phase 2 are guaranteed to converge after finite numbers of iterations and
output optimal solutions for (EC.1) and (EC.2), respectively. We note that constraint generation in
Phase 2 can implemented using lazy constraints within branch-and-bound; see Bertsimas and Mišić
(2019, Section 4.1).
Appendix B: Omitted Details from Section 3
B.1. Proof of Lemma 1
Proof of Lemma 1.
Consider any k,k′ ∈[K], L ∈[Lk], and suppose that {ik,1,...,ik,L} =
{ik′,1,...,ik′,L}. It follows from the fact that L ∈[Lk] that ik,ℓ< N + 1 for all ℓ∈{1,...,L}, which
implies that ik′,ℓ< N + 1 for all ℓ∈{1,...,L}. We thus conclude that L ≤Lk′, which implies that
(9) contains the constraints PL
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ≥PL
ℓ=1 yk′,ℓand PL
ℓ=1 yk′,ℓ≥PL
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ.
□
B.2. Strength of formulation (11)
In the following example, we show that the linear programming relaxation of (11) can be strictly
tighter than the linear programming relaxation of (8). Indeed, consider an example in which there
are N = 3 products and K = 2 rankings. The two rankings are given by
i1,1 = 1,
i2,1 = 2,
i1,2 = 2,
i2,2 = 1,
i1,3 = 3,
i2,3 = 4,
i1,4 = 4,
i2,4 = 3,


--- Page 37 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec3
the probabilities of the two rankings are λ1 = λ2 = 0.5, and the revenues of the products are r1 =
r2 = $100, and r3 = $150. For this example, we observe that (8) is
maximize
x∈{0,1}3,y
(100y1,1 + 100y1,2 + 150y1,3) × 0.5 + (100y2,1 + 100y2,2) × 0.5
subject to
y1,1 + y1,2 + y1,3 ≤1
y2,1 + y2,2 ≤1
x1 ≤y1,1
x2 ≤y1,1 + y1,2
x3 ≤y1,1 + y1,2 + y1,3
x2 ≤y2,1
x1 ≤y2,1 + y2,2
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈{1,2},ℓ∈[Lk]
(EC.3)
We now make several claims.
Claim EC.1. The optimal objective value of (EC.3) is equal to $100 and x ∈{0,1}3 is an optimal
solution for (EC.3) if and only if x1 = 1 or x2 = 1.
Proof of Claim EC.1.
Suppose that x1 = x2 = 0. Then we observe that the revenue from the
second ranking is equal to $0 (because the second ranking prefers the no-purchase option 4 to
product 3) and that the revenue from the first ranking is at most $150. However, if x1 = 1 or x2 = 1,
then the revenue we get from the first ranking is $100 and the revenue we get from the second
ranking is $100. Since λ1 = λ2 = 0.5, then we conclude that every optimal solution of (EC.3) must
satisfy x1 = 1 or x2 = 1 and that the optimal objective value of (EC.3) is $100.
□
Claim EC.2. The optimal objective value of the linear programming relaxation of (EC.3) is equal
to $112.5 and x ∈[0,1]3 is an optimal solution for the linear programming relaxation of (EC.3) if
and only if x1 = x2 = 0.5 and x3 ≥0.5.
Proof of Claim EC.2.
While this claim can be verified numerically, it is useful to sketch out the
intuition. Indeed, we observe for all x ∈[0,1]3 that every feasible solution for the linear programming
relaxation of (EC.3) must satisfy y2,1 = x2. Therefore, we observe that every optimal solution will
satisfy y2,2 = min{x1,1 −y2,1} = min{x1,1 −x2}, and so the revenue from the second ranking will
be
100y2,1 + 100y2,2 = 100x2 + 100min{x1,1 −x2} = 100min{x1 + x2,1}
We further observe that if x1 = x2 = 0.5 and x3 ≥0.5, then there exists a feasible solution in which
y1,1 = 0.5, y1,2 = 0, and y1,3 = 0.5, and so the revenue from the first ranking will be
100y1,1 + 100y1,2 + 150y1,3 = 125
We observe that increasing x1 = 0.5 or x2 = 0.5 by ϵ > 0 will result in the revenue from the first
ranking decreasing by 150ϵ−100ϵ = 50ϵ and the revenue from the second product being unchanged.
Conversely, decreasing x1 = 0.5 or x2 = 0.5 by ϵ > 0 will result in the revenue from the first ranking
increasing by at most 150ϵ −100ϵ = 50ϵ and the revenue from the second ranking decreasing by
100ϵ. We thus conclude that x1 = 0.5 and x2 = 0.5 is optimal, and we readily observe that every
optimal solution will satisfy x3 ≥0.5.
□


--- Page 38 ---
ec4
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
If follows from Claims EC.1 and EC.2 that the linear programming relaxation of (EC.3) has an
optimal objective value (0.5 × $125 + 0.5 × $100 = $112.5) that is strictly greater than the optimal
objective value of (EC.3) ($100). Moreover, it follows from Claim EC.2 that every optimal solution
for the linear programming relaxation of (EC.3) is violated by the constraint y1,1 +y1,2 = y2,1 +y2,2.
We have thus shown for this example that the linear programming relaxation of (11) is tighter than
the linear programming relaxation of (8).
B.3. Proof of Theorem 1
Proof of Theorem 1.
Recall the optimization problem (11), repeated below for convenience.
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ=
L
X
ℓ=1
yk′,ℓ
∀k,k′ ∈[K],L ∈[Lk] : {ik,1,...,ik,L} = {ik′,1,...,ik′,L}
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
(11)
We observe that we can, without loss of generality, introduce a decision variable zE into (11) with
the constraint that zE = PL
ℓ=1 yk,ℓfor all k ∈[K] and L ∈[Lk] that satisfy E = {ik,1,...,ik,L}. Note
that adding these decision variables and constraints into (11) is without loss of generality because
the constraint P|E|
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ= P|E|
ℓ=1 yk′,ℓis imposed for all k,k′ that satisfy E = {ik,1,...,ik,|E|} =
{ik′,1,...,ik′,|E|}. Therefore, the above optimization problem can be written as
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y,z
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ= z{ik,1,...,ik,L}
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
We next observe that the nonnegativity of the decision variables yk,ℓand the constraints PLk
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ≤
1 together imply that PL
ℓ=1 yk,ℓ≤1 for all k ∈[K] and L ∈[Lk], and so the above problem is


--- Page 39 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec5
equivalent to
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y,z
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ= z{ik,1,...,ik,L}
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
It follows from substitution that the above problem is equivalent to
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y,z
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ= z{ik,1,...,ik,L}
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
z{ik,1,...,ik,L} ≤1
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
xik,ℓ≤z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ}
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
(EC.4)
We also observe that the constraints
L
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ= z{ik,1,...,ik,L}
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
can be rewritten equivalently as
z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1} = yk,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
z∅= 0
Therefore, (EC.4) is equivalent to
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,z
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓ
 z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1}

λk
subject to
z{ik,1,...,ik,L} ≤1
∀k ∈[K],L ∈[Lk]
xik,ℓ≤z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ}
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1} ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
z∅= 0
(EC.5)


--- Page 40 ---
ec6
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
It follows from the definitions of E and P that the constraints of (EC.5) can be written equivalently
as
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,z
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓ
 z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1}

λk
subject to
zE ≤1
∀E ∈E
xi ≤zE∪{i}
∀(E,i) ∈P
0 ≤zE∪{i} −zE ≤xi
∀(E,i) ∈P
z∅= 0
(EC.6)
To conclude the proof of Theorem 1, we reformulate the objective function of (EC.6). Indeed, we
observe that the objective function of (EC.6) satisfies
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓ
 z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1}

λk
=
X
(E,i)∈P
 K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓ
 z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ} −z{ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1}

λkI{E = {ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1} and i = ik,ℓ}
!
=
X
(E,i)∈P
 K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓ
 zE∪{i} −zE

λkI{E = {ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1} and i = ik,ℓ}
!
=
X
(E,i)∈P
rik,ℓ
 zE∪{i} −zE

 K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
I{E = {ik,1,...,ik,ℓ−1} and i = ik,ℓ}λk
!
=
X
(E,i)∈P
rik,ℓ
 zE∪{i} −zE

 K
X
k=1
I

E = {ik,1,...,ik,|E|} and i = ik,|E|+1
	
λk
!
=
X
(E,i)∈P
rik,ℓ
 zE∪{i} −zE

λE,i
where first equality follows from the definition of P, the second, third, and fourth equalities follow
from algebra, and the fifth equality is the definition of λE,i. That concludes our proof of Theorem 1.
□
B.4. Proof of Proposition 1
Proof of Proposition 1.
We recall that the exclusion set formulation (12) is equivalent to (11)
(Theorem 1), and we recall from Section 3.1.2 that (11) is stronger than (8). Therefore, to prove
Proposition 1, it suffices to show that (8) is integral in the case where we have a cardinality constraint


--- Page 41 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec7
that is equal to one. Indeed, consider the formulation (8) with this cardinality constraint:
maximize
x∈{0,1}N ,y
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓyk,ℓλk
subject to
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓ
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
N
X
i=1
xi ≤1
(EC.7)
We now consider the linear programming relaxation of (EC.7). Indeed, it follows from the fact
that r1,...,rN > 0 that there exists an optimal solution for the linear programming relaxation that
satisfies PN
i=1 xi = 1. Now consider any x ∈[0,1]N that satisfies PN
i=1 xi = 1. It follows from the
constraints yk,ℓ≤xik,ℓand from the fact that r1,...,rN > 0 that an upper bound on (EC.7) is
achieved by letting yk,ℓ= xik,ℓfor all k ∈[K] and ℓ∈[Lk], i.e., the optimal objective value of the
linear programming relaxation of (EC.7) is upper bounded by
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓxik,ℓλk
We also observe that letting yk,ℓ= xik,ℓfor each ranking k ∈[K] and ℓ∈[Lk] is a feasible solution
for the linear programming relaxation of (EC.7), since
Lk
X
ℓ=1
yk,ℓ=
Lk
X
ℓ=1
xik,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K]
xik,ℓ≤
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
xik,ℓ′ =
ℓ
X
ℓ′=1
yk,ℓ′
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
0 ≤yk,ℓ= xik,ℓ≤1
∀k ∈[K],ℓ∈[Lk]
Therefore, the optimal objective value of (EC.7) is lower bounded by
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓxik,ℓλk
Since the above reasoning holds for all x ∈[0,1]N that satisfy PN
i=1 xi = 1, we conclude that the
linear programming relaxation of (EC.7) is equivalent to
maximize
x∈[0,1]N :PN
i=1 xi≤1
K
X
k=1
Lk
X
ℓ=1
rik,ℓxik,ℓλk
(EC.8)
Because there exists an optimal solution for (EC.8) that is integral, we conclude that the linear
programming relaxations of (12) and (8) are equivalent and integral when we have a cardinality
constraint of a single product.
□


--- Page 42 ---
ec8
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Appendix C: Proof of Theorem 2
Our proof of Theorem 2 is split into the following two theorems.
Theorem EC.1. If δ ∈∆k, then there exists (α,β,γ) ∈Dk that satisfies
Jk(x,δ) = γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
∀x ∈X c
Theorem EC.2. If (α,β,γ) ∈Dk, then there exists δ ∈∆k that satisfies
Jk(x,δ) ≤γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
∀x ∈X c
The proofs of Theorems EC.1 and EC.2 are found in Appendices C.1 and C.2. For the sake of
completeness, we show in Appendix C.3 that Theorem 2 follows from Theorems EC.1 and EC.2.
C.1. Proof of Theorem EC.1
Let ¯r∗≜maxi∈[N+1] ri denote the maximum revenue among all products. Our proof of Theorem EC.1
is constructive. Indeed, consider any δ ∈∆k, and define (α,β,γ) as
αℓ=
(
max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
,
if ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1},
0,
if ℓ∈{Lk + 2,...,N + 1}
(EC.9a)
βℓ=





δℓ+1 −δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,Lk},
¯r∗−δLk+1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
if ℓ∈{Lk + 2,...,N + 1}
(EC.9b)
γ = ¯r∗
(EC.9c)
In what follows, we complete the proof of Theorem EC.1 by showing that the solution (α,β,γ)
constructed in (EC.9) satisfies (α,β,γ) ∈Dk as well as satisfies Jk(x,δ) = γ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
for all x ∈X c. We prove these two results in the following Propositions EC.1 and EC.2.
Proposition EC.1. (α,β,γ) ∈Dk.
Proof of Proposition EC.1.
Our proof consists of showing that (α,β,γ) satisfies the constraints
of the linear program (7). Indeed, for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}, we have
γ + αℓ−
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ = γ + αℓ−
Lk
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ −βLk+1 −
N+1
X
ℓ′=Lk+2
βℓ′
= ¯r∗+ max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−
Lk
X
ℓ′=ℓ
(δℓ′+1 −δℓ′) −
 ¯r∗−δLk+1

−
N+1
X
ℓ′=Lk+2
0
= δℓ+ max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
≥rik,ℓ
(EC.10)


--- Page 43 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec9
The first equality follows from algebra. The second equality follows from our construction of (α,β,γ).
The third equality from canceling terms. The inequality follows from algebra. Moreover, for ℓ∈
{Lk + 2,...,N + 1}, we have
γ + αℓ−
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ = ¯r∗+ 0 −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
0 ≥rik,ℓ
(EC.11)
The first equality follows from our construction of (α,β,γ), and the inequality follows from the
definition of ¯r∗. Combining (EC.10) and (EC.11), we have shown that
γ + αℓ−
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ ≥rik,ℓ
∀ℓ∈{1,...,N + 1}
It is straightforward to show that αℓ≥0 for all ℓ∈{1,...,N +1}. Moreover, for all ℓ∈{1,...,N +1},
βℓ≥





δℓ−δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,Lk},
¯r∗−δLk+1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
if ℓ∈{Lk + 2,...,N + 1}
≥0
where the first inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k, and the second inequality follows from
algebra and from the definition of ¯r∗. We have thus shown that (α,β,γ) satisfies the constraints
of the linear program (7), which implies that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk. Our proof of Proposition EC.1 is thus
complete.
□
Proposition EC.2. Jk(x,δ) = γ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c
Proof of Proposition EC.2.
Consider any x ∈X c. For each ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}, it follows from our
construction of (α,β,γ) that
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ=
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
For the case of ℓ= Lk + 1, we have
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ=

max
n
0,rik,Lk+1 −δLk+1
o
−
 ¯r∗−δLk+1

xik,Lk+1
=
 max

0,rN+1 −δLk+1
	
−
 ¯r∗−δLk+1

xN+1
=
 max

0,0 −δLk+1
	
−
 ¯r∗−δLk+1

1
= δLk+1 −¯r∗
The first equality follows from our construction of (α,β,γ). The second equality follows from algebra
and from the fact that ik,Lk+1 = N + 1. The third equality follows from the fact that rN+1 = 0 and
from the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xN+1 = 1). The fourth equality follows from the fact
that δ ∈∆k (which implies that δLk+1 ≥0). For each ℓ∈{Lk + 2,...,N + 2}, it follows from our
construction of (α,β,γ) that
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ= (0 −0)xik,ℓ= 0


--- Page 44 ---
ec10
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
We have thus shown that
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ= γ +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ+
 αLk+1 −βLk+1

xik,Lk+1 +
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+2
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ
= ¯r∗+
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ+
 δLk+1 −¯r∗
+
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+2
0
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
which completes our proof of Proposition EC.2.
□
C.2. Proof of Theorem EC.2
Our proof of Theorem EC.2 is constructive. Indeed, consider any (α,β,γ) ∈Dk, and define δ as
δℓ= max
(
min
(
γ −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′, ¯rk
)
,0
)
∀ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}
(EC.12)
In what follows, we complete the proof of Theorem EC.2 by showing that the solution δ constructed
in (EC.12) satisfies δ ∈∆k as well as satisfies Jk(x,δ) ≤γ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c. We
prove these two results in the following Propositions EC.3 and EC.4.
Proposition EC.3. δ ∈∆k.
Proof of Proposition EC.3.
It follows immediately from (EC.12) that δ1 ≥0 and that δLk+1 ≤¯rk.
Moreover, for each ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}, it follows from (EC.12) that
δℓ+1 = max
(
min
(
γ −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′ + βℓ+1, ¯rk
)
,0
)
≥max
(
min
(
γ −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′, ¯rk
)
,0
)
= δℓ
where the inequality follows from the fact that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk, which implies that βℓ+1 ≥0. We have
thus shown that δ ∈∆k.
□
Proposition EC.4. Jk(x,δ) ≤γ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c.
Proof of Proposition EC.4.
Consider any x ∈X c. It follows from fact that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk that
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ≥γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
 
max
(
rik,ℓ−
 
γ −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′
!
,0
)
−βℓ
!
xik,ℓ
(EC.13)
For notational convenience, define
ζℓ≜γ −
N+1
X
ℓ′=ℓ
βℓ′
∀ℓ∈{1,...,N + 2}
It follows from the above definition that βℓ= ζℓ+1 −ζℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,N + 1} and that
δℓ= max{min{ζℓ, ¯rk},0}
∀ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}
(EC.14)


--- Page 45 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec11
In view of the above notation and (EC.13), to complete the proof of Proposition EC.4, it suffices
for us to show that
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ≥Jk(x,δ)
(EC.15)
Our proof of (EC.15) will make use of the following Claims EC.3 and EC.4.
Claim EC.3.
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−δℓ,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
≥−max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
Proof of Claim EC.3.
Consider any ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}. We observe that
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

−
 max

rik,ℓ−δℓ,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

=





 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

−
 max

rik,ℓ−¯rk,0
	
−(¯rk −¯rk)

,
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

−
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −ζℓ)

,
if 0 ≤ζℓ≤¯rk,
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

−
 max

rik,ℓ−0,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −0)

,
if ζℓ< 0
=





−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −δℓ+1),
if 0 ≤ζℓ≤¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −δℓ+1),
if ζℓ< 0
=
(
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −δℓ+1),
if ζℓ≤¯rk
=





−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −δℓ+1),
if ζℓ≤¯rk < ζℓ+1,
−(ζℓ+1 −δℓ+1),
if ζℓ≤ζℓ+1 ≤¯rk
=





−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −¯rk),
if ζℓ≤¯rk < ζℓ+1,
−(ζℓ+1 −max{ζℓ+1,0}),
if ζℓ≤ζℓ+1 ≤¯rk
=





−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −¯rk),
if ζℓ≤¯rk < ζℓ+1,
max{0,−ζℓ+1},
if ζℓ≤ζℓ+1 ≤¯rk
≥





−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ),
if ζℓ> ¯rk,
−(ζℓ+1 −¯rk),
if ζℓ≤¯rk < ζℓ+1,
0,
if ζℓ≤ζℓ+1 ≤¯rk
= −(max{ζℓ+1 −¯rk,0} −max{ζℓ−¯rk,0})
(EC.16)
The first equality follows from (EC.14). The second equality follows from algebra and the definition
of ¯rk. The third and fourth equalities follow from algebra. The fifth equality follows from (EC.14).
The sixth equality, the inequality, and the seventh equality follow from algebra. Using the above
inequality, we have
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−δℓ,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ


--- Page 46 ---
ec12
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
≥−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(max{ζℓ+1 −¯rk,0} −max{ζℓ−¯rk,0})xik,ℓ
≥−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(max{ζℓ+1 −¯rk,0} −max{ζℓ−¯rk,0})1
= −
 max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
−max{ζ1 −¯rk,0}

≥−max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
The first inequality follows from (EC.16). The second inequality follows from the fact that x ∈X c
(which implies that xik,ℓ≤1) and the fact that (α,β,γ) ∈Dk (which implies that ζℓ+1 ≥ζℓ). The
equality follows from algebra, and the third inequality follows from algebra. This completes our
proof of Claim EC.3.
□
Claim EC.4.
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−δLk+1 ≥max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
Proof of Claim EC.4.
We observe that

max
n
rik,Lk+1 −ζLk+1,0
o
−
 ζLk+2 −ζLk+1

xik,Lk+1
=
 max

0 −ζLk+1,0
	
−
 ζLk+2 −ζLk+1

1
= max

ζLk+1,0
	
−ζLk+2
(EC.17)
The first equality follows from the definition of Lk and from the fact that x ∈X c (which implies
that xik,Lk+1 = 1), and the second equality follows from algebra. Therefore,
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−δLk+1
= γ +
 max

ζLk+1,0
	
−ζLk+2

+
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+2
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−δLk+1
≥γ +
 max

ζLk+1,0
	
−ζLk+2

−
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+2
(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)xik,ℓ−δLk+1
≥γ +
 max

ζLk+1,0
	
−ζLk+2

−
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+2
(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)1 −δLk+1
= γ + max

ζLk+1,0
	
−ζN+2 −δLk+1
= max

ζLk+1,0
	
−δLk+1
= max

ζLk+1,0
	
−min

max

ζLk+1,0
	
, ¯rk
	
= max

max

ζLk+1,0
	
−¯rk,0
	
= max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
The first equality follows from (EC.17). The first inequality follows from algebra and from the
fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,ℓ≥0). The second inequality follows from the fact that


--- Page 47 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec13
(α,β,γ) ∈Dk (which implies that ζℓ+1 −ζℓ≥0) and the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,ℓ≤
1). The second equality follows from algebra. The third equality follows from the fact that ζN+2 = γ.
The fourth equality follows from (EC.14). The fifth and sixth equalities follow from algebra. Our
proof of Claim EC.4 is complete.
□
Combining Claims EC.3 and EC.4, we have shown that
γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−Jk(x,δ)
=

γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=Lk+1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−δLk+1


+
 Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−ζℓ,0
	
−(ζℓ+1 −ζℓ)

xik,ℓ−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

rik,ℓ−δℓ,0
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
!
≥max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
−max

ζLk+1 −¯rk,0
	
= 0
where first equality follows from algebra and the definition of Jk(x,δ), the inequality follows from
Claims EC.3 and EC.4, and the second equality follows from algebra. We have thus shown that
(EC.15) holds, which completes our proof of Proposition EC.4.
□
C.3. Proof of Theorem 2
For the sake of completeness, we conclude Appendix C by showing that Theorem 2 follows from
Theorems EC.1 and EC.2.
Proof of Theorem 2.
We first show that every optimal solution for (13) is an optimal solution for
(7). Indeed, it follows from Theorem EC.1 that every optimal solution for (13) can be transformed
into a feasible (but possibly suboptimal) solution for (7) with the same objective value. This implies
that the optimal objective value of (13) is greater than or equal to the optimal objective value of
(7). Moreover, it follows from Theorem EC.2 that every optimal solution for (7) can be transformed
into a feasible (but possibly suboptimal) solution for (13) with the same or better objective value.
This implies that the optimal objective value of (7) is greater than or equal to the optimal objective
value of (13). We thus conclude that the optimal objective values of (7) and (13) are equal, and
that every optimal solution for (13) can be transformed into an optimal solution for (7).
Consider any δ ∈∆k that is a Pareto cut in the sense of Definition 2. It follows from Theorem EC.1
that there exists (α,β,γ) ∈Dk that satisfies Jk(x,δ) = γ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c.
Now suppose for the sake of developing a contradiction that (α,β,γ) is not a Pareto cut in the
sense of Definition 1. Then it follows from that supposition that there exists (α′,β′,γ′) ∈Dk that
dominates (α,β,γ). It follows from Theorem EC.2 that there exists δ′ ∈∆k that satisfies that
satisfies Jk(x,δ′) ≤γ′ + PN+1
ℓ=1 (α′
ℓ−β′
ℓ)xik,ℓfor all x ∈X c. We have thus shown that
Jk(x,δ′) ≤γ′ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(α′
ℓ−β′
ℓ)xik,ℓ≤γ +
N+1
X
ℓ=1
(αℓ−βℓ)xik,ℓ= Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c
where the second inequality is strict at some ¯x ∈X c. We have thus shown that δ′ dominates δ,
which contradicts the assumption that δ is a Pareto cut. This contradiction implies that (α,β,γ)
is a Pareto cut in the sense of Definition 1, which completes the proof of Theorem 2.
□


--- Page 48 ---
ec14
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Appendix D: Proof of Proposition 2
Proof of Proposition 2.
Let k ∈[K] and x ∈X. We observe that δ is an optimal solution for
(13) because
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= ¯rk +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−¯rk
	
−(¯rk −¯rk)

xik,ℓ
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−rik,ℓ∗
o
−

¯rk −rik,ℓ∗

xik,ℓ
= ¯rk +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗+1
(0 −0)xik,ℓ+

0 −

¯rk −rik,ℓ∗

xik,ℓ
= ¯rk −

¯rk −rik,ℓ∗

xik,ℓ
= rik,ℓ∗
The first equality holds because our definition of ℓ∗in (14) implies that xik,1 = ··· = xik,ℓ∗−1 = 0. The
second equality follows from our construction of δ in (15). The third equality follows from the fact
that rik,ℓ≤¯rk for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk +1}. The fourth equality follows from algebra. The fifth equality
holds because our definition of ℓ∗in (14) implies that xik,ℓ∗= 1. Since the optimal objective value
of (13) is clearly equal to rik,ℓ∗, our proof of Proposition 2 is complete.
□
Appendix E: Illustration for Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4
In this appendix, we provide intuition for Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 by presenting four illustrative
examples. Each example shows that removing any one of those four properties from Section 4.3 can
allow for solutions for (13) that are not Pareto cuts, in the sense of Definition 2. By showing how
removing any of those properties allows for non-Pareto cuts, we motivate each of the four properties
as well as motivate the four subroutines in the transformation algorithm from Section 4.4.
Example EC.1 (Property 1 is violated). Suppose that there are N = 2 products, the rev-
enues are r1 = $10 and r2 = $5, and ranking k satisfies ik,1 = 1, ik,2 = 2, and ik,3 = 3. Consider the
two feasible solutions δ = (10,10,10) and δ′ = (5,5,5), which correspond to
Jk(x,δ) = 10 + (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x1 + (max{0,5 −10} −(10 −10))x2
= 10
Jk(x,δ′) = 5 + (max{0,10 −5} −(5 −5))x1 + (max{0,5 −5} −(5 −5))x2
= 5 + 5x1
We observe that δ and δ′ are optimal solutions for (13) in the case of x = (1,0,1). We also observe
that Tk(δ) = 1 (since δ1 = 10 = rik,1, δ2 = 10 > rik,2 = 5, and δ3 = 10 > rik,1 = 0), and that Tk(δ′) = 2
(since δ′
2 = 5 = rik,2 and δ′
3 = 5 > rik,3 = 0).
• It follows from the fact that Tk(δ) = 1 that δ does not satisfy Property 1, and it follows from
the fact that Tk(δ′) = 2 that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
• It follows from the fact that δ1 = 10 = rik,1 and δ′
1 = 5 ≤rik,1 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 2.
• It follows from the fact that δ2 = δ3 and δ′
2 = δ′
3 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 3.


--- Page 49 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec15
• It follows from the fact that Tk(δ) = 1 and δ1 = δ2 = δ3 that δ satisfies Property 4, and it follows
from the fact that Tk(δ′) = 2 and δ′
2 = δ′
3 that δ′ satisfies Property 4.
Finally, we observe that Jk(x,δ′) = Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 = 1 and that Jk(x,δ′) <
Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 ∈[0,1). We have thus shown that δ′ dominates δ.
□
Example EC.2 (Property 2 is violated). Suppose that there are N = 2 products, the rev-
enues are r1 = $5 and r2 = $10, and ranking k satisfies ik,1 = 1, ik,2 = 2, and ik,3 = 3. Consider the
two feasible solutions δ = (10,10,10) and δ′ = (5,10,10), which we observe correspond to
Jk(x,δ) = 10 + (max{0,5 −10} −(10 −10)x1 + (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x2
= 10
Jk(x,δ′) = 10 + (max{0,5 −5} −(10 −5)x1 + (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x2
= 10 −5x1
We observe that δ and δ′ are both optimal solutions for (13) in the case of x = (0,1,1).
• We readily observe that Tk(δ) = Tk(δ′) = 2, which implies that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 1.
• It follows from the fact that δ1 = 10 > rik,1 that δ does not satisfy Property 2, and it follows
from the fact that δ′
1 = 5 = rik,1 that δ′ satisfies Property 2.
• It follows from the fact that δ2 = δ3 and δ′
2 = δ′
3 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 3.
• It follows from the fact that δ2 = δ3 and δ′
2 = δ′
3 that δ and δ′ satisfies Property 4.
Finally, we observe that Jk(x,δ′) = Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 = 0 and that Jk(x,δ′) <
Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 ∈(0,1]. We have thus shown that δ′ dominates δ.
□
Example EC.3 (Property 3 is violated). Suppose that there are N = 3 products, the rev-
enues are r1 = r2 = r3 = $10, and ranking k satisfies ik,1 = 1, ik,2 = 2, ik,3 = 3, and ik,4 = 4. Consider
the two feasible solutions δ = (0,0,10,10) and δ′ = (0,10,10,10), which we observe correspond to
Jk(x,δ) = 10 + (max{0,10 −0} −(0 −0)x1
+ (max{0,10 −0} −(10 −0))x2 + (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x3
= 10 + 10x1
Jk(x,δ′) = 10 + (max{0,10 −0} −(10 −0)x1
+ (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x2 + (max{0,10 −10} −(10 −10))x3
= 10
We observe that δ and δ′ are both optimal solutions for (13) in the case of x = (0,1,1,1).
• We readily observe that Tk(δ) = Tk(δ′) = 3, which implies that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 1.
• It follows from the fact that δ1 = δ′
1 = 0 < 10 = rik,1 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 2.
• It follows from the fact that δ2 < rik,2 = 10 and δ2 < δ3 that δ does not satisfy Property 3. It
follows from the fact that δ′
2 = δ′
3 = δ′
4 that δ′ satisfies Property 3.
• It follows from the fact that δ3 = δ4 and δ′
3 = δ′
4 that δ and δ′ satisfies Property 4.
Finally, we observe that Jk(x,δ′) = Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 = 0 and that Jk(x,δ′) <
Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x1 ∈(0,1]. We have thus shown that δ′ dominates δ.
□
Example EC.4 (Property 4 is violated). Suppose that there are N = 2 products, the rev-
enues are r1 = $10 and r2 = $5, and ranking k satisfies ik,1 = 1, ik,2 = 2, and ik,3 = 3. Consider the
two feasible solutions δ = (5,5,10) and δ′ = (5,5,5), which we observe correspond to
Jk(x,δ) = 10 + (max{0,10 −5} −(5 −5)x1 + (max{0,5 −5} −(10 −5))x2
= 10 + 5x1 −5x2
Jk(x,δ′) = 5 + (max{0,10 −5} −(5 −5)x1 + (max{0,5 −5} −(5 −5))x2
= 5 + 5x1
We observe that δ and δ′ are both optimal solutions for (13) in the case of x = (0,1,1).


--- Page 50 ---
ec16
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
• We readily observe that Tk(δ) = Tk(δ′) = 2, which implies that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 1.
• It follows from the fact that δ1 = δ′
1 = 5 < 10 = rik,1 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 2.
• It follows from the fact that δ2,δ′
2 ≥rik,2 that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 3.
• It follows from the fact that Tk(δ) = 2 and δ2 < δ3 that δ does not satisfy Property 4, and it
follows from the fact that δ′
2 = δ′
3 that δ′ satisfies Property 4.
Finally, we observe that Jk(x,δ′) = Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x2 = 1 and that Jk(x,δ′) <
Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c that satisfy x2 ∈[0,1). We have thus shown that δ′ dominates δ.
□
Appendix F: Proof of Theorem 4
Our proof of Theorem 4 in the present Appendix F shows that if δ ∈∆k satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3,
and 4, then δ is a Pareto cut. Our proof makes use of the notions of ‘Pareto cuts’ and ‘domination’
that are given in Definition 2 (Section 4.1) as well as makes use of Theorem 3 (Section 4.3).
We begin our proof of Theorem 4 with the following straightforward lemma.
Lemma EC.1. Let δ ∈∆k. We have that δ is a Pareto cut if and only if there does not exist δ′ ∈∆k
that satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 and dominates δ.
Proof of Lemma EC.1.
Let δ ∈∆k. If δ is a Pareto cut, then it follows from Definition 2 that
there does not exist δ′ ∈∆k that dominates δ, which proves the first direction of Lemma EC.1. To
prove the other direction, suppose that δ is not a Pareto cut. In that case, it follows from Definition 2
that there exists δ′ ∈∆k that dominates δ, in the sense that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c,
where that inequality is strict at some ¯x ∈X c. It follows from Theorem 3 that either δ′ satisfies
Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 or there exists δ′′ ∈∆k that satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 and dominates
δ′. Therefore, we conclude in the latter case that δ′′ satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4 and dominates
δ, which completes the proof of the other direction of Lemma EC.1.
□
Equipped with the above lemma, we now present the organization of the proof of Theorem 4.
Indeed, consider any δ,δ′ ∈∆k that satisfy Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4. Our proof of Theorem 4 is
split into five cases, which are shown in the following table.
Case
If. . .
then δ′ does not dominate δ, as shown in . . .
1
δ′
Lk+1 > δLk+1
Proposition EC.5 in Appendix F.1
2
δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 < δ2
Proposition EC.6 in Appendix F.2.1
3
δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2
Proposition EC.7 in Appendix F.2.2
4
δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) < δ′
Lk+1
Proposition EC.8 in Appendix F.3
5
δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) = δ′
Lk+1
Proposition EC.9 in Appendix F.4
We observe that the five regimes in the second column are mutually exclusive and collectively exhaus-
tive.16 Consequently, we conclude that Propositions EC.5-EC.9 in combination with Lemma EC.1
completes the proof of Theorem 4. The remainder of Appendix F consists of proving Proposi-
tions EC.5-EC.9.
16 Note that the case where δ′
Tk(δ) > δ′
Lk+1 does not need to be considered because δ′ ∈∆k implies that δ′
Tk(δ) ≤δ′
Lk+1.


--- Page 51 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec17
F.1. Case 1
Our first case consists of proving the following proposition.
Proposition EC.5. If δ′
Lk+1 > δLk+1, then δ′ does not dominate δ.
Proof of Proposition EC.5.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 > δLk+1. Let x be the vector that is defined for
each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0 = δ′
Lk+1
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0 = δLk+1
which implies that
Jk(x,δ′) > Jk(x,δ)
Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ.
□
F.2. Cases 2 and 3
Our proofs in Appendices F.2.1 and F.2.2 will make use of the following lemma.
Lemma EC.2. If ˆδ ∈∆k satisfies Property 2, then for all x ∈X c we have
Jk(x, ˆδ) = ˆδLk+1 +

rik,1 −ˆδ2

xik,1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2

max
n
0,rik,ℓ−ˆδℓ
o
−

ˆδℓ+1 −ˆδℓ

xik,ℓ
Proof of Lemma EC.2.
Note that the inequality 1 < Lk + 1 follows from Assumption 2 (see
Section 2.3). Let ˆδ ∈∆k satisfy Property 2. We observe for all x ∈X c that

max
n
0,rik,1 −ˆδ1
o
−

ˆδ2 −ˆδ1

xik,1
=

max
n
ˆδ1,rik,1
o
−ˆδ2

xik,1
=

rik,1 −ˆδ2

xik,1
where the first equality follows from algebra and the second equality follows from the fact that
ˆδ satisfies Property 2. The above reasoning together with the definition of Jk(x, ˆδ) completes the
proof of Lemma EC.2.
□
Equipped with Lemma EC.2, we proceed to prove Case 2 and Case 3.


--- Page 52 ---
ec18
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
F.2.1. Case 2.
Our second case consists of proving the following proposition.
Proposition EC.6. If δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 < δ2, then δ′ does not dominate δ.
Proof of Proposition EC.6.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 < δ2. It follows from the fact that
δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 < δ2 that Lk +1 > 2. Let x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N +1] as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{1,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
 rik,1 −δ′
2

1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
= δ′
Lk+1 + rik,1 −δ′
2
> δLk+1 + rik,1 −δ2
= δLk+1 +
 rik,1 −δ2

1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
= Jk(x,δ)
The first equality follows from the fact that δ′ satisfies Property 2 and from Lemma EC.2 as well
as the construction of x. The second equality follows from algebra. The inequality follows from the
fact that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 < δ2. The third equality follows from algebra. The fourth equality
follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 2 and from Lemma EC.2 as well as the construction
of x. Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ.
□
F.2.2. Case 3.
Our third case consists of proving the following proposition.
Proposition EC.7. If δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2, then δ′ does not dominate δ.
Our proof of Proposition EC.7 will utilize the following lemma.
Lemma EC.3. If δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2, then either (δ2,...,δLk+1) = (δ′
2,...,δ′
Lk+1) or there
exists ℓ∈{2,...,Lk} such that δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ< δℓ+1 −δℓ.
Proof of Lemma EC.3.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2. We recall from Assumption 2
(see Section 2.3) that Lk ≥1, and the lemma clearly holds if Lk = 1. We thus assume throughout
the rest of the proof of Lemma EC.3 that Lk ≥2. Suppose that (δ2,...,δLk+1) ̸= (δ′
2,...,δ′
Lk+1) and
δ′
ℓ′+1 −δ′
ℓ′ ≥δℓ′+1 −δℓ′ ∀ℓ′ ∈{2,...,Lk}.
(EC.18)
In that case, we observe that
δ′
Lk+1 −δ′
2 =
Lk
X
ℓ′=2
 δ′
ℓ′+1 −δ′
ℓ′

≥
Lk
X
ℓ′=2
(δℓ′+1 −δℓ′) = δLk+1 −δ2.
(EC.19)
We recall that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2, and so it follows from (EC.19) that
δ′
Lk+1 −δ′
2 = δLk+1 −δ2.
(EC.20)


--- Page 53 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec19
The only way that (EC.18) and (EC.20) can be true simultaneously is for the equality δ′
ℓ′+1 −
δ′
ℓ′ = δℓ′+1 −δℓ′ to hold for all ℓ′ ∈{2,...,Lk}. Since δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1, it must be the case that
(δ2,...,δLk+1) = (δ′
2,...,δ′
Lk+1), which is a contradiction. This concludes the proof of Lemma EC.3.
□
Equipped with Lemma EC.3, we now present our proof of Proposition EC.7.
Proof of Proposition EC.7.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 and δ′
2 ≥δ2. If (δ2,...,δLk+1) =
(δ′
2,...,δ′
Lk+1), then it follows from Lemma EC.2 and from the fact that δ and δ′ satisfy Property 2
that Jk(x,δ) = Jk(x,δ′) for all x ∈X c, which implies that δ′ does not dominate δ. Therefore, we
assume henceforth that (δ2,...,δLk+1) ̸= (δ′
2,...,δ′
Lk+1), and so it follows from Lemma EC.3 that
there exists ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk} that satisfies δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗. Let x be the vector that is defined
for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{ℓ∗,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
 rik,1 −δ′
2

0 +
X
ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

1
= δ′
Lk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

≥δ′
Lk+1 + 0 −
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

= δLk+1 −
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

> δLk+1 −(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
The first equality follows from the fact that δ′ satisfies Property 2 and from Lemma EC.2 as well
as the construction of x. The second equality and the first inequality follow from algebra. The
third equality holds because δLk+1 = δ′
Lk+1. The second inequality follows from the definition of ℓ∗.
Moreover, we observe that
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
 rik,1 −δ2

0 +
X
ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)

1
= δLk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
= δLk+1 + 0 −(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
The first equality follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 2 and from Lemma EC.2 as well as
the construction of x. The second equality follows from algebra. The third equality holds because
δ satisfies Property 3 and because 0 ≤δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗and because ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}, which
together imply that δℓ∗≥rik,ℓ∗. Combining the above reasoning, we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) > δLk+1 −(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗) = Jk(x,δ)
Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ.
□


--- Page 54 ---
ec20
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
F.3. Case 4
Our fourth case consists of proving the following proposition.
Proposition EC.8. If δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) < δ′
Lk+1, then δ′ does not dominate δ.
Proof of Proposition EC.8.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) < δ′
Lk+1. For notational con-
venience, let ℓ∗≜Tk(δ). We will make use of the following two intermediary claims.
Claim EC.5. δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗.
Proof of Claim EC.5.
We observe that
δ′
ℓ∗≤δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 = δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗
The first inequality follows from the fact that δ′ ∈∆k. The second inequality follows from assump-
tion. The equality follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 4 and the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ). The
third inequality follows from the definition of Tk(δ) and the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ). That completes
the proof of Claim EC.5.
□
Claim EC.6. ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}.
Proof of Claim EC.6.
We observe that
rik,Lk+1 = 0 ≤δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗
where the equality follows from the fact that ik,Lk+1 = N + 1, the first inequality follows from the
fact that δ′ ∈∆k, and the second inequality follows from Claim EC.5. This shows that ℓ∗< Lk + 1.
Moreover, it also follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 1 that ℓ∗≥2. That completes the
proof of Claim EC.6.
□
Equipped with the above intermediary claims, we now proceed to prove Proposition EC.8. Indeed,
let x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{ℓ∗,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
Note that it follows from Claim EC.6 that ℓ∗< Lk + 1. We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
X
ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

1
= δ′
Lk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

= δ′
Lk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗

−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

= δ′
Lk+1 + rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗+1
= δ′
Lk+1 + rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
> δ′
ℓ∗+ rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
= rik,ℓ∗


--- Page 55 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec21
The first equality follows from the construction of x, and the second equality follows from algebra.
The third equality follows from Claim EC.5. The fourth equality follows from algebra. The fifth
equality follows from the fact that δ′
ℓ∗< rik,ℓ∗(Claim EC.5) and the fact that ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}
(Claim EC.6), which together with the fact that δ′ satisfies Property 3 implies that δ′
ℓ∗+1 = δ′
ℓ∗. The
inequality follows from the assumption that δ′
ℓ∗< δ′
Lk+1, and the sixth equality follows from algebra.
Moreover, we observe that
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
X
ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)

1
= δLk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
= δLk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗

−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
= δLk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δLk+1

−
 δLk+1 −δLk+1

= rik,ℓ∗
The first equality follows from the construction of x, and the second equality follows from algebra.
The third equality follows from Claim EC.5. The fourth equality follows from the fact that δ satisfies
Property 4 and the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ), which imply that δℓ∗= δℓ∗+1 = ··· = δLk+1. The fifth equality
follows from algebra. Combining the above reasoning, we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) > rik,ℓ∗= Jk(x,δ).
Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ.
□
F.4. Case 5
Our fifth case consists of proving the following proposition.
Proposition EC.9. If δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) = δ′
Lk+1, then δ′ does not dominate δ.
Proof of Proposition EC.9.
Assume that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 and δ′
Tk(δ) = δ′
Lk+1. For notational con-
venience, let ℓ∗≜Tk(δ). We will utilize the following three intermediary claims.
Claim EC.7. δ′
ℓ∗= ··· = δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 = ··· = δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗.
Proof of Claim EC.7.
The fact that δ′
ℓ∗= ··· = δ′
Lk+1 follows from the fact that δ′ ∈∆k and
from the assumption that δ′
ℓ∗= δ′
Lk+1. The fact that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1 is an assumption. The fact that
δLk+1 = ··· = δℓ∗follows from the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ) and from the assumption that δ satisfies
Property 4. The fact that δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗follows from the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ) and from the definition
of Tk(δ). This completes our proof of Claim EC.7.
□
Claim EC.8. ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}.
Proof of Claim EC.8.
It follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 1 and from the fact that
ℓ∗= Tk(δ) that ℓ∗≥2. Now suppose for the sake of developing a contradiction that ℓ∗= Lk+1. If that
were true, then it would follow from the fact that ℓ∗= Tk(δ) and from the definition of Tk(δ) that
δLk+1 ≤rik,Lk+1 = 0. However, we assumed that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1, which would imply that δ′
Lk+1 < 0,
which contradicts the assumption that δ′ ∈∆k. Therefore, we have proven by contradiction that
ℓ∗≤Lk, which completes our proof of Claim EC.8.
□


--- Page 56 ---
ec22
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Claim EC.9. If x ∈X is a vector that satisfies xik,ℓ∗= 1 and xik,ℓ= 0 ∀ℓ∈{ℓ∗+ 1,...,Lk}, then
δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= rik,ℓ∗
Proof of Claim EC.9.
Let x ∈X be a vector that satisfies xik,ℓ∗= 1 and xik,ℓ= 0 for all ℓ∈
{ℓ∗+ 1,...,Lk}. Then
δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)

1
= δLk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗
o
−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
= δLk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δℓ∗

−(δℓ∗+1 −δℓ∗)
= δLk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δLk+1

−
 δLk+1 −δLk+1

= rik,ℓ∗
The first equality follows from the construction of x and from Claim EC.8 (which implies that ℓ∗≤
Lk). The second equality follows from algebra. The third equality follows from the fact that δℓ∗≤
rik,ℓ∗(Claim EC.7), and the fourth equality follows from the fact that δℓ∗= ··· = δLk+1 (Claim EC.7).
The fifth equality follows from algebra. We similarly observe that
δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=ℓ∗+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

1
= δ′
Lk+1 + max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

= δ′
Lk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗

−
 δ′
ℓ∗+1 −δ′
ℓ∗

= δ′
Lk+1 +

rik,ℓ∗−δ′
Lk+1

−
 δ′
Lk+1 −δ′
Lk+1

= rik,ℓ∗
The first equality follows from the construction of x and from Claim EC.8 (which implies that ℓ∗≤
Lk). The second equality follows from algebra. The third equality follows from the fact that δ′
ℓ∗<
rik,ℓ∗(Claim EC.7), and the fourth equality follows from the fact that δ′
ℓ∗= ··· = δ′
Lk+1 (Claim EC.7).
The fifth equality follows from algebra. That concludes the proof of Claim EC.9.
□


--- Page 57 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec23
In view of the above intermediary claims, the remainder of the proof of Proposition EC.9 is split
into two parts.
• Part 1: Suppose that δ′
2 < δ2. In that case, let x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N +1]
as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{1,ℓ∗,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
We note in the above definition that the set {1,ℓ∗,Lk+1} is well defined because ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}
(Claim EC.8). We observe that x ∈X and that
Jk(x,δ′) = rik,ℓ∗+
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= rik,ℓ∗+
 max

0,rik,1 −δ′
1
	
−(δ′
2 −δ′
1)

= rik,ℓ∗+
 rik,1 −δ′
1

−(δ′
2 −δ′
1)
= rik,ℓ∗+ rik,1 −δ′
2
> rik,ℓ∗+ rik,1 −δ2
The first equality follows from the definition of Jk(x,δ′) and from Claim EC.9. The second
equality follows from the construction of x. The third equality follows from the fact that δ′
satisfies Property 2 (which implies that δ′
1 ≤rik,1). The fourth equality follows from algebra.
The inequality follows from the supposition that δ′
2 < δ2. Moreover, we observe that
Jk(x,δ) = rik,ℓ∗+
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= rik,ℓ∗+
 max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)

= rik,ℓ∗+
 rik,1 −δ1

−(δ2 −δ1)
= rik,ℓ∗+ rik,1 −δ2
The first equality follows from the definition of Jk(x,δ) and from Claim EC.9. The second
equality follows from the construction of x. The third equality follows from the fact that δ
satisfies Property 2 (which implies that δ1 ≤rik,1). The fourth equality follows from algebra.
Combining the above reasoning, we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) > rik,ℓ∗+ rik,1 −δ2 ≥Jk(x,δ).
Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ in Part 1.
• Part 2: Suppose that δ′
2 ≥δ2. In that case, define the set
L ≜{ℓ∈{2,...,ℓ∗−1} : δℓ< δℓ+1}
We begin by proving that L is nonempty. Indeed, it follows from Claim EC.8 that ℓ∗≥2.
Moreover, it follows from Claim EC.7 that δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗. Combining the inequalities ℓ∗≥2 and
δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗together with the supposition that δ′
2 ≥δ2, we conclude that ℓ∗≥3. We have thus
shown that the set {2,...,ℓ∗−1} is nonempty. Furthermore, it follows from the fact that
δ′ ∈∆k and from Claim EC.7 that δ′
2 ≤··· ≤δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗. It thus follows from the supposition


--- Page 58 ---
ec24
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
that δ2 ≤δ′
2 that there must exist at least one ℓ∈{2,...,ℓ∗−1} that satisfies δℓ< δℓ+1. We
have thus shown that L is nonempty.
Let x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈L ∪{ℓ∗,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
We observe that x ∈X. We also observe that
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
=
X
ℓ∈L
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

≥−
X
ℓ∈L
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

≥−
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=2
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

= −(δ′
ℓ∗−δ′
2)
> −(δℓ∗−δ2)
(EC.21)
The first equality follows from the construction of x. The first inequality follows from algebra.
The second inequality follows from the fact that δ′ ∈∆k and the fact that L ⊆{2,...,ℓ∗−1}.
The second equality follows from algebra. The third inequality follows from Claim EC.7 (which
implies that δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗) and from the supposition that δ′
2 ≥δ2. We further observe that
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
=
X
ℓ∈L
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

= −
X
ℓ∈L
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)
= −
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=2
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)
= −(δℓ∗−δ2)
(EC.22)
The first equality follows from the construction of x. The second equality follows from the fact
that δ satisfies Property 3 and from the fact that δℓ< δℓ+1 for all ℓ∈L ⊆{2,...,ℓ∗−1}, which
implies that δℓ≥rik,ℓfor all ℓ∈L. The third equality follows from the fact that δℓ= δℓ+1 for
all ℓ∈{2,...,ℓ∗−1} \ L. The fourth equality follows from algebra.
Combining the above reasoning, we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) −Jk(x,δ)
=
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ−
ℓ∗−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
> −(δℓ∗−δ2) −(−(δℓ∗−δ2))
= 0


--- Page 59 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec25
where the first equality follows from Claim EC.9 and the definitions of Jk(x,δ′) and Jk(x,δ),
the inequality follows from lines (EC.21) and (EC.22), and the second equality follows from
algebra.
Since x ∈X, we have shown that δ′ does not dominate δ in Part 2.
Because Parts 1 and 2 are exhaustive, our proof of Proposition EC.9 is complete.
□
Appendix G: Proof of Proposition 3
Let δ ∈∆k. We recall from Section 4.1 that Rk is the set of unique revenues among the products that
are not less preferred by ranking k to the no-purchase option, and that ¯rk ≜max{r ∈Rk} denotes
the highest revenue in Rk. Following the notation from Subroutine 1, let ¯r′
k ≜max{r ∈Rk : r < ¯rk}
denote the second-highest revenue in Rk. It is shown in Section 4.1 that |Rk| ≥2, which implies
that ¯r′
k is always finite and that there always exists ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} that satisfies rik,ℓ= ¯r′
k.
If Tk(δ) > 1, then it follows from Subroutine 1 that δ′ = δ, which implies that δ′ satisfies δ′ ∈∆k
and satisfies Property 1. Therefore, assume from this point onward that Tk(δ) = 1. It follows from
that assumption and from the definition of Tk(δ) that δ1 ≤rik,1 and that rik,ℓ< δℓ≤¯rk for all
ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1}. For those inequalities to be true, it must be the case that rik,1 = ¯rk and it must
be the case that rik,2,...,rik,Lk+1 ≤¯r′
k.
Now let δ′ be defined as in Subroutine 1; that is, let δ′ be the vector defined by
δ′
ℓ≜min{δℓ, ¯r′
k}
∀ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}
It follows readily from the fact that δ ∈∆k that δ′ ∈∆k. Furthermore, it follows from the fact that
rik,2,...,rik,Lk+1 ≤¯r′
k that there exists ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1} such that rik,ℓ= ¯r′
k. It thus follows from
the construction of δ′ that δ′
ℓ≤rik,ℓfor that ℓ, which implies that Tk(δ′) > 1. We have thus shown
that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
The remainder of the proof of Proposition 3 is organized as follows. In Appendix G.1, we show
that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. In Appendix G.2, we show that there always exists ¯x ∈X c
that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). The combination of Appendices G.1 and G.2 thus implies that δ′
dominates δ.
G.1. Proof that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c
In the present Appendix G.1, we show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. To this end, consider
any x ∈X c. We first observe that
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ+
 max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)

xik,1
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
(0 −(δℓ+1 −δℓ))xik,ℓ+
  rik,1 −δ1

−(δ2 −δ1)

xik,1


--- Page 60 ---
ec26
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
= δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)xik,ℓ+
 rik,1 −δ1

xik,1
where the first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ), and the second equality follows from algebra.
The third equality follows from the fact that rik,ℓ< δℓfor all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1} and from the fact
that δ1 ≤rik,1. The fourth equality follows from algebra. Moreover, we observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= min

¯r′
k,δLk+1
	
+
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−min{¯r′
k,δℓ}
	
−(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ})

xik,ℓ
+
 max

0,rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}
	
−(min{¯r′
k,δ2} −min{¯r′
k,δ1})

xik,1
= ¯r′
k +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−min{¯r′
k,δℓ}
	
−(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ})

xik,ℓ
+
 max

0,rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}
	
−(min{¯r′
k,δ2} −min{¯r′
k,δ1})

xik,1
= ¯r′
k +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
(0 −(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ}))xik,ℓ
+
 max

0,rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}
	
−(min{¯r′
k,δ2} −min{¯r′
k,δ1})

xik,1
= ¯r′
k −
Lk
X
ℓ=2
(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ})xik,ℓ
+
  rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}

−(min{¯r′
k,δ2} −min{¯r′
k,δ1})

xik,1
= ¯r′
k −
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ})xik,ℓ+
 rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}

xik,1
The first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ′). The second equality follows from the construction of
δ′. The third equality holds because it must be the case that δLk+1 > ¯r′
k, since if that inequality did
not hold, then it would follow from the fact that δ ∈∆k that there would exist ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1}
such that rik,ℓ= ¯r′
k and δℓ≤rik,ℓ. The fourth equality holds because rik,ℓ< δℓand rik,ℓ≤¯r′
k for all
ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1}. The fifth equality holds because rik,1 = ¯rk > ¯r′
k and because rik,1 ≥δ1. The sixth
equality follows from algebra.
Therefore,
Jk(x,δ′) −Jk(x,δ)
=
 ¯r′
k −δLk+1

−
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(min{¯r′
k,δℓ+1} −min{¯r′
k,δℓ} −(δℓ+1 −δℓ))xik,ℓ
+
  rik,1 −min{¯r′
k,δ1}

−
 rik,1 −δ1

xik,1
= ¯r′
k −δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(min{¯r′
k −δℓ+1,0} −min{¯r′
k −δℓ,0})xik,ℓ−min{¯r′
k −δ1,0}xik,1
(EC.23)
We have two cases to consider.


--- Page 61 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec27
• First, suppose that ¯r′
k < δ1 ≤··· ≤δLk+1. In that case, we have
(EC.23) = ¯r′
k −δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=1
((¯r′
k −δℓ+1) −(¯r′
k −δℓ))xik,ℓ−(¯r′
k −δ1)xik,1
= ¯r′
k −δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)xik,ℓ−(¯r′
k −δ1)xik,1
≤¯r′
k −δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)1 −(¯r′
k −δ1)xik,1
= ¯r′
k −δ1 −(¯r′
k −δ1)xik,1
≤¯r′
k −δ1 −(¯r′
k −δ1)1
= 0
where the first equality follows from the supposition that ¯r′
k < δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1},
the second equality follows from algebra, the first inequality follows from the fact that x ∈X c
(which implies that xik,ℓ≤1 for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk +1}) and the fact that δ ∈∆k (which implies
that δℓ+1 −δℓ≥0 for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}). The third equality follows from algebra. The second
inequality follows from the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,1 ≤1) and the supposition
that ¯r′
k < δ1. The fourth equality follows from algebra.
• Second, suppose that δ1 ≤¯r′
k. In that case, it follows from the fact that ¯r′
k < δLk+1 that there
exists L ∈{1,...,Lk} such that δL ≤¯r′
k < δL+1. In that case, we observe that
(EC.23) = ¯r′
k −δLk+1 −
L−1
X
ℓ=1
(min{¯r′
k −δℓ+1,0} −min{¯r′
k −δℓ,0})xik,ℓ
−(min{¯r′
k −δL+1,0} −min{¯r′
k −δL,0})xik,L
−
Lk
X
ℓ=L+1
(min{¯r′
k −δℓ+1,0} −min{¯r′
k −δℓ,0})xik,ℓ−min{¯r′
k −δ1,0}xik,1
= ¯r′
k −δLk+1 −
L−1
X
ℓ=1
(0 −0)xik,ℓ
−((¯r′
k −δL+1) −0)xik,L
−
Lk
X
ℓ=L+1
((¯r′
k −δℓ+1) −(¯r′
k −δℓ))xik,ℓ−(¯r′
k −δ1)xik,1
= ¯r′
k −δLk+1 + (δL+1 −¯r′
k)xik,L +
Lk
X
ℓ=L+1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)xik,ℓ+ (δ1 −¯r′
k)xik,1
≤¯r′
k −δLk+1 + (δL+1 −¯r′
k)1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=L+1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)1 + (δ1 −¯r′
k)0
= ¯r′
k −δLk+1 + (δL+1 −¯r′
k) +
 δLk+1 −δL+1

= 0
where the first equality follows from algebra. The second equality follows from fact that δ ∈∆k
and the fact that δL ≤¯r′
k < δL+1, which together imply that δ1,...,δL ≤¯r′
k < δL+1,...,δLk+1.


--- Page 62 ---
ec28
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
The inequality follows from the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,L,...,xik,Lk+1 ≤1 and
xik,1 ≥0), the fact that δ ∈∆k (which implies that δℓ+1 −δℓ≥0 for all ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk}),
and the fact that δ1 ≤¯r′
k < δL+1. The fourth and fifth equalities follow from algebra.
Since the above two cases are exhaustive, we conclude that Jk(x,δ′) −Jk(x,δ) ≤0.
G.2. Proof that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ)
In the present Appendix G.2, we show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
To this end, let ¯x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
¯xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
otherwise
It follows from the discussion in the beginning of Appendix G that there exists ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk + 1}
that satisfies rik,ℓ∗= ¯r′
k and that δℓ∗> rik,ℓ∗. We observe for any such ℓ∗that
Jk(¯x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
= min

δLk+1, ¯r′
k
	
< δLk+1
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
= Jk(¯x,δ)
The first equality follows from the construction of ¯x. The second equality follows from algebra and
from the construction of δ′. The inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which implies that
δLk+1 ≥δℓ∗) and the fact that Tk(δ) = 1 and ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk +1} (which implies that δℓ∗> rik,ℓ∗= ¯r′
k).
The third equality follows from algebra. The fourth equality follows from the construction of ¯x.
This completes our proof that there always exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
Appendix H: Proof of Proposition 4
Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Property 1, and let δ′ be the output of Subroutine 2. If δ1 ≤rik,1, then it
follows from the construction of δ′ that δ′ = δ, which implies that δ′ satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies
Properties 1 and 2. Therefore, assume from this point onward that δ1 > rik,1, in which case we
observe that the output δ′ of Subroutine 2 satisfies
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1},
rik,1,
if ℓ= 1.
We readily observe that δ′ ∈∆k. Moreover, it follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 1 that
δ′ satisfies Property 1. The vector δ′ also obviously satisfies Property 2.
The remainder of the proof of Proposition 4 is organized as follows. In Appendix H.1, we show
that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. In Appendix H.2, we show that there always exists ¯x ∈X c
that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). The combination of Appendices H.1 and H.2 thus implies that δ′
dominates δ.


--- Page 63 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec29
H.1. Proof that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c
In the present Appendix H.1, we show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. To this end, consider
any x ∈X c. We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) −Jk(x,δ) =
 
δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
!
−
 
δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
!
=
 max

0,rik,1 −rik,1
	
−
 δ2 −rik,1

xik,1 −
 max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)

xik,1
=
 0 −
 δ2 −rik,1

xik,1 −(0 −(δ2 −δ1))xik,1
=
 rik,1 −δ1

xik,1
≤0
where the first equality follows from the definitions of Jk(x,δ′) and Jk(x,δ), the second equality
follows from the construction of δ′, the third equality follows from algebra and from the supposi-
tion that δ1 > rik,1, the fourth equality follows from algebra, and the inequality follows from the
supposition that δ1 > rik,1 and the fact that x ∈X c. We thus conclude that Jk(x,δ′) −Jk(x,δ) ≤0.
H.2. Proof that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ)
In the present Appendix H.2, we show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
To this end, let ¯x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
¯xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{1,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
It follows from Assumption 2 from Section 2.3 that Lk ≥1, which implies that 1 ̸= Lk + 1. We
observe that
Jk(¯x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=2
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
+
 max

0,rik,1 −δ′
1
	
−(δ′
2 −δ′
1)

1
= δLk+1 + max

0,rik,1 −δ′
1
	
−(δ2 −δ′
1)
= δLk+1 + max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ′
1)
< δLk+1 + max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
+
 max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)

1
= Jk(¯x,δ)
The first equality follows from the construction of ¯x. The second equality follows from algebra and
from the fact that δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk + 1}. The third equality follows from the fact that
0 = rik,1 −rik,1 = rik,1 −δ′
1 > rik,1 −δ1, which implies that max{0,rik,1 −δ′
1} = max{0,rik,1 −δ1}.


--- Page 64 ---
ec30
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
The inequality follows from the fact that δ′
1 < δ1. The fourth equality follows from algebra, and the
fifth equality follows from the construction of ¯x. This completes our proof that there always exists
¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
Appendix I: Proof of Proposition 5
Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Properties 1 and 2, and let δ′ be the output of Subroutine 3. We will make use
of the following lemma.
Lemma EC.4. If δ satisfies Property 3, then δ′ = δ.
Proof of Lemma EC.4.
Suppose that δ satisfies Property 3. It follows from the construction of δ′
that δ′
1 = δ1. In what follows, we prove that δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk +1} by backward induction
on ℓ. In the base case where ℓ= Lk + 1, it follows immediately from the construction of δ′ that
δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1. Now consider any arbitrary ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, and assume by induction that δ′
ℓ′ = δℓ′
for all ℓ′ ∈{ℓ+ 1,...,Lk + 1}. In the case of ℓ′ = ℓ, we have
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δℓ+1
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δℓ
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
= δℓ
where the first equality follows from the construction of δ′, the second equality follows from the
induction hypothesis, the third equality follows from the fact that ℓ∈{2,...,Lk} and from the
supposition that δ satisfies Property 3, and the fourth equality follows from algebra. Since ℓ∈
{2,...,Lk} was chosen arbitrarily, our proof of Lemma EC.4 is complete.
□
It follows from Lemma EC.4 that if δ satisfies Property 3, then δ′ = δ, which implies that δ′
satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Properties 1, 2, and 3. Therefore, assume from this point onward that
δ does not satisfy Property 3. Our proof will also make use of the following intermediary lemma.
Lemma EC.5. δ′
ℓ≥δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}.
Proof of Lemma EC.5.
It follows immediately from the construction of δ′ that δ′
1 = δ1. In what
follows, we prove that δ′
ℓ≥δℓfor all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk +1} by backwards induction on ℓ. In the base case
where ℓ= Lk + 1, it follows immediately from construction of δ′ that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1. Now consider
any arbitrary ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, and assume by induction that δ′
ℓ′ ≥δℓ′ for all ℓ′ ∈{ℓ+ 1,...,Lk + 1}.
In the case of ℓ′ = ℓ, we have
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
≥
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δℓ+1
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ


--- Page 65 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec31
≥
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δℓ
	
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
= δℓ
The first equality follows from the construction of δ′. The first inequality follows from the induction
hypothesis. The second inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which implies that δℓ+1 ≥δℓ).
The second equality follows from algebra. Since ℓ∈{2,...,Lk} was chosen arbitrarily, our proof of
Lemma EC.5 is complete.
□
Equipped with Lemma EC.5, the remainder of the proof of Proposition 5 is organized as follows.
In Appendix I.1, we prove that δ′ ∈∆k. In Appendix I.2, we prove that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
In Appendix I.3, we prove that δ′ satisfies Property 2. In Appendix I.4, we prove that δ′ satisfies
Property 3. In Appendix I.5, we show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. In Appendix I.6,
we show that there always exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). The combination of
Appendices I.5 and I.6 thus implies that δ′ dominates δ.
I.1. Proof that δ′ satisfies δ′ ∈∆k
In the present Appendix I.1, we show that δ′ ∈∆k. Indeed, it follows from the construction of δ′
and from the fact that δ ∈∆k that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1 ≤¯rk, and it follows from the construction of δ′
and from the fact that δ ∈∆k that δ′
1 = δ1 ≥0. We observe that
δ′
1 = δ1 ≤δ2 ≤δ′
2
where the equality follows from the construction of δ′, the first inequality follows from the fact that
δ ∈∆k, and the second inequality follows from Lemma EC.5. Finally, for all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, we have
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
≤
(
δℓ+1,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
≤
(
δ′
ℓ+1,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
≤
(
δ′
ℓ+1,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
δ′
ℓ+1,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
= δ′
ℓ+1
where the first equality follows from the construction of δ′, the first inequality follows from the fact
that δ ∈∆k (which implies that δℓ≤δℓ+1), the second inequality follows from Lemma EC.5, the
third inequality follows from algebra, and the second equality follows from algebra. We have thus
shown that δ′ ∈∆k.
I.2. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 1
In the present Appendix I.2, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 1. Indeed, it follows from the fact that
δ satisfies Property 1 that Tk(δ) > 1, which implies that there exists ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk + 1} such that


--- Page 66 ---
ec32
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗. If ℓ∗= Lk +1, then it follows from the construction of δ′ that δ′
ℓ∗= δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗= 0, which
implies that Tk(δ′) = Lk + 1 > 1. If ℓ∗< Lk + 1, then it follows from the fact that ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}
that
δ′
ℓ∗=
(
δℓ∗,
if δℓ∗= rik,ℓ∗,
min
n
rik,ℓ∗,δ′
ℓ∗+1
o
,
if δℓ∗< rik,ℓ∗
≤rik,ℓ∗
The equality follows from the construction of δ′ and from the definition of ℓ∗(which implies that
δℓ∗≤rik,ℓ∗). The inequality follows from algebra. This shows that Tk(δ′) ≥ℓ∗≥2, which implies
that δ′ satisfies Property 1. This completes our proof that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
I.3. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 2
In the present Appendix I.3, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 2. Indeed, we observe that
δ′
1 = δ1 ≤rik,1
where the equality follows from the construction of δ′ and the inequality follows from the fact that
δ satisfies Property 2. We have thus shown that δ′ satisfies Property 2.
I.4. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 3
In the present Appendix I.4, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 3. Indeed, for each ℓ∈{2,...,Lk},
we observe that
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ
min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
=





δℓ,
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ
rik,ℓ,
if δℓ< rik,ℓand rik,ℓ< δ′
ℓ+1
δ′
ℓ+1,
if δℓ< rik,ℓand rik,ℓ≥δ′
ℓ+1
(EC.24)
where the first equality follows from the construction of δ′ and the second equality follows from
algebra. We now consider each of the above three cases. If δℓ≥rik,ℓ, then it follows from line (EC.24)
that δ′
ℓ≥rik,ℓ, which complies with Property 3. If δℓ< rik,ℓand rik,ℓ< δ′
ℓ+1, then it follows from
line (EC.24) that δ′
ℓ≥rik,ℓ, which complies with Property 3. If δℓ< rik,ℓand rik,ℓ≥δ′
ℓ+1, then
δ′
ℓ= δ′
ℓ+1, which complies with Property 3.
Since this reasoning holds for all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, we have shown that δ′ satisfies Property 3.
I.5. Proof that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c
In the present Appendix I.5, we show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. We will make use of
the following intermediary lemma.
Lemma EC.6. For all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}, we have
max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

≤max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)


--- Page 67 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec33
Proof of Lemma EC.6.
Consider any ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}. If ℓ= 1, then we observe that
max

0,rik,1 −δ′
1
	
−(δ′
2 −δ′
1) = max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ′
2 −δ1)
≤max

0,rik,1 −δ1
	
−(δ2 −δ1)
The equality follows from the construction of δ′ (which implies that δ′
1 = δ1). The inequality follows
Lemma EC.5. If ℓ∈{2,...,Lk}, then we observe that
max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

≤max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ)
=
(
max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ),
if δℓ≥rik,ℓ,
max

0,rik,ℓ−min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
		
−
 δℓ+1 −min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
,
if δℓ< rik,ℓ
where the inequality follows from Lemma EC.5 and the equality follows from the construction of
δ′. If δℓ≥rik,ℓ, then we have shown the desired result. Otherwise, if δℓ< rik,ℓ, then
max

0,rik,ℓ−min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
		
−
 δℓ+1 −min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
=
 rik,ℓ−min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
−
 δℓ+1 −min

rik,ℓ,δ′
ℓ+1
	
= rik,ℓ−δℓ+1
=
 rik,ℓ−δℓ

−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)
= max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)
where the first, second, and third equalities follow from algebra, and the fourth equality follows
from the fact that δℓ< rik,ℓ. Our proof of Lemma EC.6 is thus complete.
□
Equipped with Lemma EC.6, we now show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. Indeed,
consider any x ∈X c. We observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
≤δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= Jk(x,δ)
where the first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ′), the second equality follows from the construction
of δ′ (which implies that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1), the inequality follows from Lemma EC.6 and the fact that
x ∈X c (which implies that xik,ℓ≥0 for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}), and the third equality is the definition
of Jk(x,δ). We thus conclude that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ).
I.6. Proof that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ)
In the present Appendix I.6, we show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
Indeed, it follows from the assumption that δ does not satisfy Property 3 and from the fact that


--- Page 68 ---
ec34
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
δ′ satisfies Property 3 (see Appendix I.4) that δ′ ̸= δ. For that to be the case, it follows from
Lemma EC.5 that there must exist ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} such that δ′
ℓ> δℓ.
Let ℓ∗denote the minimum ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} such that δ′
ℓ> δℓ. It follows from the construction
of δ∗that δ′
1 = δ1 and δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1, which imply that ℓ∗∈{2,...,Lk}. Let ¯x be the vector that is
defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
¯xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ∈{ℓ∗−1,Lk + 1},
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(¯x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
X
ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗−1}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−1 −δ′
ℓ∗−1
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗−1

1
= δ′
Lk+1 +

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−1 −δ′
ℓ∗−1
o
−
 δ′
ℓ∗−δ′
ℓ∗−1

= δLk+1 +

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−1 −δℓ∗−1
o
−(δ′
ℓ∗−δℓ∗−1)

< δLk+1 +

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−1 −δℓ∗−1
o
−(δℓ∗−δℓ∗−1)

= δLk+1 +
X
ℓ∈{1,...,Lk}\{ℓ∗−1}
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
+

max
n
0,rik,ℓ∗−1 −δℓ∗−1
o
−(δℓ∗−δℓ∗−1)

1
= Jk(¯x,δ)
The first equality follows from the construction of ¯x. The second equality follows from algebra.
The third equality follows the construction of δ′ (which implies that δ′
Lk+1 = δLk+1) and from the
definition of ℓ∗and Lemma EC.5 (which imply that δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,ℓ∗−1}). The inequality
follows from the definition of ℓ∗(which implies that δ′
ℓ∗> δℓ∗). The fourth equality follows from
algebra, and the fifth equality follows from the construction of ¯x. This completes our proof that
there always exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
Appendix J: Proof of Proposition 6
Let δ ∈∆k satisfy Properties 1, 2, and 3. Let L, ˆr, and δ′ be as defined in Subroutine 4, which we
repeat below for convenience.
L ≜Tk(δ)
ˆr ≜max

δL,
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ

δ′
ℓ≜min{δℓ, ˆr}
∀ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1}
Our proof of Proposition 6 will make use of the following intermediary lemma.
Lemma EC.7. We have δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,L}.


--- Page 69 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec35
Proof of Lemma EC.7.
For each ℓ∈{1,...,L}, we observe that
δ′
ℓ= min{δℓ, ˆr}
= min

δℓ,max

δL,
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ

≥min{δℓ,δL}
= δℓ
The first equality is the definition of δ′
ℓ. The second equality is the definition of ˆr. The inequality
follows from algebra. The third equality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k and the fact that ℓ∈
{1,...,L}, which implies that δL ≥δℓ. Moreover, we observe that
δ′
ℓ= min{δℓ, ˆr} ≤δℓ
where the equality is the definition of δ′
ℓand the inequality follows from algebra. Combining the
above reasoning, we have shown that δ′
ℓ= δℓ, which completes our proof of Lemma EC.7.
□
We will also make use of the following lemma.
Lemma EC.8. If δ satisfies Property 4, then δ′ = δ.
Proof of Lemma EC.8.
Suppose that δ satisfies Property 4. Then it follows from the definition
of Property 4 that δL = ··· = δLk+1. Moreover, it follows from the definition of Tk(δ) that δℓ> rik,ℓ
for all ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1}. Therefore, we conclude for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} that
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,L},
min{δℓ, ˆr},
if ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,L},
min{δL, ˆr},
if ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,L},
δL,
if ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
= δℓ
The first equality follows from the definition of δ′
ℓand from Lemma EC.7. The second equality follows
from the fact that L = Tk(δ) and from the supposition that δ satisfies Property 4, which implies that
δL = ··· = δLk+1. The third equality follows from the fact that ˆr = max{δL,...} ≥δL. The fourth
equality follows from the fact that δL = ··· = δLk+1. Our proof of Lemma EC.8 is complete.
□
It follows from Lemma EC.8 that if δ satisfies Property 4, then δ′ = δ, which implies that δ′
satisfies δ′ ∈∆k and satisfies Properties 1, 2, 3, and 4. Therefore, assume from this point onward
that δ does not satisfy Property 4.
The remainder of the proof of Proposition 6 is organized as follows. In Appendix J.1, we show that
δ′ ∈∆k. In Appendix J.2, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 2. In Appendix J.3, we consider the case
where δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ, and for that case we prove that δ′ satisfies Properties 1, 3, and
4 as well as dominates δ. In Appendix J.4, we consider the case where δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ,
and for that case we prove that δ′ satisfies Properties 1, 3, and 4 as well as dominates δ. The
combination of these results completes the proof of Proposition 6.


--- Page 70 ---
ec36
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
J.1. Proof that δ′ satisfies δ′ ∈∆k
In the present Appendix J.1, we show that δ′ ∈∆k. Indeed, it follows from Lemma EC.7 and from
the fact that δ ∈∆k that δ′
1 = δ1 ≥0. Moreover, we observe that
δ′
Lk+1 = min{δLk+1, ˆr} ≤δLk+1 ≤¯rk
where the equality is the definition of δ′
Lk+1, the first inequality follows from algebra, and the second
inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k. Finally, we observe for each ℓ∈{1,...,Lk} that
δ′
ℓ= min{δℓ, ˆr} ≤min{δℓ+1, ˆr} = δ′
ℓ+1
where the first equality is the definition of δ′
ℓ, the inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which
implies δℓ≤δℓ+1), and the second equality is the definition of δ′
ℓ+1. We have thus shown that δ′ ∈∆k.
J.2. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 2
In the present Appendix J.2, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 2. Indeed, it follows from the fact
that δ satisfies Property 2 that δ1 ≤rik,1. Moreover, it follows from Lemma EC.7 that δ′
1 = δ1.
Therefore, we conclude that δ′
1 = δ1 ≤rik,1, which shows that δ′ satisfies Property 2.
J.3. Case where δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ
In the present Appendix J.3, we consider the case in which δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ, and for
this case we prove that δ′ satisfies Properties 1, 3, and 4 as well as dominates δ. Indeed, assume
throughout the remainder of Appendix J.3 that δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. We will make use of
the following lemma.
Lemma EC.9. Tk(δ′) ≥L, and for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} we have
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈{1,...,L},
δL,
if ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
Proof of Lemma EC.9.
We observe that
δ′
L = δL ≤rik,L
where the first equality follows from Lemma EC.7 and the second inequality follows from the defini-
tion of L. We have thus shown that Tk(δ′) ≥L. We conclude the proof of Lemma EC.9 by showing
that δ′
ℓ′ = δL for all ℓ′ ∈{L+1,...,Lk +1}. Indeed, we observe for each ℓ′ ∈{L+1,...,Lk +1} that
δ′
ℓ′ = min{δℓ′, ˆr}
= min

δℓ′,max

δL,
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ

= min{δℓ′,δL}
= δL
The first equality is the definition of δ′
ℓ′. The second equality is the definition of ˆr. The third equality
follows from the assumption that δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. The fourth equality follows from the
fact that δ ∈∆k and the fact that ℓ′ ∈{L+1,...,Lk +1}, which together imply that δℓ′ ≥δL. That
completes our proof of Lemma EC.9.
□


--- Page 71 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec37
Equipped with Lemma EC.9, the remainder of Appendix J.3 is organized as follows. In
Appendix J.3.1, we prove that δ′ satisfies Property 1. In Appendix J.3.2, we prove that δ′ satisfies
Property 3. In Appendix J.3.3, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 4. In Appendix J.3.4, we show
that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. In Appendix J.3.5, we show that there always exists ¯x ∈X c
that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). The combination of Appendices J.3.4 and J.3.5 thus implies that
δ′ dominates δ.
J.3.1. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
In the present Appendix J.3.1, we show that
δ′ satisfies Property 1. Indeed, it follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 1 and from the
definition of L that L ≥2. Moreover, Lemma EC.9 shows that Tk(δ′) ≥L. We thus conclude that
Tk(δ′) ≥2, which shows that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
J.3.2. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 3.
In the present Appendix J.3.2, we show that δ′
satisfies Property 3. Indeed, it follows from Lemma EC.9 that δ′
L = ··· = δ′
Lk+1. Moreover, for each
ℓ∈{2,...,L −1}, we observe that if δ′
ℓ< rik,ℓ, then
δ′
ℓ= δℓ= δℓ+1 = δ′
ℓ+1
The first equality follows from Lemma EC.9 and the fact that ℓ∈{2,...,L−1}. The second equality
follows from the fact that δℓ= δ′
ℓ< rik,ℓ, the fact that ℓ∈{2,...,L−1}, and the fact that δ satisfies
Property 3, which together imply that δℓ= δℓ+1. The third equality follows from Lemma EC.9 and
the fact that ℓ+ 1 ∈{3,...,L}. We have thus shown for all ℓ∈{2,...,Lk} that if δ′
ℓ< rik,ℓ, then
δ′
ℓ= δ′
ℓ+1, which completes our proof that δ′ satisfies Property 3.
J.3.3. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 4.
In the present Appendix J.3.3, we show that δ′
satisfies Property 4. Indeed, it follows from Lemma EC.9 that Tk(δ′) ≥L and that δ′
L = ··· = δ′
Lk+1 =
δL, which imply that δ′
Tk(δ′) = ··· = δ′
Lk+1 = δL. This shows that δ′ satisfies Property 4.
J.3.4. Proof that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c.
In the present Appendix J.3.4, we show
that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. Indeed, consider any x ∈X c. We first observe that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=L
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
= δL +
Lk
X
ℓ=L
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δL
	
−(δL −δL)

xik,ℓ
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ


--- Page 72 ---
ec38
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
= δL +
Lk
X
ℓ=L+1
max

0,rik,ℓ−δL
	
xik,ℓ
+ max

0,rik,L −δL
	
xik,L +
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δL + max

0,rik,L −δL
	
xik,L +
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δL +
 rik,L −δL

xik,L +
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
The first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ′). The second equality follows from algebra. The third
equality follows from Lemma EC.9. The fourth equality follows from algebra. The fifth equality
follows from the fact that δL ≥maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ, which implies that max

0,rik,ℓ−δL
	
= 0
for all ℓ∈{L + 1,...,Lk}. The sixth equality follows from the definition of L, which implies that
δL ≤rik,L. Moreover, we observe that
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=L
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=L
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)xik,ℓ+ max

0,rik,L −δL
	
xik,L
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=L
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)xik,ℓ+
 rik,L −δL

xik,L
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
≥δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=L
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)1 +
 rik,L −δL

xik,L
+
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δL +
 rik,L −δL

xik,L +
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
The first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ). The second equality follows from algebra. The third
equality follows from the definition of L, which implies that max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
= 0 for all ℓ∈{L +
1,...,LK}. The fourth equality follows from the definition of L, which implies that δL ≤rik,L. The


--- Page 73 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec39
inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which implies that δℓ+1 −δℓ≥0 for all ℓ∈{L,...,Lk})
and the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,ℓ≤1 for all ℓ∈{L,...,Lk}). The fifth equality
follows from algebra. Combining the above reasoning, we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) = δL +
 rik,L −δL

xik,L +
L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
≤Jk(x,δ)
We thus conclude that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ).
J.3.5. Proof that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
In the present
Appendix J.3.5, we show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). We will make
use of the following lemma.
Lemma EC.10. δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1.
Proof of Lemma EC.10.
It follows from the construction of δ′ that δ′
ℓ≤δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk +
1}. Therefore, it follows from the assumption that δ ̸= δ′ and from the fact that δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all
ℓ∈{1,...,L} (Lemma EC.9) that there must exist ℓ∗∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1} such that δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗. We
thus observe that
δ′
Lk+1 = δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗≤δLk+1
The first equality follows from Lemma EC.9 (which implies that δ′
L+1 = ··· = δ′
Lk+1). The inequality
follows from the construction of ℓ∗. The second equality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which
implies that δℓ∗≤··· ≤δLk+1). We have thus shown that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1, which completes the proof
of Lemma EC.10.
□
Equipped with the above lemma, we now show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) <
Jk(¯x,δ). Indeed, let ¯x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
¯xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(¯x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
< δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
= Jk(¯x,δ)
The first equality follows from the construction of ¯x. The inequality follows from algebra and from
Lemma EC.10. The second equality follows from the construction of ¯x. This completes our proof
that there always exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).


--- Page 74 ---
ec40
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
J.4. Case where δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ
In the present Appendix J.4, we consider the case in which δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ, and for
this case we prove that δ′ satisfies Properties 1, 3, and 4 as well as dominates δ. Indeed, assume
throughout the remainder of Appendix J.4 that δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. Moreover, let ¯L denote
the largest integer that satisfies δ¯L ≤maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. We will make use of the following
lemmas.
Lemma EC.11. L ≤¯L < Tk(δ′).
Proof of Lemma EC.11.
If follows from the fact that δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓand from the
definition of ¯L that ¯L must be greater than or equal to L.
To show that ¯L < Tk(δ′), let ˆL ∈{L + 1,...,Lk + 1} denote any integer that satisfies rik,ˆL =
maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. It follows from algebra that such ˆL must exist. We will now show by contra-
diction that ¯L < ˆL. Indeed, suppose for the sake of developing a contradiction that ˆL ≤¯L. If that
were true, then
rik,ˆL < δˆL ≤δ¯L ≤
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ= rik,ˆL
The first inequality follows from the definition of L and from the fact that ˆL > L. The second
inequality follows from the supposition that ˆL ≤¯L and the fact that δ ∈∆k. The third inequality
follows from the definition of ¯L. The equality follows from the definition of ˆL. Since we cannot have
rik,ˆL < rik,ˆL, it must be the case that ¯L < ˆL.
To complete our proof that ¯L < Tk(δ′), we now show that Tk(δ′) ≥ˆL. Indeed, we observe that
δ′
ˆL = min{δˆL, ˆr}
= min

δˆL,max

δL,
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ

= min

δˆL,
max
ℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ

= min
n
δˆL,rik,ˆL
o
= rik,ˆL
The first equality is the definition of δ′
ˆL. The second equality is the definition of ˆr. The third equality
follows from the assumption that δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. The fourth equality follows from the
definition of ˆL. The fifth equality follows from the definition of L and from the fact that ˆL > ¯L ≥L,
which together imply that δˆL > rik,ˆL. We have thus shown that δ′
ˆL ≤rik,ˆL, which implies Tk(δ′) ≥ˆL.
This concludes our proof that Tk(δ′) > ¯L, which completes our proof of Lemma EC.11.
□
Lemma EC.12. For all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} we have
δ′
ℓ=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈

1,..., ¯L
	
,
maxℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ′,
if ℓ∈{¯L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
Proof of Lemma EC.12.
We observe for all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk + 1} that
δ′
ℓ= min{δℓ, ˆr}


--- Page 75 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec41
= min

δℓ,max

δL,
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

= min

δℓ,
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

=
(
δℓ,
if ℓ∈

1,..., ¯L
	
,
maxℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ′,
if ℓ∈{¯L + 1,...,Lk + 1}
The first equality is the definition of δ′
ℓ. The second equality follows from the definition of ˆr. The third
equality follows from our assumption that δL < maxℓ∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ. The fourth equality follows
from the definition of ¯L and the fact that δ ∈∆k, which imply that δℓ≤maxℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ′ for
all ℓ∈{1,..., ¯L} and δℓ> maxℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ′ for all ℓ∈{¯L+1,...,Lk +1}. This completes our
proof of Lemma EC.12.
□
Equipped with the above intermediary lemmas, the remainder of Appendix J.4 is organized as
follows. In Appendix J.4.1, we prove that δ′ satisfies Property 1. In Appendix J.4.2, we prove that
δ′ satisfies Property 3. In Appendix J.4.3, we show that δ′ satisfies Property 4. In Appendix J.4.4,
we show that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. In Appendix J.4.5, we show that there always
exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ). The combination of Appendices J.4.4 and J.4.5 thus
implies that δ′ dominates δ.
J.4.1. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
In the present Appendix J.4.1, we show that δ′
satisfies Property 1. Indeed, it follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 1 and from the definition
of L that L ≥2. Moreover, it follows from Lemma EC.11 that Tk(δ′) > L. We thus conclude that
Tk(δ′) > L ≥2, which shows that δ′ satisfies Property 1.
J.4.2. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 3.
In the present Appendix J.4.2, we show that δ′
satisfies Property 3. Indeed, it follows from Lemma EC.12 that δ′
¯L+1 = ··· = δ′
Lk+1. Moreover, for
each ℓ∈{2,..., ¯L −1}, we observe that if δ′
ℓ< rik,ℓ, then
δ′
ℓ= δℓ= δℓ+1 = δ′
ℓ+1
The first equality follows from Lemma EC.12 and the fact that ℓ∈{2,..., ¯L −1}. The second
equality follows from the fact that δℓ= δ′
ℓ< rik,ℓand the fact that δ satisfies Property 3, which
together imply that δℓ= δℓ+1. The third equality follows from Lemma EC.12 and the fact that
ℓ+ 1 ∈{3,..., ¯L}. Finally, we observe that
δ′
¯L = δ¯L ≥rik,¯L
The equality follows from Lemma EC.12. The inequality follows from the definition of ¯L (which
implies that δ¯L < δ¯L+1 and ¯L ≥2) and the fact that δ satisfies Property 3, which imply that δ¯L ≥
rik,¯L. We have thus shown for each ℓ∈{2,...,Lk} that if δ′
ℓ> rik,ℓ, then δ′
ℓ= δ′
ℓ+1, which shows that
δ′ satisfies Property 3.
J.4.3. Proof that δ′ satisfies Property 4.
In the present Appendix J.4.3, we show that
δ′ satisfies Property 4. Indeed, Lemma EC.11 shows that Tk(δ′) > ¯L. Moreover, it follows from
Lemma EC.12 that δ′
¯L+1 = ··· = δ′
Lk+1. Therefore, we conclude that δ′
Tk(δ′) = ··· = δ′
Lk+1, which
shows that δ′ satisfies Property 4.


--- Page 76 ---
ec42
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
J.4.4. Proof that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c.
In the present Appendix J.4.4, we show
that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ) for all x ∈X c. Indeed, consider any x ∈X c. We first show that
Jk(x,δ′) =
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ +

δ¯L −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
(EC.25)
Indeed, we first observe that
δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
=
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′
+
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1

max

0,rik,ℓ−
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

−

max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,ℓ
=
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′
(EC.26)
where the first equality follows from Lemma EC.12 and the second equality follows from algebra.
We next observe that
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ=
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
(EC.27)
where the equality follows from Lemma EC.12. Finally, we observe that

max
n
0,rik,¯L −δ′
¯L
o
−
 δ′
¯L+1 −δ′
¯L

xik,¯L
=

max
n
0,rik,¯L −δ¯L
o
−

max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ −δ¯L

xik,¯L
=

0 −

max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ −δ¯L

xik,¯L
=

δ¯L −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,¯L
(EC.28)
The first equality follows from Lemma EC.12. To see why the second equality holds, we observe that
Lemma EC.11 implies that ¯L+1 ≤Lk +1, and so it follows from the definition of ¯L that δ¯L < δ¯L+1.
Therefore, it follows from the fact that δ satisfies Property 3 that δ¯L ≥rik,¯L, which implies that
0 ≥rik,¯L −δ¯L. The third equality follows from algebra. Combining (EC.26), (EC.27), and (EC.28),
we have shown that
Jk(x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ
+

max
n
0,rik,¯L −δ′
¯L
o
−
 δ′
¯L+1 −δ′
¯L

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

xik,ℓ


--- Page 77 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec43
=
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ +

δ¯L −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
where the first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ′) and the second equality follows from (EC.26),
(EC.27), and (EC.28). We have thus shown that (EC.25) holds.
We next show that
Jk(x,δ) ≥
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ +

δ¯L −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
(EC.29)
Indeed, we first observe that
δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
= δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
(0 −(δℓ+1 −δℓ))xik,ℓ
≥δLk+1 −
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
(δℓ+1 −δℓ)1
= δ¯L+1
(EC.30)
The first equality follows from Lemma EC.11 (which implies that ¯L + 1 > L) and the definition
of L (which implies that δℓ> rik,ℓfor all ℓ> L). The inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k
(which implies that δℓ+1 ≥δℓfor all ℓ∈{¯L + 1,...,Lk}) and the fact that x ∈X c (which implies
that xik,ℓ≤1 for all ℓ∈{¯L + 1,...,Lk}). The second equality follows from algebra. Moreover, we
observe that

max
n
0,rik,¯L −δ¯L
o
−(δ¯L+1 −δ¯L)

xik,¯L = (0 −(δ¯L+1 −δ¯L))xik,¯L
= (δ¯L −δ¯L+1)xik,¯L
(EC.31)
To see why the first equality holds, we observe that Lemma EC.11 implies that ¯L + 1 ≤Lk + 1,
and so it follows from the definition of ¯L that δ¯L < δ¯L+1. Therefore, it follows from the fact that δ
satisfies Property 3 that δ¯L ≥rik,¯L, which implies that 0 ≥rik,¯L −δ¯L. The second equality follows
from algebra. Combining (EC.30) and (EC.31), we have shown that
Jk(x,δ) = δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=¯L+1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
+

max
n
0,rik,¯L −δ¯L
o
−(δ¯L+1 −δ¯L)

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ


--- Page 78 ---
ec44
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
= δ¯L+1 + (δ¯L −δ¯L+1)xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
≥
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′ +

δ¯L −
max
ℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1}rik,ℓ′

xik,¯L
+
¯L−1
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

xik,ℓ
where the first equality is the definition of Jk(x,δ), the second equality follows from (EC.30)
and (EC.31), and the inequality follows from the definition of ¯L (which implies that δ¯L+1 >
maxℓ′∈{L+1,...,Lk+1} rik,ℓ′) and the fact that x ∈X c (which implies that xik,¯L ≤1). We have thus
shown that (EC.29) holds.
Combining (EC.25) and (EC.29), we conclude that Jk(x,δ′) ≤Jk(x,δ)
J.4.5. Proof that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
In the present
Appendix J.4.5, we show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
We will make use of the following lemma.
Lemma EC.13. δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1.
Proof of Lemma EC.13.
It follows from the construction of δ′ that δ′
ℓ≤δℓfor all ℓ∈{1,...,Lk +
1}. Therefore, it follows from the assumption that δ ̸= δ′ and from the fact that δ′
ℓ= δℓfor all
ℓ∈{1,..., ¯L} (Lemma EC.12) that there must exist ℓ∗∈{¯L+1,...,Lk +1} such that δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗. We
thus observe that
δ′
Lk+1 = δ′
ℓ∗< δℓ∗≤δLk+1
The equality follows from Lemma EC.12 (which implies that δ′
¯L+1 = ··· = δ′
Lk+1). The first inequality
follows from the construction of ℓ∗. The second inequality follows from the fact that δ ∈∆k (which
implies that δℓ∗≤··· ≤δLk+1). We have thus shown that δ′
Lk+1 < δLk+1, which completes the proof
of Lemma EC.13.
□
Equipped with the above lemma, we now show that there exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) <
Jk(¯x,δ). Indeed, let ¯x be the vector that is defined for each ℓ∈[N + 1] as
¯xik,ℓ=
(
1,
if ℓ= Lk + 1,
0,
otherwise
We observe that
Jk(¯x,δ′) = δ′
Lk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δ′
ℓ
	
−
 δ′
ℓ+1 −δ′
ℓ

0
< δLk+1 +
Lk
X
ℓ=1
 max

0,rik,ℓ−δℓ
	
−(δℓ+1 −δℓ)

0
= Jk(¯x,δ)


--- Page 79 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec45
The first equality follows from the construction of ¯x. The inequality follows from algebra and from
Lemma EC.13. The second equality follows from the construction of ¯x. This completes our proof
that there always exists ¯x ∈X c that satisfies Jk(¯x,δ′) < Jk(¯x,δ).
Appendix K: Implementation Details and Additional Experimental Results
In this appendix, we complement the numerical experiments from Section 5 by discussing imple-
mentation details and presenting additional experiments. This appendix is organized as follows.
• In Appendix K.1, we discuss in detail our implementations of the various solution methods
from Section 5.
• In Appendix K.2, we present additional numerical results regarding the synthetic data gener-
ation process that is used in Section 5.1.
• In Appendix K.3, we conduct additional experiments to those in Section 5.1.2 to investigate
the practical efficiency of the exclusion set formulation in assortment optimization problems
with cardinality constraints.
• In Appendix K.4, we conduct additional experiments to show the out-of-sample performance
of the sample average approximation in the context of the real-world dataset from Section 5.2.
K.1. Implementation details
In Section 5, our goal is to perform numerical experiments that reflect an honest comparison between
the various solution methods proposed in this paper and from the prior literature. In this appendix,
we discuss in detail our implementations of the various solution methods from Section 5, with the
aim of transparency as well as reproducibility.
K.1.1. Parameter tuning and optional heuristics.
In our experiments in Section 5,
our goal is to conduct a direct comparison between various solution methods. To this end, we
conducted all of our experiments without any optional heuristics or parameter tuning, both for our
solution methods as well as the solution methods from the literature. This includes, for example,
not tuning the Gurobi mixed-integer programming parameters, not changing the default frequency
of callbacks, and not applying any optional heuristics such as the divide-and-conquer warm start
from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 5.3). The only parameter that we specify is the required
numerical tolerance in the original two-phase Benders decomposition method from Section 2.4.2
and our accelerated Benders decomposition method from Section 4 for when to add violated cuts.
For both of these decomposition methods, we use a tolerance of 10−6 for detecting a violated cut,
as well as a tolerance of 10−6 for terminating the decomposition method.
While optional heuristics and parameter tuning may lead to speedups in the various solution
methods, our rationale for not including them are three-fold. First, because our goal in Section 5
is to provide an honest comparison of various solution methods, we do not want the reported
computation times to reflect a real or perceived disparity in efforts for choosing optional heuristics
and tuning parameters more carefully for some solution methods than others. Second, the spirit
of sample average approximation is that it can provide a general approach to solving assortment


--- Page 80 ---
ec46
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
optimization problems; as such, we believe it would not be ideal for a practitioner to need to select
optional heuristics or tune solver parameters separately for different problem instances to obtain
good performance. Third, there is a large number of combinations of solver parameters that can be
tuned and optional heuristics that could be considered, both for our solutions methods and existing
solution methods, making it impractical to conduct a comprehensive comparison of all combinations
of optional heuristics and parameter tuning.
K.1.2. Implementation of original two-phase Benders decomposition method.
In
Sections 5.1.3 and 5.2, we report the computation times of the original two-phase Benders decom-
position method from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 4), which is reviewed in Section 2.4.2 and
Appendix A.2. Our implementation of their two-phase Benders decomposition method is based on
the companion code for Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) that is made publicly available by the authors.17
Upon studying their code, we identified a small typo in their implementation of their two-phase
Benders decomposition method. This typo did not affect the correctness of their code; however, this
typo made their implementation of their algorithm considerably slower than the algorithm described
in the main text of Bertsimas and Mišić (2019). As we show in Tables EC.1 and EC.2 below, making
a small fix to this typo in their code results in significant speedups in the two-phase Benders decom-
position method for the empirical study conducted by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 5.3). To
provide an honest comparison, all numerical results in Section 5 report the computation time of their
implementation of the original two-phase Benders decomposition method with our fix to the typo.
In greater detail, the typo in their implementation concerned their algorithm for generating cuts
in Phase 2. Their algorithm for computing optimal cuts for Phase 2 is described in Bertsimas
and Mišić (2019, Equations (11a)-(11c) in Section 4.1). In particular, their equation (11a) requires
calculating a vector ¯β ∈RN+1 where ¯βk
ℓ≜P
j:σk(j)<ℓβk
j for all ℓ∈[N + 1]. This vector can be
calculated in O(N) time using the recursion ¯βk
ℓ= ¯βk
ℓ−1 +βk
σ−1
k
(ℓ−1) for each ℓ. However, their code for
their implementation of this algorithm calculates ¯βk
ℓseparately for each ℓ, which requires O(N) time
per ℓ. This increased the runtime of their Phase 2 algorithm for generating cuts from O(KN) to
O(KN 2). For this reason, the computation times of their Benders decomposition method reported
in Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 5.3) made their method appear slower than it should be.
In all of our numerical experiments in Section 5, we report computation times for our fixed version
of their code that computes cuts in Phase 2 in O(KN) time. To demonstrate the significance of
this fix, Tables EC.1 and EC.2 repeat the numerical results shown in Tables 7 and 8 from Section
5.2, appended with additional numerical results that show the computation time of their original
implementation of the two-phase Benders decomposition made publicly available by Bertsimas and
Mišić (2019). These tables show that our small fix to the typo in their code results in 2x-20x speedup
in their Phase 2 for the empirical study conducted in Bertsimas and Mišić (2019, Section 5.3).
K.1.3. Initial cuts in Benders decomposition.
To avoid unboundedness of the outer prob-
lem (5), both our accelerated Benders decomposition method from Section 4 and the original two-
phase Benders decomposition method from Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) described in Section 2.4.2
17 https://github.com/vvmisic/optimalPLD, accessed on September 5, 2025.


--- Page 81 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec47
Table EC.1
Experiments from Appendix K.1.2 -
Computation Time.
Constraints
Computation Time
ABD
BD1
BD0
Pxi = 2
3.40
106.47
180.95
Pxi = 3
5.87
276.21
480.89
Pxi = 4
14.05
392.50
675.41
Pxi = 5
18.09
387.86
903.59
Pxi = 6
167.14
705.85
1845.19
Pxi = 7
157.88
861.02
2386.83
Pxi = 8
371.61
1396.28
3566.60
Pxi = 9
508.31
2177.62
4525.05
Pxi = 10
2215.70
4240.28
9018.24
Results under different cardinality constraints for the compu-
tation time in seconds for three solution methods. The first is
the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD).
The second is the implementation of the two-phase Benders
decomposition method from §2.4.2 given by Bertsimas and Mišić
(2019) with our improvement to their code (BD1). The third
is the implementation of the two-phase Benders decomposition
method from §2.4.2 given by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) with-
out our improvement to their code (BD0). Results are averaged
over three replications to remove variability in solve times, and
results are rounded to two decimal places. Table 7 in Section 5.2
includes columns ABD and BD1.
Table EC.2
Experiments from Appendix K.1.2 - Computation Time by Phase
ABD
BD1
BD0
Constraints
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 1
Phase 2
Pxi = 2
2.78
0.62
102.66
3.80
102.64
78.31
Pxi = 3
3.31
2.55
263.99
12.22
273.05
207.84
Pxi = 4
3.40
10.65
332.14
60.36
291.12
384.29
Pxi = 5
4.22
13.87
333.92
53.94
340.17
563.42
Pxi = 6
4.05
163.09
404.12
301.73
411.84
1433.35
Pxi = 7
4.75
153.12
464.12
396.90
480.03
1906.80
Pxi = 8
4.94
366.68
497.50
898.79
463.73
3102.87
Pxi = 9
5.23
503.08
590.07
1587.55
611.46
3913.59
Pxi = 10
5.39
2210.31
651.65
3588.63
686.38
8331.87
Results under different cardinality constraints for the computation time in seconds for three solution methods,
split by Phase 1 and Phase 2. The first is the accelerated Benders decomposition method from §4 (ABD). The
second is the implementation of the two-phase Benders decomposition method from §2.4.2 given by Bertsimas
and Mišić (2019) with our improvement to their code (BD1). The third is the implementation of the two-phase
Benders decomposition method from §2.4.2 given by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019) without our improvement to
their code (BD0). Results are averaged over three replications to remove variability in solve times, and results
are rounded to two decimal places. Table 8 in Section 5.2 includes columns ABD and BD1.


--- Page 82 ---
ec48
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
initialize the outer problem (5) in Phase 1 with a single constraint for each ranking. Consistent with
the implementation given by Bertsimas and Mišić (2019), the original two-phase Benders decompo-
sition method is initialized with the constraint qk ≤maxi∈[N+1] ri for each ranking k. Our accelerated
Benders decomposition method is initialized with the constraint qk ≤maxℓ∈[Lk+1] rik,ℓ, which corre-
sponds to the cut that would be obtained by (13) from Section 4.1 with δ1 = ··· = δLk+1 = ¯rk.
K.2. Discussion of the data generation process from Section 5.1.1
The data generation process described in Section 5.1.1 consists of generating a "ground truth"
ranking-based choice model with M rankings (Step 1) and fitting the attraction parameters of the
multinomial logit model to transaction data generated from that ranking-based choice model (Step
2). In this appendix, we perform additional experiments to demonstrate the effect of the parameter
M on the multinomial logit models with rank cutoffs obtained from this data generation process.
The results from these additional experiments are shown in Figure EC.1. Similarly as in Sec-
tion 5.1.2, Figure EC.1 considers a setting with N = 50 products, a rank cutoff of L = 5, and M ∈
{5,15,25}. For each M ∈{5,15,25}, we perform the data generation process described in Steps 1 and
2 of Section 5.1.1 to construct a multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs, and we then generate ˜K =
50000 samples from the constructed multinomial logit model with rank cutoffs by following Steps 3
and 4 of Section 5.1.1. In Figure EC.1, we report for each product the proportion of samples in which
that product is preferred to the no-purchase option, averaged across ten replications for each M ∈
{5,15,25}.18 Consistent with the data generation process described in Section 5.1.1, the products in
Figure EC.1 are sorted within each replication so that the attraction parameters satisfy ν1 ≥··· ≥νN.
There are two main takeaways from Figure EC.1. First, we observe that as the number of rankings
M in the ground truth model increases, the proportion of samples in which each product is preferred
to the no-purchase option becomes more evenly distributed across products. This reflects the fact
that larger values of M leads to a smaller spread of the attraction parameters in the estimated
multinomial logit model. Second, we observe that even for the smallest choice of M (M = 5), each
product is preferred to the no-purchase option in at least some of the samples.
K.3. Additional Experiments from Section 5.1.2
In this appendix, we present additional numerical experiments to those in Section 5.1.2 to explore
the impact of cardinality constraints on the computation time of the exclusion set formulation (12)
and the original mixed-integer programming formulation (8).
Our additional experiments follow a similar setup as Section 5.1.2. Specifically, we use the same
data generation process from Section 5.1.1 with N = 50, M = 5, ˜K = 10000, and L = 5. We then
compare the performance of the exclusion set formulation (12) and the original mixed-integer
programming formulation (8) with budget constraints of the form PN
i=1 xi ≤5, PN
i=1 xi ≤10, . . . ,
PN
i=1 xi ≤45, PN
i=1 xi ≤50. Table EC.3 shows the computation time for solving (12) and (8), and
it also shows the gap of each method of the root relaxation, i.e., the ratio of the optimal objective
values of the linear programming relaxations to the true optimal objective values.
18 Because the rank cutoff is L = 5, we observe that at most 5 products are preferred to the no-purchase option in
any given sample. As such, for each M ∈{5,15,25}, the sum of the proportions in Figure EC.1 is at most 5.0.


--- Page 83 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec49
Figure EC.1
Experiments from Appendix K.2 - Visualization of samples.
M = 5
M = 15
M = 25
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Product Index
Proportion
Note. Proportion of samples in which each product is preferred to no-purchase option.
There are three main takeaways from Table EC.3. First, we observe that the root relaxation gap
for both methods decreases as the budget constraint decreases from 10 to 5. This decrease in the
root relaxation gaps is consistent with Proposition 1 from Section 3.2, which shows that the root
relaxation gap of (12) and (8) are both 0% if we have a budget constraint of PN
i=1 xi ≤1. Second,
we observe that the computation times for solving (12) and (8) increase as the budget decreases
from 50 to 15, and the computation times then decrease as the budget decreases from 15 to 5. We
attribute this to the fact that the root relaxation gaps for both formulations become larger as we
decrease from 50 to 15, after which the root relaxation gaps for both formulations becomes smaller.
Third, we observe that the ratio of computation times between (12) and (8) is closely correlated
with the ratio of their root relaxation gaps. This demonstrates the value of the strength of the
exclusion set formulation (12) compared to the original mixed-integer programming formulation (8)
from the perspective of reducing the computation time for obtaining an optimal solution.
K.4. Approximation Gap for Section 5.2
In Section 5.2, we solve the sample average approximation (2) using the dataset from Toubia et al.
(2003), which consisted of N = 3584 products and ˜K = 330 samples. This set of experiments is


--- Page 84 ---
ec50
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
Table EC.3
Experiments Showing Exclusion Set Performance Under
Cardinality Constraints.
Budget
Computation Time
Root Relaxation Gap
XSET
MIP
Ratio
XSET
MIP
Ratio
5
48.09
97.80
2.03
6.44%
6.99%
1.09
10
281.00
549.89
1.96
10.29%
11.32%
1.10
15
486.80
887.64
1.82
8.40%
10.75%
1.28
20
207.06
550.55
2.66
4.11%
7.13%
1.74
25
86.67
273.10
3.15
1.56%
3.87%
2.48
30
11.59
32.83
2.83
0.44%
1.78%
4.07
35
2.34
22.80
9.74
0.05%
1.02%
18.75
40
1.51
18.12
11.96
0.02%
0.95%
58.16
45
1.59
15.35
9.64
0.02%
0.95%
58.16
Inf
1.48
15.83
10.73
0.02%
0.95%
58.16
Results for two solution methods under different cardinality constraints. The two solu-
tion methods are our exclusion set formulation (12) (XSET) and the original mixed-integer
programming formulation (8) (MIP). The Computation Time columns report the solu-
tion time (in seconds) required to solve each formulation under integrality constraints,
along with the ratio of these times. The Root Relaxation Gap columns report the average
percentage deviation of the root relaxation from the optimal integral solution for both
formulations, as well as the ratio of these gaps. Results are averaged over five replications,
and results are rounded to two decimal places.
notably different than the experiments in Section 5.1 for two reasons. First, the dataset from Toubia
et al. (2003) contains far more products than samples, raising potential concerns about the out-
of-sample performance of assortments obtained from solving the sample average approximation.
Second, the dataset from Toubia et al. (2003) was obtained using a conjoint analysis rather than
Monte-Carlo simulation. As such, it is not possible to obtain more samples to improve the approx-
imation gap of the sample average approximation, nor is it possible to generate an out-of-sample
validation set of samples to estimate the approximation gap of the assortments obtained from solving
sample average approximation, as was done in Section 5.1.3.
To address these potential concerns, Table EC.4 presents the results of a five-fold cross-validation
conducted on the dataset of Toubia et al. (2003) from Section 5.2. Specifically, after randomizing
the dataset, we partitioned it into five equal subsets. For each budget constraint, we performed five
iterations, using four subsets for the sample average approximation (2) and evaluating the revenue
performance of the optimal assortment on the remaining hold-out subset. This process allows us
to assess how well the optimal assortments generalize to unseen data across different cardinality
constraints. To the best of our knowledge, Table EC.4 offers the first empirical analysis of the
approximation gap from using the dataset of Toubia et al. (2003).
Table EC.4 reveals that the approximation gap of the sample average approximation (2) on the
dataset from Toubia et al. (2003) is surprisingly small, and substantially smaller than the one
reported in Table 6. This indicates that this dataset may possess structural properties, potentially
stemming from the data collection methodology employed by Toubia et al. (2003), that facilitate
strong generalization. The consistently low approximation gaps observed on this real-world dataset of


--- Page 85 ---
e-companion to Khalid and Sturt: Assortment Optimization and the Sample Average Approximation
ec51
Table EC.4
Experiments from
Appendix K.4 - Estimated Approximation
Gap.
Constraints
Approximation Gap
Pxi = 2
94.96%
Pxi = 3
95.55%
Pxi = 4
96.99%
Pxi = 5
96.14%
Pxi = 6
97.26%
Pxi = 7
97.46%
Pxi = 8
95.82%
Relative accuracy (100% - MAPE) of optimal
assortments from the sample average approxima-
tion (2), solved using the accelerated Benders
decomposition method from §4. MAPE is based
on the revenue of each optimal assortment on the
training data versus its performance on the out-
of-sample data. Results are averaged over five-
fold cross-validation (Appendix K.4) and reported
to two decimal places.
N = 3584 products provide additional evidence of the viability of the sample average approximation
approach for solving the assortment optimization problems with realistic numbers of products.
