--- Page 1 ---
Justitia: Fair and Efficient Scheduling for
LLM Applications
Mingyan Yang∗, Guanjie Wang∗, Manqi Luo, Yifei Liu, Chen Chen, Han Zhao, Yu Feng, Quan Chen, Minyi Guo
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract—In the era of Large Language Models (LLMs), it
has been popular to launch a series of LLM inferences—we
call an LLM application—to better solve real-world problems.
When serving those applications in shared GPU servers, the
schedulers are expected to attain fast application completions
with guaranteed worst-case performance. However, mainstream
LLM schedulers fail to behave well for LLM applications—due
to head-of-line blocking or over-constrained resource allocation.
In this paper, we propose to serve LLM applications in a fair
and also efficient manner. To this end, we design Justitia, a
novel scheduler with three key techniques. First, given that
memory is prevalently a bottleneck for mainstream inference
frameworks like vLLM, Justitia models the service cost of LLM
applications in a memory-centric manner. Meanwhile, it uses a
simple neural network model to conduct light-weight and also
accurate demand prediction. Moreover, Justitia adopts a virtual-
time based fair queuing algorithm to reduce the overall perfor-
mance with guaranteed worst-case delay. We have implemented
Justitia atop vLLM, and experimental results involving diverse
LLM applications show that it can substantially enhance the
scheduling efficiency with fairness preserved.
I. INTRODUCTION
The recent years have witnessed the boom of large language
models (LLMs) [1] in revolutionizing various fields [2], [3],
[4]. In particular, for enlarged input size or enhanced output
quality, it has become increasingly popular to address a real-
world problem with a set of correlated LLM inferences [5], [6],
which we call an LLM application. For example, to summarize
a very large file, multiple parallel inference tasks would be
launched each processing one file partition [7]; to solve a
complex mathematical problem, multiple searching directions
need to be explored until a satisfiable answer is obtained [8].
Such LLM applications are prevalently served in shared GPU
clusters, where users usually expect to get the final output as
early as possible [7], [9], without being remarkably delayed
by competing users [10], [11].
However, existing LLM serving systems fail to behave
well for scheduling LLM applications. For example, the
mainstream LLM framework, vLLM [12], schedules LLM
inference requests in a First-Come-First-Serve (FCFS) manner,
which suffers from the head-of-line-blocking problem. Such a
problem also exists for another recently-proposed scheduler,
Parrot [7], which applies FCFS at the application level. Mean-
while, to ensure fairness, the VTC scheduler [10] is proposed
to fairly allocate the serving resources among different users.
However, this method forces each application to use its fair
∗Equal contribution.
(a) Concurrent Serving
(b) Sequential Serving
Fig. 1: Given two competing LLM applications, serving them
sequentially in a saturated manner can reduce the average
completion time with no per-application delay.
share in contention, resulting in postponed completion. It is
thus desirable to devise a scheduler particularly for LLM
applications that can behave well in both efficiency (i.e., short
average completion time) and fairness (i.e., guarantee that no
application be delayed by the mis-behaviors of others).
To attain efficient and also fair serving, our insight is that
LLM applications shall be served in a saturated manner fol-
lowing the fair completion order. We first note that, regarding
fairness, users primarily care about the long-term fairness (i.e.,
with guaranteed fast completion) instead of short-term fairness
(i.e., always allocated an equal share of the total resources). We
thus can trade such short-term fairness for higher efficiency.
As shown in Fig. 1, when two applications are competing
with each other, serving them—not concurrently with the fair
share—but sequentially in the fair completion order with all
the resources—can reduce the average completion time, with
no application actually delayed. With such a serving manner—
we call saturated serving in fair completion order, we can
potentially do well in both fairness and efficiency.
Yet, it is a non-trivial task to apply the above insight into
practice, which requires estimating the service cost of LLM
applications and calculating their fair completion order. To be
specific, the challenges are three-fold. First, LLM inferences
consume both compute and memory (i.e., KV cache) resources
on GPU servers, and the resource consumption amount is
not a constant (due to the auto-regressive generation manner);
such resource heterogeneity and volume-irregularity shall be
properly handled when depicting an LLM application’s service
cost. Second, the overall service cost of an LLM application
needs to be predicted upon its arrival; such prediction shall
be made accurate and also efficient. Third, upon the arrival
or completion of any application, we need to work out the
expected completion order of all the pending applications
under a fair scheduler; such decisions shall be made efficiently
arXiv:2510.17015v1  [cs.LG]  19 Oct 2025


--- Page 2 ---
(without frequent refreshing later) and also of high quality
(yielding worst-case performance guarantee).
In this paper, we propose Justitia, a fair and efficient sched-
uler for LLM applications. In modeling the service cost of an
LLM application, we find that the GPU memory is usually
the true bottleneck; therefore, rather than adopting compute-
centric cost modeling as in [10], we propose memory-centric
cost modeling, which takes into consideration both the space
and time of memory occupation. In demand prediction, we
adopt the Multi-Level Perception model, which is light-weight
(in terms of the training and inference cost) and also accurate
(by leveraging the application-specific demand similarity). In
determining the application queuing order, we borrow the
virtual-time based fair queuing algorithm originally proposed
for packet scheduling in the network community [13], [14].
That algorithm can efficiently calculate the application com-
pletion order under an idealized fair scheduler—in one shot
with no need to consider later-arrival ones. Moreover, we
theoretically prove that, the maximal delay an application
could encounter under Justitia—when compared to under the
idealized fair scheduler—is always bounded by a constant.
We have implemented Justitia above vLLM [12], the main-
stream LLM serving framework. Given a set of diverse LLM
applications, Justitia can remarkably reduce the average com-
pletion time compared to existing schedulers. Specifically,
compare to the state-of-the-art fair scheduler, VTC [10], our
Justitia scheduler can reduce the average application com-
pletion time by 57.5%—with only 8% delayed at a slight
level. Moreover, further studies confirm that it is indeed
indispensable to adopt memory-centric service cost modeling
and MLP-based demand prediction for LLM applications;
besides, the scheduling overhead of Justitia is also negligible.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LLM Application Serving: The Basics
LLM inference: an auto-regressive process relying on KV-
cache.
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
strong capability for diverse tasks like text processing [15],
code generation [3] and task planning [16]. Leveraging LLM
intelligence requires conducting auto-regressive LLM infer-
ences. Due to the compute-intensive nature, LLM inferences
are typically conducted with cutting-edge accelerators like
GPUs, and for high GPU utilization, multiple input sequences
are batched together and processed in an iterative manner [17].
In particular, to avoid repeated computations, the intermediate
feature states of the generated tokens are cached for later
usage during the inference process (called KV cache) [18].
In mainstream inference frameworks like vLLM [12], such
KV cache is accommodated within a designated GPU memory
space of limited size, which bounds the maximum number of
sequences that can be concurrently processed in each iteration.
LLM applications: the emerging trend and the scheduling
objectives.
To apply LLMs for real-world problems with
enhanced processing capability and output quality, there re-
cently emerges a trend to organize multiple LLM inferences
together—in the form of LLM applications. For example, as
shown in Fig. 2a, since the context window size of an LLM
inference is limited (e.g., 10M tokens [19]), to summarize
a large text file, multiple parallel inferences—each process-
ing a slice of the original file—need to be launched and
finally have their results merged [7]. Similarly, in Fig. 2b, to
improve the merging quality of multiple documents, several
merging inferences are submitted in parallel—each followed
by a scoring inference—and finally the highest-score result
is selected [20]. In Fig. 2c, to address the hallucination
problem [21], each claim within the LLM-generated output
needs to be additionally verified by a dedicated LLM inference
(e.g., with the FacTool framework [5]). In Fig. 2d, to solve
complex mathematical problems, sophisticated LLM reasoning
algorithms like self-consistency (SC) [6] are increasingly pop-
ular, which works by expanding multiple reasoning trajectories
and applying majority voting to find the best answer.
LLM applications have substantially unleashed the potential
of LLMs in reliably solving realistic problems, and would
potentially become a dominant cloud workload. For such LLM
applications, the final output desired by the end-users is only
available when all the inference requests constituting the LLM
application complete. Therefore, when serving those LLM
applications in a GPU cluster, it is of paramount significance
to reduce their end-to-end execution time [7]. In the meantime,
since different applications—usually submitted by different
users—would compete for the limited processing capabil-
ity on GPU servers, it is also necessary to ensure service
fairness among LLM applications, so as to avoid negative
interferences [10] (e.g., head-of-line-blocking or starvation). In
summary, attaining efficient and also fair scheduling is critical
for serving LLM applications in the clusters.
B. Related Works and Their Limitations
Regarding LLM inference serving, a series of scheduling
methods have been proposed recently, in both inter-inference
and inter-application level. Here we revisit such scheduling
practices and summarize their limitations.
Inference-level Scheduling. Given that the ultimate out-
put length of the auto-regressive generation process is non-
deterministic a priori, mainstream LLM serving frameworks
like vLLM [12] and SGLang [22] commonly adopt the First-
Come-First-Serve (FCFS) scheduling algorithm—at the infer-
ence level without awareness to the existence of LLM appli-
cations. They schedule each incoming inference request based
on its arrival time. Such a FCFS scheduling method suffers the
head-of-line-blocking problem, meaning that a long inference
would impede the execution of those behind it. Another work
FastServe [23] employs multi-level-feedback-queue to address
this problem, although frequent queue switching would bring
non-negligible overhead. Recently, there also emerge some
prediction-based methods that seek to enforce Shortest-Job-
First in request scheduling [24], [25], [26].
However, all such inference-level scheduling methods fail
to provide end-to-end performance optimizations for LLM


--- Page 3 ---
(a) MapReduce Summarization
(b) Doc Merging
(c) Fact Verification
(d) Self Consistency
Fig. 2: Examples of typical LLM applications.
applications: in contention-intensive scenarios, the constitut-
ing inferences of an LLM application may be served in an
interleaved manner, compromising the ultimate application
completion time [7].
Application-level
Scheduling.
Given
the
deficiency
of
inference-level request scheduling, recent works have also
noticed the need to optimize application-level scheduling per-
formance. In that regard, Parrot [7] devises novel programming
abstractions for LLM applications, which supports execut-
ing the correlated inferences in a non-interleaved manner;
yet it determines the inter-application scheduling order still
following the FCFS policy, thus also suffering head-of-line-
blocking. Noticing the need to ensure inter-application (tenant)
fairness, Sheng et al. proposed a fair scheduling algorithm
called Virtual Token Counter (VTC) [10], which tracks the
services received for each tenant and prioritize the ones with
the least services received (a similar method is used by
another work FairServe [11]). However, by enforcing each
tenant (application) to only use its fair share, the end-to-end
application completion time—which users truly care about—
would be delayed compared to the monopolizing cases.
To summarize, existing LLM scheduling methods fail to
attain efficient and fair scheduling at the application level,
hurting the ultimate user experience. Our objective in this
paper is thus to make up that research gap by designing a
fair and also efficient scheduler specifically for LLM appli-
cations. On the one hand, we want to optimize application-
level scheduling efficiency by reducing the average application
completion time; on the other hand, we want to provide
service guarantee on the worst-case service degradation any
application could experience compared to the case where it is
allocated an equal resource share.
III. MOTIVATION
A. Insight
Short-term fairness or long-term fairness? We note that the
fairness-centric schedulers [10], [11] are inefficient essentially
because they seek to fairly share the computing resources
at each instant moment, i.e., stick to short-term fairness.
However, in expecting service fairness, users primarily desire
a service guarantee on the worst-case completion time at the
application level (as explained in Sec. II-A, the application
completion time is what users truly care about). In that sense,
long-term fairness (i.e., with performance guarantee on the
application completion time) would suffice for end users (as
echoed by existing works adopting the fairness metric called
finish-time fairness [27]). We thus materialize out fairness
objective as long-term fairness, which, as we show next, allows
for more scheduling flexibility to attain higher efficiency.
Saturated serving in fair completion order.
For a set of
competing LLM applications, instantaneous fair sharing would
limit the usable resources of each application to only the
average share. Instead, we can prioritize the applications one
by one based on their relative completion order under fair
sharing, allowing each prioritized application to use unlimited
resources it desires. In this way, because a prioritized applica-
tion can complete faster, the average application completion
time can potentially be reduced. In particular, if all applications
arrive at the same time, we would be essentially mimicking
the shortest-job-first (SJF) scheduling, which is known to be
efficiency-optimal. Meanwhile, this method can also behave
well in the fairness aspect: since the prioritized applica-
tions would yield their resources also earlier, and the fair-
completion-order can prevent head-of-line blocking or infinite
starvation, each application may still finish no later than its
expected completion time under fair sharing. To summarize, it
is promising that we can simultaneously attain high efficiency
and long-term fairness. We call such a serving methodology
saturated serving in fair completion order.
To verify the effectiveness of the above insight, we conduct
a testbed experiment as shown in Fig. 3. We submitted two
DocMerging applications simultaneously to an LLaMA2-7B
model deployed on a single A100 GPU, with a total GPU
block number of 459. As shown in Fig. 3a, under instantaneous
fair sharing, each application is restricted to its fair share (as
indicated by the KV block usage), resulting in an average JCT
of 210 s. However, if we prioritize the applications sequentially
(based on the job completion order in Fig. 3b), the average
JCT drops to 166 s—without delaying any single application
compared to the fair-sharing case in Fig. 3a.
Predictability of application-level resource demands. Note
that to attain the previous scheduling effect, we need to


--- Page 4 ---
0
2000
4000
Inference Iteration
0
200
400
GPU Blocks Usage
DM-1
DM-2
(a) Instantaneous Fair Sharing
0
2000
4000
Inference Iteration
0
200
400
GPU Blocks Usage
DM-1
DM-2
(b) Saturated Serving in Fair Com-
pletion Order
Fig. 3: KV block usage when running two DocMerging (DM)
applications under different scheduling schemes.
estimate the application completion order prior to application
execution. While existing serving methods [7], [10], [11], [12]
treat the LLM inference duration as a blackbox, we find that
would be too conservative for LLM applications.
In fact, we find it is indeed promising to realize demand-
aware application scheduling. Since each LLM application
is designed for specific use cases, the resource demands of
which are relatively stable across different execution runs.
Fig. 4 shows the execution information (input/output length)
of specific inference stages in the two LLM applications
over 100 trial runs, which exhibits strong demand correla-
tions. For example, generate-queries inferences in Fact-
Verification application all have an input token length between
360 and 380. Meanwhile, since the LLM applications are often
hosted on the cloud as a public service [28], the application-
specific execution information previously profiled would be
readily available to the service providers. In that sense, the
application viewpoint can bring promising opportunities for
demand estimation. Moreover, our previous scheduling insight
can bear a certain level of demand prediction errors, as long
as the resultant scheduling order is not affected.
B. Challenges
While it is promising to attain fair and efficient scheduling
for LLM applications with saturated serving in fair completion
order, when applying that insight in practice, there nonetheless
exist several critical challenges.
First, how to quantify the service cost of an LLM appli-
cation? Serving LLM workloads require both compute and
memory (e.g., KV cache space as explained in Sec. II-A)
resources, it is unclear which perspective is more suitable
for demand depiction. Meanwhile, due to the auto-regressive
nature (i.e., token number keeps increasing), the demand
volumes on both resource types keep expanding. Therefore, we
need to properly address such type-heterogeneity and volume-
irregularity in resource demand when modeling the overall
service cost of an LLM application.
Second, how to make application-level demand prediction
as accurately as possible? While Fig. 4 previously suggests
that there exists certain similarity among the resource demands
in different trial runs of a given application, merely using such
historical information is not sufficient for accurate demand
0
200
400
600
The Number of Prompt Tokens
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Probability
generate summary
360
365
370
375
380
The Number of Prompt Tokens
0.0
0.1
0.2
Probability
generate queries
0
200
400
600
800
1000
The Number of Completion Tokens
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Probability
(a) Summarization
10
20
30
40
The Number of Completion Tokens
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Probability
(b) Fact Verification
Fig. 4: Prompt and decoding length distribution respectively
for the generate-summary and generate-queries
inferences in the MapReduce-Summarization application and
the Fact-Verification application. In each case, we divide the
length range into 10 buckets, and calculate the value appear-
ance probability in each bucket (accompanied by the fitted
curves assuming skewed Guassian distribution reference).
prediction in the ongoing run. In fact, the runtime application
input also crucially affects the overall resource demand in
the current execution round. For example, for the SC appli-
cation [6], a longer question input is usually more difficult to
solve, and the resultant application serving duration would also
be longer. Ignorance to such runtime hints would render the
demand prediction as well as the completion order estimation
inaccurate; meanwhile, such predictions must be also made
light-weight.
Third, how to efficiently make high-quality decisions on
the application queuing order, so as to reduce the average
application completion time while theoretically guarantee-
ing the worst-case performance? Enforcing our previous in-
sight in Sec. III-A requires obtaining—when each application
arrives—its expected completion time under a fair scheduler,
which is hard to make given that the completion time of an
LLM application may be affected by the later-arriving ones.
Moreover, to make our solution generally applicable, it is
desirable to provide a formal performance guarantee on the
worst-case performance impact of any application.
IV. SOLUTION
In this section, we present Justitia, a fair and also efficient
scheduler for LLM applications, with all the above challenges
addressed. We first introduce our cost modeling method in
Sec. IV-A, and then elaborate how to predict the application-
level resource demand in Sec. IV-B. Finally we describe the
queuing strategy of Justitia in Sec. IV-C and theoretically
analyze its fairness properties in Sec. IV-D.
A. Memory-Centric Cost Modeling
To determine the application scheduling order, we need to
quantify the overall serving cost of each LLM application, and


--- Page 5 ---
𝑑
𝑝+ 𝑑
𝑝
Fig. 5: Demand modeling of an LLM inference. p and d are
respectively the prefill and decoding token length. The service
cost is then depicted as the accumulative KV cache occupation
(i.e., KV token-time): pd + d2
2 .
the key is to describe the serving cost of an LLM inference.
Given that both computation and memory resources are
demanded in LLM inference process, its serving cost can
be captured from either the computation perspective or the
memory perspective. The VTC work [10] chooses the former:
it measures the serving cost as a weighted combination of
the prefilling (input) tokens and decoding (output) tokens.
However, such a method is over-simplified by ignoring the
impact of KV cache consumptions. In fact, in modern LLM
serving frameworks like vLLM [12], the inference throughput
is bounded commonly on the GPU memory (KV cache space):
new sequences can always be added to the running queue as
long as there are sufficient KV cache space; otherwise some
running sequences would be interrupted and moved to the
swapped queue. In that sense, inference serving cost shall be
better depicted from the memory perspective.
Moreover, the resource demand of an LLM inference is
not fixed during its lifetime. During the generative inference
process, the sequence length keeps increasing, leading to
increasing KV-cache occupations. Therefore, in this paper we
propose a memory-centric cost modeling method that depicts
the cumulative service cost of an LLM inference in both
temporal and spatial dimensions. To be specific, let p and d
respectively represent the prefill and decode token length, then
we devise the cost metric, KV token-time, as:
c =
d
X
i=1
(p + i) = pd + d2
2 .
(1)
This formula adds up the KV cache occupation1 over all
the iterations2 of that inference. From the above formula, we
can learn that the relationship between the cost volume and
the generation length (d) is indeed quadratic. This is more
reasonable compared to the linear relationship in the cost
model of VTC [10] given the inflation effect of d on both
memory occupation size and duration.
1The unit of the KV cache occupation is the number of KV cache blocks
corresponded to one token (over all the LLM layers and heads), which is fixed
for a given LLM. This is more concise for analysis than recording the exact
KV block number. Hereafter in this paper, we describe the total KV cache
space also in such units.
2For simplicity we do not consider the time difference when generating
different tokens. In realistic execution, an LLM sequence would be batched
with sequences from other inference requests [17]; all such sequences jointly
determine the per-iteration inference latency. The inference time of such
runtime batches with mixed sequence is statistically stable.
System prompt for app-i
Text input: Is it true that ...
User prompt
You are a fact-checking
assistant. Verify with ...
0
0
0.3
1234
 Predicted 
resource
demand
MLP 
for app-i
0.2
0.9
0.4
0.2
0.1
 Vectorize
TF-IDF
Fig. 6: Predict the resource demand from the input prompt
with MLP model.
Furthermore, the overall serving cost of an LLM application
can be naturally defined as the sum of the KV token-time of all
its constituting inferences. Such a memory-centric modeling
method can express the true serving cost of LLM applications.
B. MLP-based Demand Prediction
Given the above cost modeling method, to support our previ-
ous insight of “saturated serving in fair completion order”, we
need to predict the cost volume of each application. Recently,
there are some attempts [29], [30] for demand prediction of
LLM workloads. For example, the S3 [30] method proposes
to fine-tune a language model, Distillbert, to predict the output
length range given the inference prompt. However, simply
adopting such a method for application cost prediction is inap-
propriate in efficiency and accuracy. First, fine-tuning the Dis-
tillbert model (with 66 million parameters) is time-consuming
and requires collecting a large number of application execution
samples, which is hard to obtain in practice. Meanwhile, using
the Distillbert model for prediction—which is essentially yet
another LLM inference—would incur non-negligible runtime
overhead. Moreover, the S3-like method uses a single model
to predict all the workloads, yet different applications may
exhibit heterogeneous cost distribution patterns (as shown in
Fig. 4), rendering the unified prediction scheme inaccurate.
Therefore, in this paper we seek to devise a light-weight
and also sufficiently-accurate cost prediction method for LLM
applications. For each application type, we maintain a Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) model to predict the its runtime
service cost based on the given application input. Since such
MLP models have a simple structure, they can be efficiently
trained even with limited historical data; meanwhile, an MLP
model requires minimal computational resources to make pre-
dictions, suitable for real-time scheduling tasks. Besides, in the
accuracy aspect, given the application-level similarity shown
in Fig. 4, such an application-specific prediction method can
attain better accuracy performance.
Fig. 6 elaborates the workflow of our MLP-based cost
prediction method. For the runtime input prompt, we first
perform vectorization using TF-IDF [31] (Term Frequency-
Inverse Document Frequency). TF-IDF is a lightweight and
efficient method for converting text into numerical vectors, fo-
cusing on word importance rather than deep semantic analysis.
It’s ideal for quick processing with minimal overhead. Then
the vectorized input will be passed into the app-specific 4-
layer MLP to get the predicted application cost. The number


--- Page 6 ---
of neurons in the first layer is proportional to the average
application input size. The training is conducted on 100
samples per application, optimized via gradient descent with
Mean Squared Error (with L2 regularization). Experimental
results later in Sec. V-D demonstrate that such an MLP-based
prediction method achieves high accuracy with low overhead.
C. Application-level Fair Queuing
In this part we elaborate the key queuing algorithm of
Justitia. In Justitia, each inference is queued based on the
overall demand of the LLM application it belongs to, so that
all the inference requests of a high-priority application can be
served promptly without being interleaved. In particular, con-
sidering the preemption overhead (e.g., KV cache swapping),
we follow the original non-preemptive scheduling principle3
in vLLM [12]: any pending inference request in the waiting
queue—regardless of its scheduling priority—cannot preempt
a running inference, thus application-level preemption only
occurs when an entire inference request finishes.
Recall that our insight is to conduct saturated application
serving following the fair completion order, and the key is to
acquire that fair completion order efficiently—at application
arrival time. One choice is to use the VTC scheduler [10]
as the reference system. Yet, idealized fair sharing requires
each application sticks to its fair share, whereas an inference
scheduled in VTC can take an arbitrarily large KV cache space
as needed to accommodate its prompt, disrupting the expected
execution status. In that sense, getting the VTC completion
order requires a trial run (or simulation) based on the full
application demand knowledge (including those arriving later).
Moreover, estimating the fair completion order requires con-
tinuously refreshing—upon the arrival or completion of any
application—the remaining resource demand and the latest
resource fair share, which is cumbersome.
Fortunately, we find that the problem we face now is similar
to the packet scheduling problem in the networking field.
In network scheduling, the network port can only send one
packet at a time (which is non-preemptable), yet it is expected
that different packets can fair share the network resource at
each instant (to attain flow-level fairness). In that case, the
packet scheduler shall deliberately select the next packet to
transmit, with the objective to minimize the delay any packet
may encounter compared to the fair-sharing case. The classical
solution to the packet scheduling problem is fair queuing [13],
[14]. In principle, the fair queuing algorithm also use the
completion order of different packets under an idealized fair
sharing scheme as their scheduling priorities. That idealized
fair sharing scheme is called Generalized Processor Sharing
(GPS), where the backend resources are arbitrarily divisible
and equally allocated to each active tenant. As our problem,
3To avoid interference vLLM is designed to be non-preemptive [12]: if the
KV cache space is used up, the running inference would be placed into the
swapped queue, which has a higher priority than the waiting queue; when the
KV cache space is available again, the applications in the swapped queue (if
any) would be served first. In that sense, when viewing the swapped queue as
part of the running queue, any running inference would never be preempted
by those pending requests in the waiting queue.
App-3
(a) GPS:
KV-block
Iterations
App-1-i1
App-1-i2
App-2-i1
App-2-i2
App-2-i4
App-2-i3
App-3-i1
App-3 arrives
App-3-i2
App-3-i3
App-1
App-2
5
0
12.5 13.5
0
4
5
6
8
11 12
(b) Justitia:
KV-block
Fig. 7: In Justitia, applications are prioritized according to their
relative completion order under GPS.
it is hard to estimate the completion time in GPS at packet
arrival time—without knowing the runtime packet contention
status; to get the relative scheduling order in one shot at packet
arrival time, the fair queuing algorithm employs a notion called
virtual time, which seeks to adjust the time elapsing rate
instead of each application’s expected fair completion time
when the application contention state changes. We thus borrow
such virtual-time based fair queuing method for scheduling
LLM applications.
Fig. 7 presents the key queuing mechanism of our proposed
Justitia scheduler (for simplicity we ignore demand volume
inflation during inference). For LLM application scheduling,
we also use the GPS scheme to gauge the fair completion
order (i.e., the scheduling priority) of LLM applications. As
shown in Fig. 7, suppose the application completion order
under the idealized fair-sharing system, GPS, is App-1, App-3,
and App-2, then we set that order as their scheduling priority.
In that sense, when App-2-i1 (the first inference request of
App-2) completes, the requests from App-3 would take the
service opportunity. Specifically, for efficient completion order
estimation, we adopt the notion of virtual time V (t), which is
defined as a function of the real time t:
V (0) = 0,
d
dtV (t) = M/Nt.
(2)
Here, M is the total KV cache space, and Nt is the number
of active applications in GPS at time t; M/Nt thus represents
the instantaneous fair share. Further, V (t) increases at the
marginal rate at which each application receives service in
GPS. When App-j arrives at time aj (with Cj be its KV
token-time cost), Justitia calculates its virtual finish time Fj—
the time at which the application would complete in GPS—as:
¯fj = V (aj) + Cj.
(3)
The virtual finish time of an application, once calculated,
requires no update in the future. While the arrival of later
applications would change the fair-serving rate, they do not
change the relative completion order among existing appli-
cations (i.e., the relative order in {Fj}), because each active
application would always be serviced with the same rate. Justi-
tia further adopts the {Fj} order as the scheduling priority. In


--- Page 7 ---
TABLE I: Summary of important notations and definitions.
M
The number of KV-blocks in a server
¯fj
The application completion time for app-j in GPS
fj
The application completion time for app-j in Justitia
Cj
The total KV token-time required by app-j
Cmax
The maximum KV token-time required by any application
cmax
The maximum KV token-time required by any single inference
aj
The arrival time of app-j
ej
The ending time of the slowdown period of app-j
this way we can attain low scheduling overhead: the status
refreshing overhead on application arrival or completion is
constant, and the complexity to select the next application to
serve is O(log Nt).
D. Delay Analysis
In this part we analyze the fairness properties of Justitia.
In practice, an inference cannot be started if the available KV
block volume is smaller than its prompt size, which may cause
the memory fragmentation problem. For ease of analysis, we
assume the prompt size of typical inferences are much smaller
in scale than the total KV cache space. Our measurement show
that, in the released Mooncache dataset [32], each request in
average only takes 3.20% of the total KV cache size when
running LLaMA-3.3 70B on H100 (with 28.65GB KV cache
space). Therefore, we can faithfully neglect the fragmentation
problem. That is, if there are inferences waiting in the queue,
all the KV-blocks on the server would be fully utilized.
Symbols.
We let applications be indexed in ascending order
of their inference start time. That is, app-j is the jth application
that is allocated KV-blocks in Justitia. Meanwhile, we let Cj
represent the total KV token-time of app-j, which is the sum
of all the KV token-time of all its inferences. We also let
Cmax denote the maximum total KV token-time among all
applications. Similarly, we let cmax represent the maximum
KV token-time required by any single inference across all
applications. Finally, we let fj denote the completion time
of app-j in Justitia, and ¯fj the GPS completion time. Table I
summarizes the notations used in the analysis. Given these
definitions, we then establish the constant delay bound of
Justitia through the following theorem.
Theorem 1 (Constant delay bound). With Justitia, an appli-
cation is guaranteed to complete within a constant time after
its completion in GPS, i.e., for each app-j, we have
fj −¯fj ≤2cmax + Cmax/M.
(4)
Proof. Our analysis critically focuses on the slowdown period
of an application. In particular, we say an application is slowed
down at time t if it has a backlogged inference waiting for ser-
vice. In other words, at any moment in the slowdown period,
the application could have run more inferences if receiving
more KV-blocks. Because slowdown delays the application
completion, bounding the timespan of the slowdown periods
is the key to analyzing the longest possible delay.
For each app-j, we let aj be the arrival time of app-j.
Depending on the number of available KV-blocks at time aj,
app-j is either slowed down, or allocated a sufficient number
of KV-blocks to run all inferences right after the arrival. In
particular, we let ej be the time when the slowdown period
of app-j ends. We then have aj < ej if app-j experiences
slowdown, and aj = ej otherwise. In either case, after the
slowdown period, app-j runs all the backlogged inferences
in parallel, and is guaranteed to complete after at most the
maximal inference runtime, i.e.,
fj ≤ej + cmax.
(5)
Therefore, to bound the application completion time, it is
critical to analyze when the slowdown period ends (i.e., ej).
We consider the most general case where app-j is slowed
down right after the arrival, i.e., aj < ej. During the slowdown
period [aj, ej], all the KV-blocks are busy. While Justitia
preferentially offers KV-blocks to applications in ascending
order of their GPS completion times, applications may start
services out of order due to the dynamic arrivals. In particular,
an applications that completes before app-j in GPS may arrive
late, after app-j starts in Justitia. Let A be the set of all these
applications, i.e., A = {k | k > j and ¯fk ≤¯fj}.
On the other hand, an application that completes after app-j
in GPS may start earlier in Justitia, before app-j arrives. Let
app-m be such an application that is serviced the most recently.
That is, m is the largest integer satisfying both m ≤j −1
and ¯fm > ¯fj, i.e., ¯fm > ¯fj ≥fk for all m < k < j. In other
words, app-m completes after applications m + 1, . . . , j in
GPS, but is allocated KV-blocks before all these applications
in Justitia. We let B be the set of all these applications that
complete after app-j in GPS but start earlier in Justitia, i.e.,
B = {k | m < k ≤j}.
By definition, applications in A and B, though completing
earlier than app-m in GPS, are serviced no earlier than app-m
in Justitia. These applications must have not yet arrived before
app-m is allocated KV-blocks—otherwise Justitia would have
serviced them before app-m. We then have
mink∈A∪B {ak} ≥bm,
(6)
where bm is the first time when app-m is allocated KV-blocks
in Justitia. This suggests that since bm, GPS has completely
serviced, at least, all applications in A∪B by the time app-m
finishes, i.e.,
¯fj ≥bm +
1
M
P
k∈A∪B Ck.
(7)
We next analyze fj, the completion time of app-m in Justi-
tia. During time interval [bm, ej], Justitia may have completed
all the applications in A and B, along with at most M −1
inferences requiring a maximal runtime. In addition, app-m is
allocated KV-blocks at bm, and may also complete before ej.
Finishing these works using all M KV-blocks takes at most
ej ≤bm +
1
M [P
k∈A∪B Ck + Cm + (M −1)cmax].
(8)
Plugging (8) into (5) and subtracting (7), we have
fj −¯fj ≤cmax + M−1
M cmax + Cm/M < 2cmax + Cmax/M.
This completes the proof.


--- Page 8 ---
1x
2x
3x
0
200
400
600
800
JCT (s)
AVG JCT
Justitia
vLLM
vLLM-SJF
Parrot
VTC
SRJF
1x
2x
3x
0
400
800
1200
1600
P90 JCT
Fig. 8: JCT performance with the LLaMA-7B model.
1x
2x
3x
0
400
800
1200
1600
JCT (s)
AVG JCT
Justitia
vLLM
vLLM-SJF
Parrot
VTC
SRJF
1x
2x
3x
0
700
1400
2100
2800
P90 JCT
Fig. 9: JCT performance with the LLaMA-13B model.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Fair Ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
CDF of Fair Ratio
Justitia
vLLM
vLLM-SJF
Parrot
VTC
SRJF
Fig. 10: CDF of applications’ finish-time fair ratios (i.e.,
realistic JCT normalized by VTC-JCT) under 3× density.
V. EVALUATION
A. Setup
Hardware Platform.
We have implemented Justitia atop
vLLM [12], the mainstream LLM serving framework. We
evaluate Justitia with both single-GPU and multi-GPU exper-
iments4. The large language models that we use are LLaMA-
7B (on single-GPU) and LLaMA-13B [33] (on multi-GPU).
The evaluations conducted on a single GPU utilize a server
equipped with four 16-core AMD EPYC 7302 CPUs, 128 GB
of RAM and one NVIDIA A100 PCIe 40 GB GPU. The multi-
GPU evaluations are performed on a server with four 20-core
Intel Xeon Gold 6133 CPUs, 258 GB of RAM and four Tesla
V100 PCIe 16 GB GPUs.
Workloads.
For our experiment, we created a mixed work-
load suite with 300 LLM applications, each with distinct inputs
from the original datasets. To be specific, we include the
following application classes: (a) MapReduce Summarization
(MRS) [34], (b) Plan-and-Execution (PE) [35], (c) Code
Checking (CC) [5], (d) Knowledge-Based-Query-Answering
Verification (KBQAV) [5], (e) Equation Verification (EV) [5],
(f) Fact Verification (FV) [36], (g) ALFWorld Interaction
(ALFWI) [36]. (h) Document Merging (DM) [20] and (i) Self
Consistency (SC) [6]. Similar to prior work [37], [38], we
set the sampling probability of small (EV, FV, CC, ALFWI
and KBQAV—usually less than 1 min), medium (CG, PE
and SC—usually between 1 and 10 min) and large (DM and
MRS—usually longer than 10 min) applications to be 72%,
26%, and 2%, respectively. Regarding application submission,
we follow the request arrival time in the production traces
released by Mooncake [32], with the submission window
4Such a setup is similar to existing scheduling works [7], [26]. Our
experimental conclusions also apply to larger clusters with a global queue.
respectively set to 6, 9, 18 mins (i.e., with workload intensity
respectively be 3×, 2× and 1×).
Baselines.
We compare Justitia with five baselines: (a)
vLLM [12], which adopts FCFS policy at the inference
level; (b) vLLM-SJF [26], which schedules LLM inferences
following SJF policy with the Distillbert-predicted inference
durations; (c) Parrot [7], which adopts the FCFS policy at the
application level; (d) VTC [10], which seeks to approximate
the instantaneous fair-sharing policy at the application level;
(e) SRJF, which uses our predicted serving cost to enforce the
shortest-remaining-job-first policy at the application level.
Metrics. Justitia is expected to behave well in both efficiency
and fairness. Regarding efficiency, we adopt the average and
P90 job completion time (JCT, meaning the duration between
job arrival and completion); here a job refers to a running
application triggered by a given user input. Regarding fairness,
we adopt the notion of finish-time fair ratio, which is the
relative ratio between a job’s realistic completion time and its
completion time under a fair scheduler (we use VTC as the
baseline). The higher that ratio, the better the fairness level.
B. End-to-end Scheduling Performance
Efficiency performance.
We first evaluate the efficiency
performance of Justitia. Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 respectively show the
overall serving performance under LLaMA-7B and LLaMA-
13B setups. From the two figures, Justitia can substantially
outperform the mainstream schedulers. Specifically, the aver-
age JCT under Justitia is 57.5% (61.1%) better than that under
VTC (Parrot). In the meantime, Justitia in fact attains a very
close JCT performance with SRJF, indicating that it can attain
near-optimal efficiency.
Fairness performance.
Regarding the fairness performance,
we further depict the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
of all the applications’ finish-time fair ratio, with the results
shown in Fig. 10. It shows that 92% applications can complete
under Justitia no later than it would have under VTC (with
the worst-case delay be 26.0%, which is much smaller than
others). This confirms the fairness superiority of Justitia. Note
that SRJF can also attain a relatively good fairness perfor-
mance, because it can avoid head-of-line blocking and, many
prioritized applications cannot saturate the service backend—
thus the remaining KV resources are multiplexed by others,
exhibiting a fair sharing effect to some extent. Yet, SRJF may


--- Page 9 ---
100
300
500
Number of Mice Jobs
0
200
400
600
800
JCT of MRS (s)
Justitia
SRJF
Fig. 11: Behaviors when
serving a large application
with many small ones.
1x
2x
3x
Workload Intensity
0
140
280
420
560
Avg JCT(s)
Justitia
Justitia/C
Fig. 12: Performance com-
parison
between
different
cost modeling methods.
starve the large applications, which we next verify with a
micro-benchmark experiment.
C. Micro-benchmark Experiment on Starvation
A well-known deficiency of SRJF is the starvation prob-
lem: when short applications keep arriving, the execution of
long applications may be infinitely delayed. To confirm that,
we conduct a micro-benchmark experiment. To be specific,
we first submit a large “elephant” application—MapReduce
Summarization, and then keep submitting a set of “mice”
applications—randomly from KBQAV, CC, ALFWI—once
per second. In Fig. 11, we show the relationship between the
JCT of the elephant application and the number of “mice”
applications respectively under SRJF and Justitia. It clearly
demonstrates that, with an increasing number of mice appli-
cations, the elephant application may potentially be delayed
forever under SRJF; in contrast, that delay under Justitia is
bounded regardless of the number of competing applications.
D. Ablation Study
In Sec. IV-A and Sec. IV-B we have respectively adopted
memory-centric cost modeling and MLP-based demand predic-
tion; here we check their effectiveness with ablation studies.
Necessity of memory-centric cost modeling.
To check the
necessity of memory-centric cost modeling, we introduce a
variant of Justitia by replacing its cost model with that of
VTC (i.e., p + 2d [10]), which we call Justitia/C. We repeat
the experiment in Fig. 8, and compare the average and P90
JCT under Justitia/C with the vanilla Justitia. As shown in
Fig. 12, compute-centric cost modeling would incur a JCT
performance degradation of up to 42.3%, which confirms the
necessity to adopt memory-centric cost modeling.
Effectiveness of MLP-based demand prediction method.
To check the superiority of MLP-based demand prediction,
we introduce another Justitia variant: Justitia-S3, which uses
a Distillbert model for cost prediction in Justitia. In Justitia-
S3, the Distillbert model is trained on the same dataset as the
MLP-based models. In Table II we compare the two methods
in multiple aspects: average prediction error (prediction gap
normalized by the ground-truth), average prediction overhead,
average JCT, as well as the model training time. Table 2 sug-
gests that our MLP-based method can remarkably outperform
the distillbert-based method in all those aspects.
TABLE II: Performance comparison between MLP and Dis-
tillbert in prediction (under 2× workload density). MLP and
Distillbert model training is conducted on a V100 GPU.
Prediction
Model
Average
Relative
Error (%)
Average
Inference
Overhead (ms)
Average
JCT (s)
Training
Time
MLP
53.0
2.16
151.1
∼1 min
Distillbert
452
55.7
366.7
∼2 h
TABLE III: Scalability performance
Arrival Rate (APP/min)
15
20
30
50
100
Scheduling Overhead (ms)
0.778
1.827
3.076
5.190
8.093
E. Overhead Analysis
The overhead in Justitia stems from two sources: (1) the
one-shot prediction performed when an application arrives,
and (2) the updating of system virtual time and the selection of
highest-priority application upon the arrival or completion of
any application. As can be seen also in Table II, the prediction
overhead for a single new application is approximately 2.16
ms, which is a negligible cost. Table III further demonstrates
the average scheduling latency of Justitia under varying ar-
rival rates (reflecting different scheduling scales). The results
confirm that the scheduling overhead remains consistently low
(under 10 ms) in all scenarios.
VI. ADDITIONAL RELATED WORKS
Apart from the scheduling works in Sec. II-B, many ad-
ditional works seek to accelerate individual LLM requests
in a series of aspects. For example, FlashAttention [39]
and FlashDecoding [40] algorithms seek to accelerate LLM
inference at the operator level; model-quantization [41] and
prefill-decode-separation [42] methods have been proposed to
maximize backend utilization. Besides, speculative decoding
methods like [43] are also applied to improve the inference
throughput by accelerating the decoding process. These works
are orthogonal to us and can work together with Justitia.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose Justitia, an efficient and also fair
scheduler for LLM applications. Justitia works by scheduling
LLM applications in a saturated manner following their fair
completion order. Specifically, it quantifies the true service
cost of LLM applications in a memory-centric manner, and
also adopts a MLP-based prediction method to obtain the
application service cost at its arrival time. Moreover, Justitia
adopts the virtual-time based fair queuing method to efficiently
get the expected application completion order under an ideal-
ized fair scheduler, with an additional theoretical fairness guar-
antee. Testbed measurements with diverse workloads confirm
that Justitia can behave well in both fairness and efficiency.


--- Page 10 ---
REFERENCES
[1] H. Naveed, A. U. Khan, S. Qiu, M. Saqib, S. Anwar, M. Usman,
N. Akhtar, N. Barnes, and A. Mian, “A comprehensive overview of
large language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06435, 2023.
[2] A. J. Thirunavukarasu, D. S. J. Ting, K. Elangovan, L. Gutierrez, T. F.
Tan, and D. S. W. Ting, “Large language models in medicine,” Nature
medicine, vol. 29, no. 8, pp. 1930–1940, 2023.
[3] Q. Gu, “Llm-based code generation method for golang compiler testing,”
in Proceedings of the 31st ACM Joint European Software Engineering
Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering,
2023, pp. 2201–2203.
[4] K. M. Jablonka, Q. Ai, A. Al-Feghali, S. Badhwar, J. D. Bocarsly, A. M.
Bran, S. Bringuier, L. C. Brinson, K. Choudhary, D. Circi et al., “14
examples of how llms can transform materials science and chemistry:
a reflection on a large language model hackathon,” Digital discovery,
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 1233–1250, 2023.
[5] I. Chern, S. Chern, S. Chen, W. Yuan, K. Feng, C. Zhou, J. He,
G. Neubig, P. Liu et al., “Factool: Factuality detection in generative ai–a
tool augmented framework for multi-task and multi-domain scenarios,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13528, 2023.
[6] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdh-
ery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning
in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
[7] C. Lin, Z. Han, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, F. Yang, C. Chen, and L. Qiu,
“Parrot: Efficient serving of {LLM-based} applications with semantic
variable,” in 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 24), 2024, pp. 929–945.
[8] Y. Fu, J. Chen, S. Zhu, Z. Fu, Z. Dai, A. Qiao, and H. Zhang,
“Efficiently serving llm reasoning programs with certaindex,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.20993, 2024.
[9] X. Tan, Y. Jiang, Y. Yang, and H. Xu, “Towards end-to-end optimization
of llm-based applications with ayo,” in ACM ASPLOS, 2025.
[10] Y. Sheng, S. Cao, D. Li, B. Zhu, Z. Li, D. Zhuo, J. E. Gonzalez, and
I. Stoica, “Fairness in Serving Large Language Models,” arXiv e-prints,
p. arXiv:2401.00588, Dec. 2023.
[11] R. Ibne Seraj Khan, K. Jain, H. Shen, A. Mallick, A. Parayil, A. Kulka-
rni, S. Kofsky, P. Choudhary, R. St. Amant, R. Wang, Y. Cheng, A. R.
Butt, V. R¨uhle, C. Bansal, and S. Rajmohan, “Ensuring Fair LLM Serv-
ing Amid Diverse Applications,” arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2411.15997,
Nov. 2024.
[12] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez,
H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, “Efficient memory management for large
language model serving with pagedattention,” in Proceedings of the 29th
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2023, pp. 611–626.
[13] A. Demers, S. Keshav, and S. Shenker, “Analysis and simulation of a
fair queueing algorithm,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication
Review, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1–12, 1989.
[14] A. K. Parekh and R. G. Gallager, “A generalized processor sharing
approach to flow control in integrated services networks: the single-
node case,” IEEE/ACM transactions on networking, vol. 1, no. 3, pp.
344–357, 1993.
[15] J. Wu, S. Yang, R. Zhan, Y. Yuan, L. S. Chao, and D. F. Wong, “A
survey on llm-generated text detection: Necessity, methods, and future
directions,” Computational Linguistics, pp. 1–66, 2025.
[16] S. S. Kannan, V. L. Venkatesh, and B.-C. Min, “Smart-llm: Smart
multi-agent robot task planning using large language models,” in 2024
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 12 140–12 147.
[17] G.-I. Yu, J. S. Jeong, G.-W. Kim, S. Kim, and B.-G. Chun, “Orca: A
distributed serving system for {Transformer-Based} generative models,”
in 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (OSDI 22), 2022, pp. 521–538.
[18] S. Gao, Y. Chen, and J. Shu, “Fast state restoration in llm serving
with hcache,” in Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference
on Computer Systems, 2025, pp. 128–143.
[19] “Gemini: Next-generation AI model,” https://blog.google/technology/
ai/google-gemini-next-generation-model-february-2024/#sundar-note,
2024.
[20] M. Besta, N. Blach, A. Kubicek, R. Gerstenberger, M. Podstawski,
L. Gianinazzi, J. Gajda, T. Lehmann, H. Niewiadomski, P. Nyczyk
et al., “Graph of thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large
language models,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 16, 2024, pp. 17 682–17 690.
[21] Z. Ji, N. Lee, R. Frieske, T. Yu, D. Su, Y. Xu, E. Ishii, Y. J. Bang,
A. Madotto, and P. Fung, “Survey of hallucination in natural language
generation,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 1–38, 2023.
[22] L. Zheng, L. Yin, Z. Xie, C. L. Sun, J. Huang, C. H. Yu, S. Cao,
C. Kozyrakis, I. Stoica, J. E. Gonzalez et al., “Sglang: Efficient ex-
ecution of structured language model programs,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 62 557–62 583, 2024.
[23] B. Wu, Y. Zhong, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Sun, G. Huang, X. Liu, and
X. Jin, “Fast distributed inference serving for large language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05920, 2023.
[24] Y. Fu, S. Zhu, R. Su, A. Qiao, I. Stoica, and H. Zhang, “Efficient llm
scheduling by learning to rank,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.15792, 2024.
[25] H. Qiu, W. Mao, A. Patke, S. Cui, S. Jha, C. Wang, H. Franke, Z. T.
Kalbarczyk, T. Bas¸ar, and R. K. Iyer, “Efficient interactive llm serving
with proxy model-based sequence length prediction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.08509, 2024.
[26] R. Shahout, E. Malach, C. Liu, W. Jiang, M. Yu, and M. Mitzenmacher,
“Don’t stop me now: Embedding based scheduling for llms,” in ICLR,
2025.
[27] K. Mahajan, A. Balasubramanian, A. Singhvi, S. Venkataraman,
A. Akella, A. Phanishayee, and S. Chawla, “Themis: Fair and efficient
{GPU} cluster scheduling,” in 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20), 2020, pp. 289–304.
[28] “OpenAI Assistants API.” https://platform.openai.com/docs/assistants/
overview, 2024.
[29] Z. Zheng, X. Ren, F. Xue, Y. Luo, X. Jiang, and Y. You, “Response
length perception and sequence scheduling: An llm-empowered llm
inference pipeline,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 36, 2024.
[30] Y. Jin, C.-F. Wu, D. Brooks, and G.-Y. Wei, “s3: Increasing gpu
utilization during generative inference for higher throughput,” Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 18 015–18 027,
2023.
[31] K. Sparck Jones, “A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its
application in retrieval,” Journal of documentation, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
11–21, 1972.
[32] R. Qin, Z. Li, W. He, M. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. Zheng, and X. Xu, “Moon-
cake: A kvcache-centric disaggregated architecture for llm serving,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00079, 2024.
[33] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei,
N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale et al., “Llama
2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288, 2023.
[34] “Langchain.” https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain, 2025.
[35] Y. Shen, K. Song, X. Tan, D. Li, W. Lu, and Y. Zhuang, “Hugginggpt:
Solving ai tasks with chatgpt and its friends in hugging face,” NeurIPS,
2023.
[36] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao,
“React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[37] A. Qiao, S. K. Choe, S. J. Subramanya, W. Neiswanger, Q. Ho,
H. Zhang, G. R. Ganger, and E. P. Xing, “Pollux: Co-adaptive cluster
scheduling for goodput-optimized deep learning,” in 15th {USENIX}
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI}
21), 2021.
[38] S. Jayaram Subramanya, D. Arfeen, S. Lin, A. Qiao, Z. Jia, and
G. R. Ganger, “Sia: Heterogeneity-aware, goodput-optimized ml-cluster
scheduling,” in ACM SOSP, 2023.
[39] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. R´e, “Flashattention: Fast and
memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness,” NeurIPS, 2022.
[40] K. Hong, G. Dai, J. Xu, Q. Mao, X. Li, J. Liu, Y. Dong, Y. Wang
et al., “Flashdecoding++: Faster large language model inference with
asynchronization, flat gemm optimization, and heuristics,” Proceedings
of Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 6, pp. 148–161, 2024.
[41] S. Kim, C. Hooper, A. Gholami, Z. Dong, X. Li, S. Shen, M. W.
Mahoney, and K. Keutzer, “Squeezellm: Dense-and-sparse quantization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.07629, 2023.
[42] Y. Zhong, S. Liu, J. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Jin, and H. Zhang,
“DistServe: Disaggregating Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized
Large Language Model Serving,” in USENIX OSDI, 2024.
[43] T. Cai, Y. Li, Z. Geng, H. Peng, J. D. Lee, D. Chen, and T. Dao,
“Medusa: Simple llm inference acceleration framework with multiple
decoding heads,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10774, 2024.
