--- Page 1 ---
Decision-Dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning and
Scheduling for Light-Duty Truck Electrification at Industrial Sites
Yifu Ding, Ruicheng Ao, Pablo Duenas-Martinez, Thomas Magnanti
Many industrial sites and digital logistics platforms rely on diesel-powered light-duty trucks to transport
workers and small-scale facilities, which results in a significant amount of greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs).
To address this, we develop a robust model for planning charging infrastructure to electrify light-duty
trucks at industrial sites. The model is formulated as a mixed-integer linear program (MILP) that optimizes
the charging infrastructure selection (across multiple charger types and locations) and determines charging
schedules for each truck based on the selected infrastructure. Given the strict stop times and schedules at
industrial sites, we introduce a scheduling-with-abandonment problem in which trucks forgo charging if
their waiting time exceeds a maximum threshold. We further incorporate the impacts of overnight charging
and range anxiety on drivers’ waiting and abandonment behaviors. To model stochastic, heterogeneous
parking durations, we classified trucks using machine learning (ML) methods based on contextual and
time-location features. We then constructed decision-dependent, feature-driven robust uncertainty sets in
which parking-time variability varies flexibly with drivers’ charging choices. These feature-driven sets are
applied to two robust optimization formulations with decision-dependent uncertainty (RO-DDU), resulting
in distinct outcomes and managerial implications. We conduct a case study at an open-pit mining site to
plan charger installations across eight charging zones, serving approximately 200 trucks. By decomposing
the problem into a short rolling horizon or using a heuristic approach for the full-year or representative-day
dataset, the model achieves an optimality gap of less than 0.1% under diverse uncertainty scenarios.
Key words : Charging infrastructure planning; Decision-dependent uncertainty; ML classification;
Contextual (Stochastic) optimization, Scheduling
1. Introduction
1.1. Background
Many industrial sites, such as the mining and metals sectors, and digital logistics platforms, rely
on diesel-powered light-duty trucks to transport and dispatch goods. Their use has produced sig-
nificant GHG emissions. In 2022, light-duty trucks were the largest GHG emission source in the
U.S. transportation sector, contributing 58% of total emissions U.S. EPA (2024). Battery-electric
vehicles (BEVs) are a key solution for decarbonization. Currently, the BEV charging infrastructure
can be categorized into two types. The first type is Level 1 and Level 2 AC charging (hereafter
referred to as “slow charging”), which generally requires between four hours and a full day to charge
a vehicle battery from empty to 80% state of charge (SoC). The second type is the direct current
1
arXiv:2510.13100v2  [eess.SY]  6 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
fast charging (hereafter referred to as “fast charging”), which has been deployed at certain public
stations. Fast chargers can recharge an empty vehicle battery to 80% SoC in about an hour US
Department of Transportation (2025). However, fast-charging infrastructure entails considerable
capital investment and installation expenditures, primarily due to the required power-electronics
installations. Fast charging beyond 80% SoC is strongly discouraged for safety reasons Mussa et
al. (2017). Another fast recharging option is battery swapping. Battery swapping enables EVs to
replace depleted batteries with fully charged ones swiftly Mak et al. (2013). However, compared
with adding more trucks to the fleet, deploying battery swapping at industrial sites may yield
limited benefits due to operational risks, including potential battery damage during swapping.
In this paper, we develop an integrated planning and scheduling model for charging infrastruc-
ture with mixed-type BEV chargers, leveraging contextual stochastic optimization and ML tech-
niques. We comprehensively incorporate heterogeneous BEV driving behaviors in the scheduling,
including charging abandonment, overnight charging, and range anxiety. To capture variability in
parking duration and its dependence on charging decisions, we construct a feature-based, decision-
dependent uncertainty set using ML-based clusters and apply it to two RO-DDU formulations with
different assumptions and computational costs. We conduct a case study at an open-pit mining site
with 200 operational diesel-powered trucks. Without modifying the GPS data, we extract parking
and driving patterns relative to potential charging locations, estimate energy consumption, and
efficiently compute the charging infrastructure plan and schedules.
1.2. Related Work
1.2.1. Mixed-type Charging Infrastructure Planning
Existing studies on charging
infrastructure planning primarily focus on determining locations, quantities, and types of BEV
chargers, as well as the associated charging schedules given selected installations. For electric
buses and trucks at industrial sites, their charging operations typically rely on the opportunity
or overnight charging, meaning that vehicles are charged during layovers and overnight parking
periods Abdelwahed et al. (2020). After determining a finite set of locations for EV charger deploy-
ment, the numbers and types of chargers can be optimized based on committed trips and available
buses. In prior studies, including Hu et al. (2022), Legault et al. (2025), and Gkiotsalitis et al.
(2025), the charging planning objective includes charging infrastructure costs, BEV purchase costs,
and operational costs such as scheduling penalties and charging prices. Hu et al. (2022) model a
joint optimization problem for locating fast chargers at selected bus stops and optimizing sched-
ules during bus layovers, and the objective function incorporates the time-varying electricity price
and penalty for the additional waiting times. Legault et al. (2025) formulates a multi-period inte-
grated charging infrastructure planning and scheduling problem for an electric bus fleet. The model


--- Page 3 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
3
accounts for BEV and charger acquisition costs over multiple years, as well as the phased retire-
ment of diesel buses. Gkiotsalitis et al. (2025) optimize the mixed-type BEV chargers’ locations
and numbers by allocating bus trips to their nearest chargers when they are available, assuming
that buses are charged at the depots or the end of their trips.
1.2.2. BEV Charging Scheduling
The classical multi-depot vehicle scheduling problem
takes a set of timetabled trips as input and requires that they all be performed by a single vehicle.
The BEV charging scheduling problem is considered as a variant of this problem in which battery
SoC constraints are imposed. The problem can be modeled as a network with nodes corresponding
to discretized battery SoC levels and solved as a shortest path problem De Vos et al. (2024). The
charging procedure can be viewed as a service scheduling if a fleet of vehicles is involved. The
charging problem thus requires consideration of charger availability and waiting times (or queues)
for charging services. For instance, the waiting time can be modeled as a monetary penalty in the
objective function Hu et al. (2022), Tao et al. (2024), Gkiotsalitis et al. (2025). When the waiting
time exceeds a threshold, the vehicle that initiated a time-critical task or trip may abandon charging
and seek another charging spot, which can be modeled as abandonment. A unique aspect of BEV
charging is range anxiety, the concern among drivers that their battery will deplete before reaching
a charging station or their destination. Empirical studies show that range anxiety may incentivize
the installation of additional charging stations or the adoption of larger battery capacities Lim et
al. (2015). Lu et al. (2025) model the impact of range anxiety by setting a threshold SoC before
reaching the destination. Tao et al. (2024) formulate the accumulated range anxiety level as a
function of SoC depletion along the route and integrates this term into the objective function.
1.2.3. Charging Event Characteristics and Uncertainty
Charging events are usually
characterized by charging duration and charging power (or energy), and are correlated with diverse
features including charging type, hour of day, day of week, location, and vehicle type Cui et al.
(2023), Zhang et al. (2025). Cui et al. (2023) processed and analyzed more than 220,000 real-
world charging records in Beijing. The authors clustered these charging events based on diverse
features and structured them as a behavioral tree of fast charging. These clusters are labeled as
low-, medium-, and high-priority based on dwell duration. In BEV charging scheduling problems,
charging and dwell durations are typically unknown at the time of scheduling. These uncertainties
can be modeled using stochastic optimization (SO), robust optimization (RO), and distributionally
robust optimization (DRO). Among these formulations, RO typically provides the highest level
of reliability, making it particularly suitable for critical infrastructure planning. Different shapes
of uncertainty sets, such as boxes or ellipsoids, lead to different robust counterparts and affect
tractability Bertsimas & Hertog (2022). Hu et al. (2022) model uncertainty in passengers’ boarding


--- Page 4 ---
4
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
and alighting times during bus trips using box and budget uncertainty sets in an RO formulation.
L. Chen et al. (2024) consider EV charging scheduling with stochastic arrival times of different EV
user groups and introduce an exponential-cone programming formulation to approximate an upper
bound. Y. Chen & Liu (2023) develop a two-stage stochastic model for planning and operating
shared autonomous EV systems and create scenarios for uncertain user trip requests; an accelerated
two-phase Benders decomposition-based algorithm is proposed to solve the resulting problem. Wang
et al. (2023) develop an ML-cluster-based, feature-driven ambiguity set for surgery scheduling using
a DRO formulation; the clustering is based on classification and regression trees.
1.2.4. Decision-dependent robust optimization for charging decisions
With electrifi-
cation, parking durations that previously involved no charging activities are likely to change after
charger deployment. Large-scale charging-installation trials conducted in multiple countries have
demonstrated that charging decisions significantly affect BEV parking and waiting durations Cui
et al. (2023), Zhang et al. (2025). Parking (or charging) duration can thus be modeled using a
decision-dependent uncertainty set that depends on endogenous factors, such as charging decisions.
Nohadani & Sharma (2018) demonstrate that, for simple robust linear problems, RO-DDU is NP-
complete and requires either global optimization or reformulation techniques such as the big-M
method. Luo & Mehrotra (2020) study decision-dependent DRO models with five types of ambi-
guity sets, where an instantaneous decision directly impacts right-hand-side uncertainty, including
moments and the radius of ambiguity sets. Noyan et al. (2022) propose a decision-dependent ambi-
guity set for a machine scheduling problem and show that introducing affine dependence on decision
variables can substantially reduce the number of constraints induced by McCormick envelopes
and big-M reformulations. However, existing studies are largely limited to settings with instanta-
neous decisions, whereas in practice, uncertainty is influenced by aggregated and expected decision
outcomes.
Decision Variables
User Behaviors
Uncertainty
formulation
Location
Number
Scheduling
Type
Waiting
time
Range
anxiety
Abdelwahed et al. (2020)
✓
D
Hu et al. (2022)
✓
✓
✓
✓
RO
Y. Chen & Liu (2023)
✓
✓
✓
✓
SO
L. Chen et al. (2024)
✓
SO
Tao et al. (2024)
✓
✓
✓
D
Lu et al. (2025)
✓
✓
SO
Legault et al. (2025)
✓
✓
✓
✓
D
Gkiotsalitis et al. (2025)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
D
Our paper
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
RO-DDU
Notes: D = Deterministic model; RO = Robust Optimization; SO = Stochastic Optimization; RO-
DDU = Robust Optimization with Decision-Dependent Uncertainty.
Table 1
Literature Review Summary


--- Page 5 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
5
All the aforementioned work on charging infrastructure planning and scheduling is summarized
in Table 1.2.4. Compared with these works, our paper makes the following contributions:
• We develop an integrated charger planning and scheduling model that optimizes charger loca-
tions, quantities, and types, and jointly determines schedules given the selected infrastructure.
The model introduces a scheduling-with-abandonment formulation that reflects the industrial site’s
strict operational rules and captures the impacts of overnight parking, range anxiety, and waiting
times.
• We develop a feature-based, decision-dependent uncertainty set to capture the variability of
charging durations and their dependence on charging decisions. Leveraging ML techniques and
contextual information, we restructure time–zone features to preserve the calendar effects of truck
trips and group parking durations to efficiently set the bounds of the uncertainty sets.
• Given the limited discussion in the literature on dependency assumptions in decision-
dependent uncertainty problems, we distinguish between two cases in which charging duration
depends on either instantaneous charging decisions or cluster-level expected charging decisions. We
derive tractable reformulations for both cases and discuss the resulting outcomes and managerial
implications.
• Considering the high computational cost of solving the scheduling problem over a long opti-
mization horizon, we design a “fix-and-optimize” heuristic to forecast parking intervals with poten-
tially high charging demand. Using representative days or a rolling horizon, the model achieves an
optimality gap of less than 0.1% within a reasonable computation time under different scenarios.
2. Problem formulation
2.1. Problem description
In the joint planning and scheduling problem, we consider a fleet of electric light-duty trucks i ∈I
operating around an industrial site based on the fixed stop points and schedules during the time
period T .
As shown in Figure 1, a truck i can either wait to be charged, abandon charging, or charge
directly using one of the available charger types j ∈J during its available half-hour parking time
slots Si,d,t at time t on day d in charging zone z. A truck cannot appear in more than one zone
at a time. In each parking time slot, the effective parking duration is less than half an hour,
which restricts the maximum amount of energy that can be charged during this window. Across
the optimization horizon, the total energy scheduled for each truck must satisfy the truck’s trip-
related energy consumption, subject to the battery energy balance, battery SoC constraints, and
charging power constraints. Traveling distance and energy consumption during parking slots Si,d,t
are not considered. Furthermore, at any time t on day d, the number of chargers of type j used


--- Page 6 ---
6
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Figure 1
The studied multi-zone charging scheduling problem for the light-duty truck fleet. At any half-hour
parking time slot S shown in light green, A truck can choose to wait, abandon charging, or charge. The
effective parking durations pp are shown in dark green.
simultaneously in zone z cannot exceed the number of installed chargers of that type in the zone,
xj
z.
2.2. Set, index and parameters
• J ,j: Set, index of EV charger types.
• Z,z: Set, index of EV charging zones.
• I,i: Set, index of electric trucks.
• D,d: Set, index of days in the planning horizon.
• T ,t: Set, index of hours in day d.
• Si,d,t: Set of discrete possible parking times for truck i on day d at the time t.
• Ebat
i
: Battery energy capacity (kWh) of truck i.
• SoCmax: Maximum SoC of EV batteries.
• SoCmin: Minimum SoC of EV batteries.
• P j: Power rating (kW) of charger type j.
• ηj: Charging efficiency of charger type j.
• ρi,d,t: Energy consumption usage (kWh) of truck i at time t on day d.
• Cinstall
j
: Installation cost for charger type j.
• P low: Penalty for low SoC inducing the range anxiety
• P charging: Penalty for charging time of trucks.
• µ: Mean of parking durations by truck i at hour t at zone z across all the optimized days.
• σ: Standard deviation of parking durations by truck i at hour t on day d at zone z across all
the optimized days.
• ∆t: Duration (mins) in each parking time interval.


--- Page 7 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
7
2.3. Decision variables
• xj
z ∈Z+: The number of chargers of type j installed in zone z.
• wi,d,t ∈R+: Accumulated waiting time for truck i at charger j on day d at time t.
• bi,d,t ∈R+: Battery SoC level (%) of truck i at time t on day d.
• pi,d,t ∈R+: EV charging power (kWh) of truck i at time t on day d.
• vi,d,t ∈R+: Battery SoC inadequacy below the low SoC threshold.
• T max
i,d,t ∈R+: Maximum waiting time before truck i abandons charging at time t on day d.
• δ30
i,d,t ∈{0,1}: Indicator for the lower SoC bound of EV batteries inducing range anxiety.
• yj
i,d,t ∈{0,1}: Binary variable indicating that truck i is charged with charger type j at time t
on day d (1 for charging and 0 for not).
• ai,d,t ∈{0,1}: Binary variable indicating that truck i abandons charging at time t on day d (1
for abandonment and 0 for not).
2.4. Uncertainty variables
• ppi,j,z,t ∈R+: Parking duration for truck i at time t in zone z using charging type j.
• ¯Y j
c ∈R+: The expected cluster-wise charging decision with the cluster c.
2.5. Objective function
The objective function includes the charging planning and scheduling. The charger planning
accounts for multiple charging infrastructure types, including slow and fast chargers. In addition to
power capacity, we also model the SoC charging range for each type of chargers, which are detailed
in the following section. The scheduling part includes penalties for low battery SoC, inducing the
range anxiety and the total charging time.
min
X
j∈J
X
z∈Z
Cinstall
j
· xz,j
|
{z
}
Installation cost of mixed-type EV chargers
+
P low X
i∈I
X
d∈D
X
t∈Td
vi,d,t
|
{z
}
Penalty for low SoC of EV batteries
+P charging X
i∈I
X
d∈D
X
j∈J
X
t∈Td
yj
i,d,t
|
{z
}
Penalty for EV charging time
where the low SoC penalty is calculated as the sum of the soft violation variable vi,d,t := [0.3 −
bi,d,t]+. This variable is greater than zero (i.e., vi,d,t > 0) if and only if the battery SoC level falls
below 30 %. The charging-time penalty is calculated as the sum of charging times across all zones
and the time horizon to prevent low charger utilization (i.e., low average charging power).
2.6. Constraints for charging planning and scheduling
The following subsections detail constraints pertaining to charging planning and scheduling for the
entire fleet of electric trucks. We also introduced three big-M constraints, and we discussed the
range value of these M in Appendix B.


--- Page 8 ---
8
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
2.6.1. Truck charging constraints
We impose the following constraints to govern the truck
charging behavior:
(Single charger usage)
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t ≤1
∀i,d,t
(1)
(Charging only in parking windows)
yj
i,d,t = 0
∀i,t /∈S
∀j
(2)
(Low SoC indicator)
bi,d,t −30
100 ≥−M1 · δ30
i,d,t + ϵ
bi,d,t −30
100 ≤M1 · (1 −δ30
i,d,t)
∀i,d,t.
(3)
Constraint (1) ensures each truck uses at most one charger at any time. Constraint (2) enforces
charging only during the scheduled parking window. Constraint (3) defines the binary indicator
δ30
i,d,t for the low SoC condition, where δ30
i,d,t = 0 if and only if the battery level exceeds 30%. Here,
M1 is a large constant, and the effective range of M1 is presented in Appendix B. The parameter ϵ
is a small positive number that ensures the indicator equals 1 only when the battery SoC is strictly
greater than 30%, thereby guaranteeing a unique waiting time when the battery SoC is exactly
30%.
2.6.2. Abandonment and waiting time constraints
We model two coupled phenomena
during each half–hour parking slot t on day d: (i) abandonment—once a driver gives up waiting, no
charging may occur in that slot; and (ii) waiting-time accumulation—while a truck remains parked
in the same zone across consecutive admissible slots and is not charging, its waiting time increases
by ∆t; otherwise it resets to zero.
Abandonment Let ai,d,t ∈{0,1} indicate that truck i abandons in slot (d,t) and let yj
i,d,t ∈{0,1}
be the charger-type assignment. We enforce
(Once abandon, no charging)
ai,d,t ≤1 −
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t,
∀i,d,t,
(4)
so choosing abandonment excludes charging in that slot. During a continuous parked stretch
(defined below), the abandonment variable is non-decreasing:
ai,d′,t′ ≥ai,d,t,
∀(d′,t′) successor of (d,t).
(5)
(Persistence over a parked stretch: once abandoned, a truck remains abandoned in subsequent slots
within the same zone.)


--- Page 9 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
9
Figure 2
Day-to-day carryover of waiting time in the same zone. For Truck 2 on Day 1, the first admissible slot
initializes w = 0. The next slot in the same zone accumulates to w = ∆t, and carryover to Day 2 in the
same zone yields w = 2∆t.
Figure 3
Zone-change resets of waiting time. For Truck 2, waiting grows from w = 0 to w = ∆t across two slots in
Zone 1. Transition to Zone 2 resets w = 0, after which accumulation resumes in subsequent uncharged
slots.
Waiting time Let wi,d,t ≥0 be the accumulated waiting time upon entering slot (d,t). When two
consecutive admissible slots for truck i occur in the same zone, waiting evolves as
(Within-zone recursion)
wi,d,t+1 = wi,d,t + ∆t
 
1 −
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t
!
,
∀i,d,t with same-zone successor,
(6)
i.e., w grows by ∆t only if the truck was not charging in the preceding slot. Otherwise, w resets:
(Resets)
wi,d,t = 0,
if (i,d,t) is not an admissible parking slot;
or if the predecessor admissible slot is in a different zone.
(7)
Rule (7) initializes w at the start of any parked stretch and breaks carryover across zone changes;
Equation (6) propagates w across day boundaries when the zone is unchanged (e.g., from (d,Td−1)
to (d+1,0)). Two special cases for resetting the waiting time, the day-to-day carryover of waiting
time in the same zone and zone-change reset of waiting time, are presented in Figs. 2 and 3,
respectively. The full illustration of waiting time and abandonment is presented in Appendix A.


--- Page 10 ---
10
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
2.6.3. Charging abandonment rules
At an industrial site, a truck abandons charging if
its waiting time exceeds a maximum allowed waiting time T max
i,d,t , as constraint (8). M2 is a large
constant to relax the waiting time constraint when ai,d,t equals to 1, in other words, when the
trucks abandon charging. Notably, the maximum waiting time varies with the truck’s range anxiety
and with whether it is parked in special zones that permit overnight charging.
Based on the industrial partner’s experience, we formulate the following waiting and abandon-
ment rules, accounting for range anxiety and overnight charging in special zones as follows. As
constraint (9), if the SoC is greater than or equal to 30%, no waiting time is allowed as the driver
has no range anxiety. If the SoC of a truck is below 30%, this will result in the driver’s range anxiety
and would extend their waiting time to half an hour before abandoning charging. Let the set SZ
denote the parking time slots at any of the special zones for overnight charging. Constraint (10)
sets the waiting time to be zero when the truck is outside the parking windows (i.e., no parking
allowed) or in special zones (i.e., no waiting time limits). Constraint (11) regulates that the waiting
time is always non-negative.
(Abandon after the maximum waiting time)
wi,d,t ≤T max
i,d,t + M2 · ai,d,t
∀i,d,t ∈S
(8)
(Maximum waiting time in non-special zones)
T max
i,d,t = ∆t · δ30
i,d,t
∀i,d,t ∈SZ
(9)
(Outside parking windows or in special zones)
wi,d,t = 0
∀i,d,t ∈SZ ∪S
(10)
(Non-negative constraint)
wi,d,t ≥0
∀i,d,t ∈S
(11)
2.6.4. Battery dynamics constraints
We impose the following constraints to model battery
SoC evolution and charging power limits:
(Battery energy balance)
bi,d,tEbat
i
= bi,d,t−1Ebat
i
+ pch
i,d,t −ρi,d,t,
∀i,d,∀t ≥t0
(12)
(The initial and final SoC are equal)
bi,d0,t0 = bi,de,te
∀i,d,t
(13)
(Maximum charging power limit)
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηj · P j · ∆t · yj
i,d,t · ppi,d,t,
∀i,d,t ∈S
(14)
(Effective charging time limits)
5
30 ≤ppi,d,t ≤1,
∀i,d,t ∈S
(15)
(Battery SoC limits)
SoCmin ≤bi,d,t ≤SoCmax
∀i,d,t
(16)
Constraint (12) models EV battery dynamics considering charging power and energy consump-
tion, and it should be noted that we do not use a binary variable to model battery discharging
status, as it shall not happen during parking. Constraint (13) sets the initial SoC at t0 and final
SoC at time te of the optimization horizon to be the same. Constraint (14) sets the maximum
charging power limit considering the charging type P j and corresponding charging efficiency ηj.


--- Page 11 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
11
Constraint (15) regulates the charging time limit in each time window, which is greater than 5
mins and less than 30 mins. Finally, constraint (16) restricts battery SoC within the maximum
and minimum values.
2.6.5. Fast charger SoC restrictions
To prevent trucks from using fast chargers when their
SoC exceeds 80% and to ensure that fast chargers do not charge the battery SoC beyond 80%, the
following constraints are enforced when charging. Constraint (17) ensures that if bi,d,t > 80%, then
δ80
i,d,t = 1, and y1
i,d,t = 0, preventing the use of the fast charger. Also, if bi,d,t ≤80%, then δ80
i,d,t = 0,
allowing the fast charger to be used. Constraint (18) ensures that when the fast charger is used,
the battery level after charging (bi,d′,t′) is limited to at most 80%.
(SoC cap before fast charging)
bi,d,t ≤80
100 + M3 · (1 −y1
i,d,t)
∀i, d, t ∈S
(17)
(SoC cap during fast charging)
bi,d′,t′ ≤80
100 + M3 · (1 −y1
i,d,t)
∀i, d′, t′ ∈S
(18)
Here, bi,d,t is the SoC of truck i; yi,d,t,1 is a binary variable equal to 1 if truck i uses a fast charger
at time t on day d; M3 is a large constant; and S is the set of time steps t on day d when truck i is
parked. The pair (d′,t′) represents the next time step after (d,t), defined as (d,t + 1) if t < T −1,
or (d + 1,0) if t = T −1 and d < D −1, where T is the number of time steps per day and D is the
number of days.
2.6.6. Total number of chargers in each type and zone
The number of trucks charging
with charger type j cannot exceed the number of available chargers of type j in zone z at any time.
X
i∈I
yj
i,d,t1{truck i at zone z at time t, day d} ≤xj
z
∀z ∈Z,∀j ∈J ,d ∈D,t ∈T
(19)
Where 1 is a binary indicator to represent whether truck i is at zone z at time t of day d.
2.7. Decision-dependent robust formulation considering parking duration uncertainty
The stochastic effective parking duration, denoted by the random variable ˆppi,d,t, is unknown at the
time of scheduling. We assume that this duration is endogenous: it depends on the charging decision
yj
i,d,t. Specifically, we model the realized parking duration ( ˆpp)′
i,d,t as an affine transformation of
the intrinsic (base) random duration ˆppi,d,t.
Let kj ≥1 be a scaling constant associated with charger type j (e.g., representing the reduction
in charging time due to fast charging). The decision-dependent duration is defined as:
( ˆpp)′
i,d,t := ˆppi,d,t ·
 
1 −
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t
kj
!
(20)
Since we enforce single charger usage (Pyj ≤1), the term in the parentheses acts as a scalar scaling
factor.


--- Page 12 ---
12
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
2.7.1. Feature-driven cluster-wise uncertainty sets
Assuming that we have a total num-
ber of N historical records of parking duration, each is indexed by ω ∈Ω, Ω= {1,2,...,N}, and
records a truck’s parking duration ppω and its feature vector vω ∈V, where V is the feature space.
Each feature vector encodes information for each parking duration, including contextual and numer-
ical variables such as half-hour of day, day of year, and zone. The fleet information describes the
trucks’ operational purposes and is categorized into eight types, such as drill-and-blast or pro-
duction activities. For instance, the feature vector of a parking duration ω can be represented
as,
vω ={1 : (00 : 00),20 : (The 20th day of the year 2023),
4 : (Zone 4),3 : (Production team),255 : (Truck ID 255)}
We found that parking duration is strongly correlated with fleet groups, half-hour intervals, and
zones, but only slightly related to the day of the year. This motivates us to partition the parking
duration into c ∈N clusters to represent its stochasticity.
Given the calendar effect of parking events, we propose using hierarchical clustering by reordering
the feature vectors for each truck. We compute the average parking duration for each half-hour zone
combination, aggregated across all days of the year. These averaged parking durations under half-
hour zone combinations serve as the feature vectors for individual trucks. Let the newly arranged
feature vector be (vi)
′. Using these time–zone features alongside fleet information, we perform
hierarchical clustering to group trucks, using Euclidean distance as the similarity measure.
(vi)
′ ={1 : (00 : 00;Zone 1),2 : (00 : 30;Zone 1),...,Nt · Nz : (24 : 00;Zone 8)}
We next model the distribution of uncertain parking duration for all trucks or truck groups and
construct the corresponding feature-driven uncertainty set. Assuming that the parking duration of
each cluster is identically and independently distributed, we could calculate the empirical mean µc
and variance σ2
c =
P
ω∈Ωc( ˆ
ppω−µc)2
Nc
. Considering the inherent bounds of parking duration, we build
a box-shaped uncertainty set as follows,
P :=
(
ˆpp

EP[ ˆpp] = µpp,
EP

( ˆpp −µpp)( ˆpp −µpp)T
= Σpp,
∥ˆpp∥∞≤∆c
)
(21)
where µpp = (µc(v))c∈C, and the covariance matrix Σpp = diag(σ2
c(v)c∈C) are feature-driven. The
values of ∆c are based on µpp and Σpp, which control the conservativeness of our formulation.


--- Page 13 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
13
2.7.2. Decision-dependent uncertainty sets and moment definitions
We could con-
struct a decision-dependent uncertainty set P (21) based on the first and second moments. Let µc
and Σc denote the empirical mean vector and covariance matrix of the base parking duration for
a cluster c, derived from historical data without charging interventions. We set ∆c to be µc ± σc.
The mean and variance of the updated duration ( ˆpp)′, denoted as µc(y) and Σc(y), depend on
the decision variables. We consider two cases for this dependency:
Example 1: Affine dependency on instantaneous decisions. The moments are scaled directly by
the specific decision for that parking slot. As yj
i,d,t is a “here-and-now” decision variable fixed prior
to uncertainty realization, the adjusted moments are:
µc(yi,d,t) = ˆµc
 
1 −
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t
kj
!
(22)
Σc(yi,d,t) = ˆΣc
 
1 −
X
j∈J
yj
i,d,t
kj
!2
(23)
Example 2: Affine dependency on cluster-level expected decisions. Here, the scaling factor
depends on the aggregate behavior of the fleet within a cluster c. Let Nc be the total number of
parking slots in cluster c. We define the empirical expected value of charging decision ¯Yc as:
¯Y j
c := 1
Nc
X
(i,d,t)∈c
yj
i,d,t
(24)
Note that ¯Yc is a linear function of decision variables, not a stochastic expectation.
Proposition 1 Given that the empirical expected value ¯Yc for a cluster of parking duration c,
the moments for any instance in this cluster are scaled uniformly:
µc( ¯Y j
c ) = ˆµc
 
1 −
X
j∈J
¯Y j
c
kj
!
(25)
Σc( ¯Y j
c ) = ˆΣc
 
1 −
X
j∈J
¯Y j
c
kj
!2
(26)
Proof of Proposition 1 Please see C.1 of the Supporting information.
2.7.3. RO-DDU constraint and reformulations
To ensure schedule feasibility, we enforce
a RO-DDU constraint on the charging power limit:
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjP j∆t · yj
i,d,t · ( ˆpp)′
(27)
Based on the uncertainty variable ( ˆpp)′, we construct a box-shaped uncertainty set with bounds
∆c = µc ± σc and derive tractable reformulations of the charging power constraint for two cases.


--- Page 14 ---
14
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Theorem 1. Example 1: Affine dependency on instantaneous decisions. Constraint (28) is the
reformulation of the linear power limit constraint (27) under the robust uncertainty set with affine
dependency on instantaneous decisions yj. This formulation preserves the linearity of binary charg-
ing decisions, keeping the problem tractable.
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjP j∆t

ˆµ⊺
c

1 −1
kj

yj −

1 −1
kj

ˆΣ
1/2
c
yj

(28)
Example 2: Affine dependency on cluster-level expected decisions. After applying decision-
dependent moments (25) and (26), constraint (29) is the reformulation of the linear power limit
constraint (27) under the robust uncertainty set with affine dependency on cluster-level expected
decisions ¯Yc.
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjP j∆t

ˆµ⊺
c

1 −
¯Y j
c
kj

yj −

1 −
¯Y j
c
kj

ˆΣ
1/2
c
yj

(29)
This formulation is nonlinear because it includes the product of the binary variable yj and the
continuous variable ¯Yc.
Proof of Theorem 1. Please see C.2 of the Supporting information.
2.8. Cluster-based Linearization (Example 2)
While statistically rigorous, constraint (29) involves the product of the continuous variable ¯Yc (the
sum of binary variables normalized by Nc) and the binary decision variable yj, introducing bilinear
terms. To solve this within a MILP framework, we introduce an auxiliary variable Zj
i,d,t = ¯Y j
c ·yj
i,d,t.
Since ¯Yc ∈[0,1] and yj
i,d,t ∈{0,1}, this product can be exactly linearized using the McCormick
envelopes McCormick (1976):
Zj
i,d,t ≤¯Y j
c
(30)
Zj
i,d,t ≤yj
i,d,t
(31)
Zj
i,d,t ≥¯Y j
c −(1 −yj
i,d,t)
(32)
Zj
i,d,t ≥0
(33)
Substituting Zj into (29) renders the constraint linear in the optimization variables, albeit at
the cost of increasing the problem size. We obtain the constraint (34).
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjP j∆t

ˆµ⊺
c

1 −1
kj

Zj −

1 −1
kj

ˆΣ
1/2
c
Zj

(34)


--- Page 15 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
15
3. Solution Algorithm
3.1. Robust planning using the whole year dataset
The planned EV infrastructure must remain robust across year-round fleet operations, that is, capa-
ble of meeting trip-related energy consumption, given the limited parking duration. We compare
two planning results under different scheduling operations, based on the selective or full dataset:
In terms of data usage, data can be categorized as day selection (DS) or full year (FY). For
DS, we selected a subset of representative days based on statistical criteria, including total fleet
distance, number of moving trucks, total fleet energy consumption, and total stopping time per
day. We also include days around the representative days to preserve the trip and battery-cycle
continuity. In contrast, the FY method uses the full-year dataset directly.
For scheduling operations, we consider the hindsight (HS) and iterative planning and scheduling
(IPS) approaches. The HS method assumes perfect foresight and performs one-shot scheduling.
The IPS method is similar to rolling-horizon scheduling. The full-period dataset is first decomposed
into monthly subsets, allowing several overlapping days between periods. The algorithm then plans
charger deployment for the entire period by iteratively integrating scheduling and planning at the
sub-period level. It starts with an initial charger allocation derived from the dataset and processes
each sub-period sequentially. If the existing infrastructure can satisfy the charging demand of this
sub-period, only charging scheduling is performed. Otherwise, the algorithm jointly determines the
charging schedule and the additional chargers required, updates the infrastructure, and carries the
new configuration forward to subsequent sub-periods.
Figure 4
The fix-and-optimize heuristic where fast-charging scheduling is assigned and fixed based on the forecast
high charging demands
The proposed planning and scheduling model is difficult to solve when the optimization horizon
is long, as in hindsight scheduling. We propose a fix-and-optimize heuristic for the scheduling
problem based on high-charging-demand forecasts. It has been applied to the timetable Fonseca et
al. (2024) and job-shape scheduling Li et al. (2025), where part of the solution is fixed while the


--- Page 16 ---
16
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
remaining variables are free to form subproblems. As shown in Fig. 4, we first identified parking
intervals with high charging demand and pre-assigned fast-charging schedules, thereby accelerating
the overall optimization process.
3.2. Fix-and-optimize heuristic based on high charging demand forecasts
Algorithm 1: Fix-and-optimize heuristic under parking duration uncertainty
Input: Master problem M with deterministic parking duration ppi,d,t; Parking duration
clusters c(i,t,z) ∈C
Output: BEV charger installation decisions xj
z
repeat
Solve the master problem M;
▷Warm start at the first step if the solution available;
Obtain scheduling outcomes y = (yj
i,d,t)(i,d,t)∈S,j∈J and charging power pch = (pch)(i,d,t)∈S;
for (i,d,t) ∈c ,j ∈J do
Compute the lower bound of parking durations ˆppi,d,t = µc −σc for the cluster c;
▷Applying scaling factors kj if RO-DDU ;
Compute the updated upper bound of charging power pch′
i,j,d,t
pch′
i,j,d,t ←
X
j∈J
∆t · P j · yj
i,d,t · ˆppi,d,t · ηj
if Violations are detected then
Impose the fast-charging constraint yi,1,d,t = 1 in the master problem;
until The maximum iteration limit is reached;
Post-process the solution by discarding part of the solution and re-solve the problem with
ˆppi,d,t;
As illustrated in Algorithm 1, we first initialize the master problem with the starting values
ppi,d,t. Next, we compute the lower bound of parking duration ˆppi,d,t based on the cluster c to
replace the initial values and compute the updated bounds of the charging power. We then compare
the updated upper bounds to the required charging power in the master problem M to identify
any violations. A violation occurs if the required charging power exceeds the upper bound by more
than a threshold κv and the parking window does not belong to a special zone. The threshold
κv is initialized at 2 and decays exponentially across iterations. When a violation is detected, a
fast-charging scheduling constraint yi,1,d,t = 1 is added for that parking window. These constraints
are subsequently incorporated into the master problem, after which the model is resolved from the
first step.


--- Page 17 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
17
This iterative process continues until the maximum number of iterations is reached. Afterward,
we post-processed the optimization results by discarding part of the solution, for instance, a high
number of fast chargers in one zone. The remaining solutions for fast and slow chargers are then
used as lower bounds to resolve the model. Ultimately, the installation plan for all zones and
charger types was determined.
4. Application
We applied our model to an open-pit mining site with 203 light-duty trucks in operation, planned for
replacement with BEVs. Seven special-use trucks, such as ambulances, that will not be electrified,
along with another seven trucks dispatched fewer than 10 days, are excluded from the study.
The remaining 189 trucks will be replaced with electric trucks equipped with 100 kWh batteries.
We consider the following two types of BEV chargers, as listed in Table 2. The capital cost of
fast chargers does not include installation costs, as installation is location-dependent. We set the
penalties for low SoC and charging time to be equal in the objective function. Although the charging
efficiency could vary with the charging type, outdoor temperature, and charging power Sevdari
et al. (2023), this paper uses a fixed value for charging efficiency. Overall, fast charging is more
efficient than slow charging because it uses a high-efficiency rectifier located outside the truck
Arena et al. (2024). We therefore set the charging efficiencies for slow and fast charging to 90%
and 95%.
Specifications
Slow charger
Fast charger
Capital costs ($/charger)
1,500 Ford (2025)
38,000 Primecomtech (2025)
Maximum charging rates (kW)
11.2
150
SoC ranges
10–100%
10–80%
Charging efficiency
90% Sevdari et al. (2023)
95% Arena et al. (2024)
Table 2
Technical parameters of two types of EV chargers
The charging planning process begins by identifying potential charging sites based on the stop
frequency of all trucks (Section 4.1). Next, the parking window, effective parking duration, and
energy consumption of each truck are extracted (Section 4.2). Then, hierarchical clustering based on
the rearranged time-zone features is applied to the parking-duration samples to construct feature-
based uncertainty sets (Section 4.3). High-consumption vehicles (HCVs) with infeasible trips are
then filtered out (Section 4.4). Finally, the proposed model plans chargers using different scheduling
operations (Section 4.5).


--- Page 18 ---
18
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
4.1. Identifying potential EV charging points
We used GPS data from 189 light-duty trucks at a mining site over one year. Their GPS data
records include coordinates (i.e., longitude and latitude) and speed at each time step. We then
grid-divided the entire mining site into 100-meter × 100-meter square regions and counted the stop
frequency in each square. We assumed that a truck stops if it moves less than 50 meters within a
square region for at least five minutes. By comparing the number of stop frequencies per square,
we identified eight EV charging points with the highest annual stop frequency. Fig. 5 shows eight
EV charging points identified, and the dashed gray lines indicate the roads connecting them. Fig.
6 shows the total stopping time of the entire fleet (× 1,000 hours), including both short parking
durations (< 4 hours) and long parking durations (≥4 hours), along with the annual number of
trucks stopping at each zone. The detailed statistics of eight charging zones are listed in Table 10
in Appendix D.1. Zones 1 (roadhouse) and 4 (equipment maintenance) account for a large share
of long-duration time greater than 4 hours, indicating that most overnight parking occurs in zones
1 and 4.
Figure 5
Identified eight charging zones and roads connected to eight charging zones (indicated as gray dashed
lines)
4.2. Summary of input datasets
We extracted three inputs for each truck in each half-hour interval based on their GPS records:
(i) the travel distance of each truck in miles, (ii) the parking time windows as the input of the
set Si,d,t, and (iii) the effective parking duration in each time window in minutes as the input of
ppi,d,t. The travel distance is then converted to energy consumption for each half-hour parking
time window based on the second-order model of the temperature-dependent fuel economy for U.S.


--- Page 19 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
19
Figure 6
The total stopping time of the entire fleet (× 1,000 hours), including both short parking durations (<
4 hours) and long parking durations (≥4 hours), along with the annual number of trucks stopping at
each of eight zones
Figure 7
(a) The histogram of average daily distance per truck (miles) and (b) the histogram of average daily
energy consumption per truck (kWh)
trucks Goodall & Robartes (2024), as the input of ρi,d,t. The detailed procedures to extract all
three kinds of inputs are illustrated in Appendix D.2.
Figs. 7 (a) and (b) illustrate the distributions of average daily distance traveled per truck and
the corresponding average daily energy consumption. On average, each truck traveled 73.9 miles
per day. With a fuel economy of roughly 3–3.4 miles/kWh, this translates to a daily energy use
of 22.4–24.6 kWh per truck, or about 30% of the battery’s capacity. This implies that a full


--- Page 20 ---
20
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
battery cycle would typically last 2–3 days. It is important to note that travel distance and energy
consumption within charging zones are excluded from the model. We expect, however, that this
additional consumption could be offset with minor operational adjustments, such as modifying
parking durations.
4.3. ML clustering for constructing feature-based robust sets
Figure 8
Parking duration distributions in a year in terms of four features: (a) truck category, (b) half-hour of a
day, (c) zones, and (d) day of the month
To construct a feature-based, robust uncertainty set for heterogeneous parking duration, as
illustrated in Section 2.7.1, we first collected all parking durations in a year. Fig. 8 (a) - (d)
illustrate parking duration distributions in terms of four features, truck category, half-hour of the
day, zone, and day of the month. We observed correlations between truck categories, half-hour of
the day, and zones and parking duration. We then rearranged the time-zone features based on their
combinations, and this gives a total number of 8zones × 48time slots = 384 features.
We then apply the proposed hierarchy clustering to group trucks based on the re-arranged
time-zone features, as demonstrated in Section 2.7.1. Before clustering, we normalized the parking
duration of these trucks using z-scores. The z-score standardizes the data for each truck to a mean
of zero with a standard deviation of one. In other words, the average parking duration of a truck


--- Page 21 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
21
Figure 9
Average parking duration heatmap for the selected 20 trucks, constructed using rearranged zone–hour
features. The heatmap displays only the first 10 hours for each of the eight zones, with zone boundaries
indicated by black dashed lines. The hierarchical clustering dendrogram, based on feature distances, is
shown on the left.
is normalized to one, and the duration that is higher or lower than the average value is a positive
or negative value, respectively. Fig. 9 shows the normalized parking duration heatmap for the
selected 20 trucks, constructed using rearranged zone–hour features, with the hierarchical clustering
dendrogram on the left. We first grouped trucks by category. Using the category information,
hierarchical clustering yields three subgroups per category, for a total of 24 subgroups. We also
compare these methods with the other three: hierarchical clustering without category information,
k-means, and grouping each truck separately. These comparisons and clustering results are detailed
in Appendix E.
4.4. Set up
We prepared three inputs for the selective and full-year datasets for 2023. For the selective day
approach, we defined 10 statistical criteria to select 39 days, including total fleet distance, number
of active trucks, and total fleet energy consumption. Based on these criteria, we ranked all 365
days in a year and selected the top-ranking days. We tested different numbers of selected days,
from 10 to 40, and observed that charger installation results stabilized at 30 days. Accordingly, we
selected 39 days, including days adjacent to the 10 top-ranked days, because some vehicles charge
every 2 or 3 days, and representative sub-periods must extend beyond battery cycles. The detailed
selection criteria and procedures are provided in Appendix D.2.2. For the full year using rolling-
horizon scheduling, we divided the full-year dataset into monthly subsets, with overlapping days


--- Page 22 ---
22
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
between consecutive months to maintain trip continuity. This produces 12 monthly sub-datasets,
each spanning 34 days.
We conduct a preliminary simulation before optimization, in which each EV uses straightforward
fast charging throughout the optimization horizon. In each simulation, a truck starts with a random
SoC, and is then fully charged at each parking site. At the end of the optimization horizon, we track
whether they could restore their original SoC. If the original SoC cannot be recovered, the truck is
identified as a HCV, which is not feasible to be electrified if they stick to the current operational
scheduling. This also includes vehicles that do not pass eight charging zones. The optimization is
subsequently performed exclusively on the remaining trucks, and we recorded the number of HCVs
excluded from the optimization model for each simulation. All experiments were solved using the
Gurobi commercial solver. We set the accepted optimal gap for this MILP to be 1%, less than the
capital cost of one slow charger. All problems were solved on a computer equipped with an 8-core
CPU running at 3.4 GHz and 160 GB of RAM.
4.5. Result evaluation
4.5.1. Performance metrics
Apart from the number of fast and slow chargers installed, the
following performance metrics are introduced to evaluate performance:
• Fast charging hours (FC Hrs, per truck per day): The aggregated duration, measured in half-
hour intervals, that a truck uses a fast charger per day.
• Slow charging hours (SC Hrs, per truck per day): The aggregated duration, measured in half-
hour intervals, that a truck uses a slow charger per day.
• Abandonment hours (Ab Hrs, per truck per day): The aggregated duration, measured in half-
hour intervals, that a truck is abandoned and charged per day.
• Average charging power (Avg. CP, kW): The mean power charged during all charging time
slots.
• Percentage of the number of periods when battery SoC is lower than 30% relative to the total
time slots (Pct. of Low SoC, %): The total number of half-hour periods when the battery SoC is
lower than 30%.
• Average battery SoC of each truck (Avg. SoC, %): The average battery SoC of each truck
throughout the trip.
• Charging utilization rate (CUR, %): The average number of charging duration, measured in
half-hour intervals, each charger experiences compared to the optimization horizon.


--- Page 23 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
23
4.5.2. The impacts of abandonment, range anxiety, and effective parking duration
Using 39 representative days, we evaluate the impacts of abandonment, range anxiety, and effective
parking duration using the HS method.
• Case 1 - Benchmark: Trucks are prohibited from waiting in any zone under normal circum-
stances. However, when a vehicle’s SoC drops to below 30%, it is permitted to pause for 30 minutes
to recharge. Two designated zones (i.e., zones 1 and 4) accommodate the overnight charging with
unlimited waiting time. The model incorporates the specific parking duration for each parking
window (i.e.,
5
30 ≤pp ≤1).
• Case 2 - Full parking time: This case maintains the same as the benchmark case, except
that it has no specific parking duration constraints for each parking window (i.e., pp = 1).
• Case 3 - No overnight charging: This case maintains the same conditions as the benchmark
case, except that it has no special zones for the overnight charging.
• Case 4 - No range anxiety: This case maintains the same conditions as the benchmark
case, except that it has no related constraints or penalty related to the range anxiety, in order
words, there is no penalty for low SoC (i.e., P low = 0). Trucks are prohibited from waiting in any
zone under normal circumstances, regardless of their SoC; in other words, the maximum waiting
time is set to zero (i.e., T max
i,d,t = 0).
Figure 10
Zone-level differences in the numbers of slow and fast chargers for Cases 2–4 relative to the benchmark.
Dashed bars represent fast chargers, while solid bars represent slow chargers.
Table 3 summarizes optimization results in four deterministic cases under different assumptions
about abandonment, range anxiety, and effective parking duration. The benchmark case (case 1)


--- Page 24 ---
24
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
has a mixed type of chargers, which are 72 of slow chargers and 6 of fast chargers. Fig. 10 illustrates
differences in the numbers of fast and slow chargers in cases 2–4, compared to the benchmark.
In the benchmark case, the number of installed chargers is proportional to the total duration of
vehicle stops at each of the eight charging zones, as presented in Fig. 8 (a), while zones 4 and 5
have the highest number of chargers among the eight zones. We then examine three cases in which
overnight charging, range anxiety, and limited parking duration are not considered. Extending the
parking duration to the full window reduces the number of fast chargers to three. Removing the
designated overnight zones would require an additional 20 slow chargers to be installed in zones 1
and 4. In case 4, no range anxiety requires seven more slow chargers to be installed.
Cases
Names
# of slow /
fast chargers
Installation
costs ($)
Scheduling
penalty ($)
Gap
(%)
Time (Hrs)
1
Benchmark
72/6
336,000
38,468
0.084
2.98
2
Full parking time
74/3
187,000
39,622
0.116
57.32
3
No overnight charging
92/6
366,000
85,200
0.042
15.77
4
No range anxiety
79/6
346,500
38,077
0.079
2.94
Table 3
Summary of charging planning outcomes and overall scheduling penalties in four deterministic cases:
Benchmark, Full parking time, No overnight charging, and No range anxiety
Cases
FC Hrs
(truck · day)
FCUR
(%)
SC Hrs
(truck · day)
SCUR
(%)
Ab Hrs
(truck · day)
Pct. low SoC
(%)
Avg. CP
(kW)
1
0.18
20.64
0.50
5.46
3.60
6.01
16.51
2
0.08
19.78
0.79
8.34
3.60
4.91
13.11
3
0.19
21.65
0.48
4.06
9.46
2.12
16.91
4
0.17
19.06
0.43
4.21
3.68
62.57
19.03
Table 4
Summary of all the performance metrics in four deterministic cases; The number in bold highlights the
highest values among four cases
Table 4 summarizes all the performance metrics in four deterministic cases, and the detailed
scheduling solution of four cases are presented in Appendix F. As expected, case 2, which assumes
the full parking duration, has the highest fast-charging hours and utilization rate among the four
cases. Case 3, which excludes overnight charging, has the highest number of fast-charging and
abandonment hours. Case 4, with no range anxiety, leads to the highest percentage of low SoC
events and the average charging power.
Figs. 11 (a) and (b) show the zone-wise comparison of charging and abandonment time, respec-
tively. In case 2, with the full parking duration, zones 6 and 8 have longer charging times. In case
3, without the overnight charging, zones 1 and 4 have a significantly high number of abandonment
hours. Fig. 12 (a) illustrates the average SoC of all trucks over 39 days, ranked from the highest


--- Page 25 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
25
Figure 11
The total number of (a) charging hours and (b) abandonment hours of the truck fleet in different zones
in four deterministic cases
Figure 12
(a) Average SoC of each truck and (b) the overall battery SoC for the entire fleet in four deterministic
cases
to the lowest, and Fig. 12 (b) presents the overall battery SoC (i.e., the maximum, minimum, and
average) of the entire fleet in four cases. Among four cases, case 4 (no range anxiety) yields the
lowest average SoC (28.4%), whereas case 2 with full parking duration achieves the highest average
SoC (45.3%). When the effective charging time constraint is applied, in other words, comparing
the benchmark to case 2, part of the fleet in the benchmark case experiences a sharp drop in


--- Page 26 ---
26
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
the average SoC to very low levels (≤20%), due to the limited charging duration in the parking
windows.
4.5.3. The impacts of different RO-DDU formulations for parking duration uncer-
tainty
We next evaluate the performance of two RO-DDU formulations for the charging power
constraint under parking duration uncertainty as in Section 2.7.2. These formulations differ in
whether the uncertainty set depends affinely on instantaneous charging decisions (hereafter referred
to as ‘Instantaneous’) or on cluster-level expected charging decisions (hereafter referred to as
‘Expect’). We adopt fleet groups obtained from hierarchical clustering that incorporates truck cat-
egory information, as described in Section 4.3. We then apply different scaling factors for slow
chargers (kslow = 4) and fast chargers (kfast = 2) in the instantaneous and cluster-level RO-DDU
formulations. Here, we envisage a pessimistic scenario in which parking duration will be reduced
after BEV chargers are installed. In addition, we include an RO independent of charging decisions
(‘RO-DI’) as a benchmark. All three cases are evaluated using 39 selected days, as defined by the
IPS method. After obtaining the charger planning results, we use the sample average approximation
(SAA) to compare the scheduling performance of the Instantaneous and Expect cases.
Cases Formulations
# of
HCVs
# of slow /
fast chargers
Installation
costs ($)
Scheduling
penalty ($)
Gap
(%)
Time
(Hrs)
1
RO - DI
19
67 / 6
328,500
20,911
0.01
0.48
2
Instant.
19
67 / 6
328,500
30,400
0.01
0.52
3
Expect
19
70 / 6
333,000
31,306
0.01 10.21
Table 5
Summary of charging planning outcomes and scheduling penalties under three RO formulations
(low-penalty case)
Sample
Cases
FC Hrs
(truck · day)
SC Hrs
(truck · day)
Ab Hrs
(truck · day)
Pct. of low
SoC (%)
Avg. CP
(kW)
Tot. Penalty
($/truck · day)
In
sample
RO-DI
0.16
0.45
4.14
1.52
9.47
4.43
Instant.
0.22
0.52
4.13
1.72
7.80
4.51
Expect.
0.16
0.46
4.10
2.35
9.48
4.40
Out of
sample
Instant.
0.21
0.39
3.77
4.38
9.28
4.02
Expect.
0.21
0.39
3.77
4.90
9.33
4.01
Table 6
Summary of performance metrics for in-sample and out-of-sample evaluations under RO-DI,
instantaneous DDU, and expectation-based DDU at the low-penalty case. Values are rounded to two decimal places.
The values in bold indicate the highest value within each sample group and column.
Table 5 summarizes the charger installation results of three RO cases obtained in the in-sample
datasets. Using the IPS approach can decompose the problem and solve three instances quickly,
compared to the HS method. It relaxes the battery energy balance over a long scheduling horizon.


--- Page 27 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
27
Figure 13
Zone-wise differences in the numbers of slow and fast chargers for three RO cases: RO - DI, RO-DDU
(Instantaneous), and RO-DDU (Expect). The benchmark case is the RO - DI case
Fig. 13 shows their zone-wise differences in the numbers of installed slow and fast chargers. Only
when using the cluster formulation, the required number of chargers increases, particularly in zones
6, 7, and 8, where the charging duration variability is higher than in other zones. In addition, the
cluster formulation requires substantially longer solution times due to the introduction of nonlinear
charging-power constraints.
Table 6 summarizes the scheduling performance metrics of in-sample and out-of-sample tests
in three cases. During in-sample tests, the RO-DI formulation yields the highest charging power,
followed by RO-DDU (Expect) and RO-DDU (Instantaneous). This aligns with the theoretical
analysis of charging power bounds via cluster-level aggregation in Section C.3. The RO-DDU
(expect) formulation accounts for decision dependence and the correlation among charging decisions
within the same cluster. Therefore, the RO-DDU (expect) formulation has the highest scheduling
penalty among the three cases. In out-of-sample tests, the scheduling penalty obtained from the
RO-DDU (expect) formulation becomes less than the RO-DDU (Instantaneous) formulation. This
means that, by accounting for correlations within the cluster, the expected formulation yields more
efficient scheduling.
Tackling high computation costs with the ‘fix-and-optimize’ heuristic: Considering the high com-
putation costs of the 39-day instance under HS scheduling, we leverage the fix-and-optimize heuris-
tic to solve problems. We impose a maximum time limit of 40,000 seconds for each instance and
report the optimality gap when the solver fails to converge within this limit. In addition, we ini-
tialize the master problem as the warm start.


--- Page 28 ---
28
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Data
Range
∆c
Solving
methods
# of
HCVs
# of slow/fast
chargers
Installation
costs ($)
Scheduling
penalty ($)
Gap
(%)
Time
(Hrs)
DS
0
HS
19
68/6
330,000
35,678
9.06
11.1
HS - h
19
68/6
330,000
35,679
0.07
2.40
DS
±σ
HS
19
68/6
330,000
35,658
9.04
11.1
HS - h
19
69/6
331,500
36,065
0.05
2.15
DS
±σ
HS
19
67/8
442,500
35,565
23.19
11.1
DDU HS - h
19
70/6
330,000
22,455
0.06
3.29
DS
±2σ
HS
19
68/6
330,000
35,736
9.02
11.1
HS - h
19
69/6
331,500
35,863
0.05
5.20
Table 7
Summary of optimization results with the varying size of uncertainty set based on the selected 39-day
and full-year dataset using HS, HS with heuristic (HS - h)
As presented in Table 7, we found that solving these HS instances directly is difficult, with all
four cases reaching the maximum time limit. Using the proposed heuristic method (HS - h), the
problem can reach an acceptable optimality gap of less than 0.1% while keeping the computation
time within the prescribed limits. We used a warm start because the solution to the deterministic
benchmark case is available, and completing 10 iterations takes approximately one hour. Across
cases with varying uncertainty sets, the only difference between the HS and HS-h methods is the
installation or placement of a single fast charger. This indicates that assigning specific fast chargers
can hinder convergence. In contrast, the proposed heuristic prioritizes placing the fast charger,
allowing the model to converge more efficiently. The detailed solution processes using the HS-h
method are presented in Appendix G.
4.5.4. Robust infrastructure planning based on the full year dataset
To ensure robust
infrastructure planning over the year, we use the full-year dataset to plan the charging infrastruc-
ture under the IPS methods, as described in Section 3.1. These three full-year instances, corre-
sponding to the size of uncertainty set increasing from 0 to 2σ, provide the most robust planning
results compared with the selective datasets.
Data
Range
∆c
Solving
methods
# of
HCVs
# of slow/fast
chargers
Installation
costs ($)
Scheduling
penalty ($)
Gap
(%)
Time
(Hrs)
FY
0
IPS
48
77/5
305,500
33,466
0.09
11.3
±σ
IPS
48
75/7
378,500
33,331
0.05
12.0
±2σ IPS
48
76/8
418,000
33,402
0.05
23.8
Table 8
Summary of optimization results with the full-year dataset using the IPS method. For the IPS method,
the reported gap is the optimality gap of the final period in the iterative planning.
Table 7 summarizes the optimization results. When extending the data range to the full year
using the IPS method, between 1 and 3 iterations exceeded the time limit. However, all three full-
year instances converge by the end of the 12-month horizon. In the final instance involving joint


--- Page 29 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
29
Figure 14
The total number of chargers in each month based on the full-year dataset using the IPS method
in three instances with varying sizes of uncertainty sets (in colored lines) versus the total number of
trucks parking and charged (in gray bars) in all eight zones
planning and scheduling, an optimality gap of less than 0.1% is achieved. Fig.15 shows zone-wise
differences in the number of slow and fast chargers in three full-year cases with the increasing size
of uncertainty sets. As uncertainty increases, two or three additional fast chargers are replaced
with slow chargers.
Figure 15
Zone-level variations in the number of slow and fast chargers across three full-year cases are illustrated.
The benchmark corresponds to the case with a zero-sized uncertainty set, in which parking duration
is fixed at the mean value for each cluster.


--- Page 30 ---
30
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
When comparing results from the 39-day dataset with those from the full-year dataset, the latter
yields more chargers because the full-year data captures the end-of-year period with the highest
vehicle counts. In contrast, the results derived from the 39-day dataset require even fewer chargers
than the deterministic benchmark, because an additional 18 trucks are excluded from the HCV
set due to their very short parking durations. Fig. 14 shows the total number of chargers (i.e.,
the sum of the number of fast and slow chargers) determined by the IPS procedure from monthly
subproblems over 12 months in three instances. From January to December, the number of trucks
parked and charged across the eight zones increases from 156 to 182, resulting in a steady rise in
the number of required charger installations.
As the parking duration uncertainty grows, the total number of EV chargers increases, particu-
larly for fast chargers. We then evaluated three full-year instances by calculating their performance
metrics across 12 months. Table 9 summarizes the performance metrics of all three cases. As the
uncertainty increases, both fast and low charger utilization rates reduce. The average abandonment
hour remains constant across the three stochastic instances.
∆c
FC Hrs
(truck · day)
FCUR
(%)
SC Hrs
(truck · day)
SCUR
(%)
Ab Hrs
(truck · day)
Pct. low SoC
(%)
Avg. CP
(kW)
0
0.21
31.39
0.62
5.98
6.64
6.97
12.44
±σ
0.21
21.88
0.36
3.54
6.64
2.46
13.18
±2σ
0.22
20.80
0.35
3.43
6.64
3.59
12.80
Table 9
Summary of all performance metrics in three stochastic cases. The number in bold highlights the
highest values among the three cases.
Figure 16
(a) Distributions of monthly slow and fast charging hours of the entire truck fleet and (b) the monthly
charging hour trends across a year in three uncertainty scenarios


--- Page 31 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
31
Fig. 16 (a) shows distributions of monthly slow and fast charging hours of the entire truck fleet
in the three stochastic instances, and Fig. 16 (b) shows the total monthly charging hour trends.
By comparing three cases, we have the following observations: (1) With the increasing uncertainty
of the charging duration, the total charging hours (the parking slots being decided to charge)
reduce, but the fast charging hours increase. This indicates that the scheduling system seeks to
avoid parking slots with highly uncertain parking durations and instead uses fast chargers more
frequently. (2) If we further increase the uncertainty of charging duration, the total charging hours
will increase, which is opposite to the previous trend, as more charging slots are required to meet
the energy consumption.
4.6. Conclusion and discussion
We develop a robust model for planning and scheduling the charging infrastructure required to
electrify light-duty trucks at industrial sites with mixed charger types. The model determines
charging infrastructure deployment by selecting charging locations and charger types, and jointly
optimizes charging schedules while accounting for waiting time, charging abandonment, and range
anxiety. We conduct a case study at an open-pit mining site comprising eight charging zones. Three
input datasets are constructed from year-long GPS records of approximately 200 operational trucks:
(i) parking time slots discretized into half-hour intervals, (ii) realized parking durations within
each half-hour window, and (iii) half-hourly energy consumption of all trucks. We assume fixed
charging efficiencies for both slow and fast chargers and do not account for energy consumption
during parking periods.
4.6.1. No overnight charging or no range anxiety will significantly increase the
charger installations
Among eight zones, we assume that two designated zones allow overnight
parking; otherwise, trucks will forgo charging if no chargers are available. The battery SoC status
below 30% is assumed to trigger the range anxiety, resulting in an additional half-hour waiting
time. We found that neither overnight charging nor range anxiety significantly increases the number
of charger installations, as both behaviors entail additional waiting time and reduce the need for
installations. In addition, the charging hours account for only about 4% of the total parking time.
This means limited waiting time and resulting abandonment are the main reasons for the number
of charger installations at industrial sites.
4.6.2. A greater uncertainty in charging duration leads to changes in total charging
hours as well as shifts in charging type
We assume that parking duration in the parking
window is stochastic. To identify patterns, hierarchical clustering is used to group trucks. Then, the
uncertain parking duration of each truck can be represented as a robust, feature-based uncertainty


--- Page 32 ---
32
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
set. As charging duration uncertainty increases, total charging hours decline, reducing utilization
rates for both slow and fast chargers. Increased uncertainty also shifts charging patterns, with total
fast-charging hours increasing while slow-charging hours decrease. However, when the lower bound
of the robust parking-duration set is further reduced to its minimum value (i.e., 5 minutes), the
total charging hours increase to meet each truck’s energy requirements.
4.6.3. Alternative decision-dependent formulations that rely on clustering produce
different charger planning results
We consider that the uncertainty of charging duration is
decision-dependent, which impacts and is impacted by charging decisions (i.e., whether or not
charging and charging types). We then investigate two decision-dependent formulations, assuming
an affine dependence on instantaneous and cluster-level expected decisions. We found that cluster-
level expected decisions yield tighter bounds on scheduling and a higher charging power level
when we assume that charging decisions reduce parking duration. The instantaneous formulation
always imposes a certain risk on individual parking time slots and neglects aggregated, correlated
charging/parking behaviors across the fleet.
4.6.4. Fix-and-optimize heuristic can assist the robust scheduling depending on the
forecasts
The proposed planning and scheduling framework is formulated as a large-scale MILP
model. For a 39-day instance with 188 trucks, the model contains over 1.5 million binary variables
during pre-solving, making it computationally challenging. To address this, we introduce a fix-
and-optimize heuristic for scheduling the charging operations under uncertainty. This is to forecast
high charging demand due to reduced parking durations and to schedule fast-charging actions.
This reduces the computation time by approximately 2-5 times for 39-day instances and yields the
optimality gap of the problem below 0.1%.
Finally, several promising avenues remain for future research. For example, future work could
incorporate additional charging options, such as multiple types of fast chargers with rated powers
exceeding 150 kW, to further reduce the number of required HCVs. Moreover, charging behavior
modeling could be improved by integrating empirical data from existing electrified fleets to account
for factors such as variations in range anxiety across times of day.
4.7. Acknowledgment
We gratefully acknowledge the sponsor company for providing GPS data from the operating trucks
at the mining site. We also thank Maria Isabel Castrillo Viguera for her valuable contributions in
processing the GPS data and preparing the input datasets.


--- Page 33 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
33
References
Abdelwahed, A., Van Den Berg, P. L., Brandt, T., Collins, J., & Ketter, W. (2020, November). Evaluating
and Optimizing Opportunity Fast-Charging Schedules in Transit Battery Electric Bus Networks. Trans-
portation Science, 54(6), 1601–1615. Retrieved 2025-08-23, from https://pubsonline.informs.org/
doi/10.1287/trsc.2020.0982 doi: 10.1287/trsc.2020.0982
Arena, G., Chub, A., Lukianov, M., Strzelecki, R., Vinnikov, D., & De Carne, G. (2024). A Comprehensive
Review on DC Fast Charging Stations for Electric Vehicles: Standards, Power Conversion Technologies,
Architectures, Energy Management, and Cybersecurity. IEEE Open Journal of Power Electronics, 5,
1573–1611. Retrieved 2025-09-19, from https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10691639/
doi:
10.1109/OJPEL.2024.3466936
Bertsimas, D., & Hertog, D. d. (2022). Robust and adaptive optimization. Belmont, Massachusetts: Dynamic
Ideas LLC. (OCLC: 1334655371)
Chen, L., He, L., & Zhou, Y. H. (2024, September). An Exponential Cone Programming Approach for
Managing Electric Vehicle Charging.
Operations Research, 72(5), 2215–2240.
Retrieved 2025-08-
24, from https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/opre.2023.2460 doi: 10.1287/opre.2023
.2460
Chen, Y., & Liu, Y.
(2023, January).
Integrated Optimization of Planning and Operations for Shared
Autonomous Electric Vehicle Systems. Transportation Science, 57(1), 106–134. Retrieved 2025-08-
23, from https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/trsc.2022.1156
doi: 10.1287/trsc.2022
.1156
Cui, D., Wang, Z., Liu, P., Wang, S., Zhao, Y., & Zhan, W. (2023, April). Stacking regression technology
with event profile for electric vehicle fast charging behavior prediction. Applied Energy, 336, 120798.
Retrieved 2025-08-24, from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0306261923001629
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2023.120798
De Vos, M. H., Van Lieshout, R. N., & Dollevoet, T.
(2024, March).
Electric Vehicle Scheduling
in Public Transit with Capacitated Charging Stations.
Transportation Science, 58(2), 279–294.
Retrieved 2025-12-22, from https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/trsc.2022.0253
doi:
10.1287/trsc.2022.0253
Fonseca, G. H., Figueiroa, G. B., & Toffolo, T. A. (2024, March). A fix-and-optimize heuristic for the
Unrelated Parallel Machine Scheduling Problem.
Computers & Operations Research, 163, 106504.
Retrieved 2025-10-06, from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0305054823003684
doi: 10.1016/j.cor.2023.106504
Ford. (2025, August). Ford Charge Station Pro. Retrieved 2025-08-24, from https://chargers.ford.com/
ford-charge-station-pro


--- Page 34 ---
34
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Gkiotsalitis, K., Rizopoulos, D., Merakou, M., Iliopoulou, C., Liu, T., & Cats, O. (2025, March). Electric bus
charging station location selection problem with slow and fast charging. Applied Energy, 382, 125242.
Retrieved 2025-08-23, from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0306261924026266
doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2024.125242
Goodall, N. J., & Robartes, E. (2024, January). Feasibility of Battery Electric Pickup Trucks in a State
Department of Transportation Fleet. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
Research Board, 2678(1), 760–769. Retrieved 2024-12-20, from https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/
10.1177/03611981231172501 doi: 10.1177/03611981231172501
Hu, H., Du, B., Liu, W., & Perez, P.
(2022, August).
A joint optimisation model for charger locating
and electric bus charging scheduling considering opportunity fast charging and uncertainties. Trans-
portation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 141, 103732. Retrieved 2025-08-23, from https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0968090X2200167X doi: 10.1016/j.trc.2022.103732
Legault, R., Cabral, F., & Sun, X. A. (2025, July). Integrated Bus Fleet Electrification Planning Through
Accelerated Logic-Based Benders Decomposition and Restriction Heuristics.
doi: https://doi.org/10
.48550/arXiv.2508.05863
Li, S., Ouyang, W., Ma, Y., & Wu, C. (2025, February). Learning-Guided Rolling Horizon Optimization for
Long-Horizon Flexible Job-Shop Scheduling. arXiv. Retrieved 2025-10-10, from http://arxiv.org/
abs/2502.15791 (arXiv:2502.15791 [math]) doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2502.15791
Lim, M. K., Mak, H.-Y., & Rong, Y. (2015, February). Toward Mass Adoption of Electric Vehicles: Impact
of the Range and Resale Anxieties. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management, 17(1), 101–119.
Retrieved 2025-08-22, from https://pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/msom.2014.0504
doi:
10.1287/msom.2014.0504
Lu, C.-F., Liu, G.-P., Yu, Y., & Cui, J. (2025, April). A Coordinated Model Predictive Control-Based
Approach for Vehicle-to-Grid Scheduling Considering Range Anxiety and Battery Degradation. IEEE
Transactions on Transportation Electrification, 11(2), 5688–5699. Retrieved 2025-08-22, from https://
ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10739340/ doi: 10.1109/TTE.2024.3488075
Luo, F., & Mehrotra, S. (2020, November). Distributionally robust optimization with decision dependent
ambiguity sets.
Optimization Letters, 14(8), 2565–2594.
Retrieved 2025-12-22, from http://link
.springer.com/10.1007/s11590-020-01574-3 doi: 10.1007/s11590-020-01574-3
Mak, H.-Y., Rong, Y., & Shen, Z.-J. M. (2013, July). Infrastructure Planning for Electric Vehicles with
Battery Swapping. Management Science, 59(7), 1557–1575. Retrieved 2025-08-22, from https://
pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1672 doi: 10.1287/mnsc.1120.1672
McCormick, G. P. (1976, December). Computability of global solutions to factorable nonconvex programs:
Part I — Convex underestimating problems. Mathematical Programming, 10(1), 147–175. Retrieved
2025-12-29, from http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF01580665 doi: 10.1007/BF01580665


--- Page 35 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
35
Mussa, A. S., Klett, M., Behm, M., Lindbergh, G., & Lindstr¨om, R. W. (2017, October). Fast-charging
to a partial state of charge in lithium-ion batteries: A comparative ageing study. Journal of Energy
Storage, 13, 325–333.
Retrieved 2025-08-23, from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/
pii/S2352152X17301913 doi: 10.1016/j.est.2017.07.004
Nohadani, O., & Sharma, K. (2018, January). Optimization under Decision-Dependent Uncertainty. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 28(2), 1773–1795. Retrieved 2025-08-24, from https://epubs.siam.org/
doi/10.1137/17M1110560 doi: 10.1137/17M1110560
Noyan, N., Rudolf, G., & Lejeune, M.
(2022, March).
Distributionally Robust Optimization Under
a Decision-Dependent Ambiguity Set with Applications to Machine Scheduling and Humanitarian
Logistics. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 34(2), 729–751. Retrieved 2025-09-14, from https://
pubsonline.informs.org/doi/10.1287/ijoc.2021.1096 doi: 10.1287/ijoc.2021.1096
Primecomtech.
(2025).
Primecom.Tech Level 3DC Dual Dispenser EV Supercharger DC Fast
Charger
for
Electric
Vehicle.
Retrieved
2025-08-24,
from
https://www.primecom.tech/
products/primecom-tech-level-3-dc-dual-dispenser-charging-ev-supercharger-fast
-charger-for-electric-vehicles?currency=USD&variant=49975633805629&utm source=
google&utm medium=cpc&utm campaign=Google%20Shopping&stkn=aa93a15a64b1&srsltid=
AfmBOorf7Dr90QMKCb4Ias0yhgnyqBb36AuLlOXIKudfjaNDXbNviPSm6uI
Sevdari, K., Calearo, L., Bakken, B. H., Andersen, P. B., & Marinelli, M. (2023, December). Experimental
validation of onboard electric vehicle chargers to improve the efficiency of smart charging operation.
Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments, 60, 103512. Retrieved 2025-09-19, from https://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2213138823005052 doi: 10.1016/j.seta.2023.103512
Staffell, I., & Pfenninger, S. (2016, November). Using bias-corrected reanalysis to simulate current and
future wind power output. Energy, 114, 1224–1239. Retrieved 2025-08-23, from https://linkinghub
.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0360544216311811 doi: 10.1016/j.energy.2016.08.068
Tao, Y., Qiu, J., Lai, S., Wang, G., Liu, H., & Sun, X.
(2024, July).
Coordinated Planning of
Dynamic Wireless Charging Systems and Electricity Networks Considering Range Anxiety of Elec-
tric Vehicles.
IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 15(4), 3876–3891.
Retrieved 2025-08-23, from
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10402092/ doi: 10.1109/TSG.2024.3355183
US Department of Transportation. (2025, January). Charger Types and Speeds. Retrieved 2025-08-30, from
https://www.transportation.gov/rural/ev/toolkit/ev-basics/charging-speeds
U.S. EPA. (2024, May). Facts U.S.Transportation Sector Greenhouse Gas Emissions 1990 –2022 (Tech.
Rep.).
U.S. EPA.
Retrieved 2025-09-14, from https://nepis.epa.gov/Exe/ZyPDF.cgi?Dockey=
P101AKR0.pdf
Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhou, M., & Tang, J.
(2023, June).
Feature-driven robust surgery scheduling.
Production and Operations Management, 32(6), 1921–1938.
Retrieved 2025-12-31, from https://
journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1111/poms.13949 doi: 10.1111/poms.13949


--- Page 36 ---
36
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Zhang, Y., Li, S., Blythe, P., Wardle, J., Herron, C., Edwards, S., . . . Namdeo, A. (2025, March). Analysis
of electric vehicle charging behaviour in existing regional public and workplace charging infrastructure:
A case study in the North-East UK. Transportation Engineering, 19, 100309. Retrieved 2025-08-24,
from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S2666691X25000090
doi: 10.1016/j.treng
.2025.100309


--- Page 37 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
37
Appendix A: Waiting time and abandonment: full illustrations
State evolution on a parked stretch. Recall that Si,d,t ∈{0,1} indicate that (i,d,t) is a parking
slot and z(i,d,t) be the zone index when Si,d,t = 1. Define the continuity indicator
κi,d,t :=
(
1,
Si,d,t = 1, Si, ˜d,˜t = 1, z(i,d,t) = z(i, ˜d, ˜t),
0,
otherwise,
where ( ˜d, ˜t) is the previous admissible slot (day wrap as needed). Then the implemented rules are
equivalent
wi,d,t =



0,
Si,d,t = 0 or κi,d,t = 0,
wi, ˜d,˜t + ∆t

1 −P
j∈J yj
i, ˜d,˜t

,
otherwise,
ai,d′,t′ ≥ai,d,t for the next slot (d′,t′).
Hence: (i) any charge in ( ˜d, ˜t) prevents growth of w in that step; (ii) any zone change resets w; (iii)
day-to-day carryover is allowed only when the zone is unchanged.
Worked example 1 (day boundary, same zone). Consider three consecutive admissible slots for
truck i in the same zone: (d,t=1), (d,t=2), and (d+1,0), none charged. Then wi,d,1 = 0, wi,d,2 = ∆t,
and wi,d+1,0 = 2∆t, matching Fig. 2.
Worked example 2 (zone switch). Let (d,1) and (d,2) be in Zone 1 and (d,3) in Zone 2. If no
charging occurs, wi,d,1 = 0, wi,d,2 = ∆t, but wi,d,3 = 0 because the zone changed, as in Fig. 3.
Range anxiety and special zones. In non-special zones, the cap T max
i,d,t = ∆t · δ30
i,d,t implies: (a) if
SoC ≥30%, then δ30
i,d,t = 0 and the cap is 0; the truck either charges immediately or abandons; (b)
if SoC < 30%, then one slot of waiting is permitted before abandonment. In special (overnight)
zones, T max
i,d,t = L so multi-slot waiting is admissible, and w can grow across the night until charging
starts.
Two operational variants. We support two abandonment policies that only affect when resets
are triggered:
1. Current-policy variant. Resets occur only on parking gaps or zone changes. If the next
slot is admissible and in the same zone, apply (6) and ai,d′,t′ ≥ai,d,t.
2. SoC-based variant. In addition to the above, designated special slots (e.g., transition mark-
ers tied to SoC rules or overnight delineations) force a reset: if (i,d,t) is special, set wi,d,t = 0 and
do not apply carryover from (6) to the next slot.
Consistency with effective charging time. Within each parked slot, the available charging time
is the effective duration ˆpi,d,t ∈[5/30,1]. Charging power is bounded by
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjPj ∆tyj
i,d,t ˆpi,d,t,
So even when w grows across a long stretch (e.g., in a special zone), the energy deliverable in any
individual slot remains limited by ˆpi,d,t.


--- Page 38 ---
38
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Appendix B: The value range of M in the Big-M constraints
We specify data-driven, minimal sufficient values for the Big-M constants used in (3), (8), and
(17)–(18). Throughout, the SoC bounds are those already imposed in the model, SoCmin ≤bi,d,t ≤
SoCmax .
Low-SoC indicator (M1) in (3). Constraint (3) encodes the threshold at 30% with a small ϵ > 0.
To make (3) logically equivalent to the intended rule δ30
i,d,t = 1 ⇔bi,d,t ≤0.3 and δ30
i,d,t = 0 ⇔bi,d,t ≥
0.3 + ϵ, it suffices to take
M ⋆
1 = max

SoCmax −0.3, 0.3 + ϵ −SoCmin 	
.
Waiting-time cap with abandonment (M2) in (8). Write T max
i,d,t as in (9). Within non-special zones,
the worst-case feasible waiting time over any contiguous admissible segment I ⊆SNZ
i,d is exactly its
duration |I|∆t. Define
Wmax := max
i,d
max
contiguous I⊆SNZ
i,d
(|I|∆t).
Then taking M ⋆
2 = Wmax makes (8) nonbinding whenever ai,d,t = 1; when ai,d,t = 0, it reduces to
the intended cap wi,d,t ≤T max
i,d,t . If M2 < Wmax, feasibility would be cut off, so M ⋆
2 is minimal.
Fast-charging SoC ceiling (M3) in (17)–(18). For the constraints bi,d,t ≤0.8+M3(1−yi,d,t,1) and
bi,d′,t′ ≤0.8 + M3(1 −yi,d,t,1), we require that when the fast charger is not used (yi,d,t,1 = 0) the
right-hand side be at least SoCmax. Thus the minimal sufficient choice is
M ⋆
3 = SoCmax −0.8.
Computation of Wmax and W Z
max. The longest feasible waiting time in each zone type is the
duration of the longest contiguous parked stretch. Hence we compute
Wmax = max
i,d
max
contiguous I⊆SNZ
i,d
(|I|∆t),
W Z
max = max
i,d
max
contiguous I⊆SZ
i,d
(|I|∆t).
Summary.
M ⋆
1 = max{SoCmax −0.3, 0.3 + ϵ −SoCmin },
M ⋆
2 = Wmax,
L⋆= W Z
max,
M ⋆
3 = SoCmax −0.8.
In implementation, set ϵ on the order of the solver feasibility tolerance (e.g., 10−6–10−4) and, if
desired, add a small margin of the same order to each M ⋆. When indicator constraints are available,
these Big-M forms may be replaced by indicator constraints to improve relaxation strength; we
keep the Big-M form for consistency.


--- Page 39 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
39
Appendix C: Detailed Reformulation and Proofs for Decision-Dependent Constraints
C.1. Proof of Decision-Dependent Moments
Proposition 1. Let ˆpp be a random variable with mean ˆµ and variance ˆσ2. Let y be a decision
variable determined ex-ante, and C(y) = (1−P yj
kj ) be a scalar scaling factor. The random variable
( ˆpp)′ = C(y) ˆpp has mean C(y)ˆµ and variance C(y)2ˆσ2.
Proof: In the Robust Optimization framework, the decision variable y is determined “here-and-
now,” before the uncertainty ˆpp is realized. Therefore, with respect to the probability measure P
governing ˆpp, y (and consequently C(y)) is a deterministic constant.
1. Covariance Independence: The covariance between the random parameter and the decision
variable is:
cov( ˆpp,y) = EP[( ˆpp −ˆµ)(y −y)] = EP[ ˆpp −ˆµ] · 0 = 0
(35)
Thus, there is no correlation between the realized noise and the decision variable.
2. Mean Derivation: Using the linearity of the expectation operator EP:
µ′ = EP[C(y) ˆpp] = C(y)EP[ ˆpp] = C(y)ˆµ
(36)
3. Variance Derivation: Using the property Var(aX) = a2Var(X) for any constant a:
(σ′)2 = VarP(C(y) ˆpp) = C(y)2VarP( ˆpp) = C(y)2ˆσ2
(37)
4. Correlation Unchanged: The Pearson correlation between ˆpp and ˆpp
′ remains unchanged
if they apply the same scaling factor.
γ′ =
(C(y))2 Pn
i=1( ˆppi −¯ˆ
pp)( ˆpp
′
i −¯ˆ
pp
′)
(C(y))2
qPn
i=1( ˆppi −¯ˆ
pp)2
qPn
i=1( ˆpp
′
i −¯ˆ
pp
′)2
= γ
(38)
Q.E.D.
C.2. RO-DDU reformulation
We use the RO-DDU formulation to model the charging-duration constraint based on a box-shaped
uncertainty set. Specifically, we assume that the charging power is constrained by the lower bound
of this set, defined as the cluster-level mean parking duration minus one standard deviation from
the empirical samples. For Example 1: Affine dependency on instantaneous decisions, we have
pch
i,d,t ≤
X
j∈J
ηjP j∆t

ˆµ⊺
c

1 −yj
kj

yj −

1 −yj
kj

ˆΣ
1/2
c
yj

(39)
Since the yj is a binary variable, we have
(yj)2 = yj
(40)
Then, we can obtain constraint (28), which is linear.


--- Page 40 ---
40
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
C.3. Theoretical Analysis of Efficiency Gains via Cluster-Level Aggregation
Our numerical results indicate that the cluster-level formulation yields a significantly higher average
charging power and a shorter total charging time than the instantaneous formulation. This efficiency
gain is not merely an artifact of parameter tuning but a structural property of how uncertainty
is aggregated. By treating the variance reduction from fast charging as a shared ”public” effect
within a cluster, the model creates a less conservative feasible region.
Proposition 2 (Relaxation of Robust Energy Limits). Let Finst and Fcluster denote the fea-
sible sets for the charging power pch in the instantaneous and cluster-level formulations, respectively.
Consider a specific parking slot where the solver selects a fast charger (decision variable y = 1) with
a duration reduction factor k > 1. If the associated cluster c has an aggregate fast-charging adoption
rate Y c ∈(0,1), then the robust upper bound on energy throughput in the cluster-level formulation
is strictly greater than in the instantaneous formulation.
T
he robust energy limit Emax is determined by the effective parking duration after accounting
for the safety margin required by the RO formulation.
In the Instantaneous Formulation, the duration scaling factor depends exclusively on the
binary decision y for the current slot. When y = 1, the scaling factor is Cinst = 1 −1/k. The
maximum feasible energy is:
Emax
inst = ηP∆t

1 −1
k

(ˆµc −ˆσc)
(41)
In the Cluster-Level Formulation, the scaling factor depends on the aggregate adoption rate
Y c. For the same slot where y = 1:
Emax
cluster = ηP∆t

1 −Y c
k

(ˆµc −ˆσc)
(42)
Since the adoption rate is an average over the cluster, typically Y c < 1. Given that fast charging
reduces duration (k > 1), it follows that:
Y c
k < 1
k =⇒

1 −Y c
k

>

1 −1
k

(43)
Assuming the baseline robust duration term (in square brackets) is positive—a necessary condition
for any feasible charging—we conclude:
Emax
cluster > Emax
inst
(44)
Thus, the cluster-level formulation admits a strictly larger feasible region for energy throughput.
Appendix D: Data processing
The overall information flow from the GPS data of all the year to the charger planning and
scheduling results is presented in Fig. 17. The whole procedure consists of five steps.


--- Page 41 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
41
Figure 17
Information flow from the GPS data to the charger planning and scheduling results
D.1. Detailed statistics of eight charging zones
We identified eight BEV charging zones for all trucks using GPS records, which include the latitude,
longitude, and speed of trucks at each timestamp across a year. For each truck, the algorithm
tracks its movement by converting GPS coordinates to UTM and measuring the distance between
consecutive points. Please note that we do not consider elevation changes at the mining site due
to insufficient geographic information. We grid divided the entire mining site into 100 meter × 100
meter square regions. If the truck moves less than 50 meters for longer than 5 minutes, this square
is marked as a potential stop. Each stop point is recorded with the truck ID, coordinates, and stop
duration, forming a list of candidate charging locations.
We ranked all candidate charging locations by total number of single stops over the year and
selected the top eight charging zones with the highest counts. The eight charging zones cover
98.31% of the parking time and 188 trucks of the entire fleet. A truck that does not pass any of the
eight zones is considered a high consumption vehicle. Table 10 lists the charging stop statistics of
eight charging zones. Eight zones have different parking patterns: for instance, zones 1 and 4 are
generally for overnight parking, with the average duration of a single stop exceeding 8 hours, while
zones 5-8 are for driving through, with the average duration of a single stop less than 4 hours.
D.2. Input data generation
Three kinds of inputs are generated by discretizing the time horizon into half-hour time intervals:
(1) the parking time window indication matrix to show if the truck parks at each of eight zones at
each half-hour time interval (i.e., 1 means parking and 0 means not parking at one zone), (2) the
actual parking time duration in minutes for each of eight zones ranging between 5 to 30 minutes,


--- Page 42 ---
42
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Metrics
SQ1
SQ2
SQ3
SQ4
SQ5
SQ6
SQ7
SQ8
Avg.
(total)
Number
of
single
stops
28,391 2,542 8,746 84,543 83,455 33,568 13,873 14,686
33,726
Relative to total (%)
10.41
0.93
3.21
30.99
30.60
12.31
5.09
5.38
(98.92)
Total time stopped
by
whole
fleet
of
trucks (in year)
11,675 3,716 1,418 15,258
7,624
2,451
1,305
1,110
5,569.5
Relative to total (%)
25.76
8.20
3.13
33.66
16.82
5.41
2.88
2.45
(98.31)
Average duration of
a single stop (hours)
9.9
35.1
3.9
4.3
2.2
1.8
2.3
1.8
7.6
# trucks stopping
184
154
44
193
181
164
126
130
(188)
Average
days
stopped
in
a
year
(per truck)
63.5
24.1
32.2
79.1
42.1
14.9
10.4
8.5
34.4
Average
hours
stopped
in
a
day
(hours per day)
4.2
1.6
2.1
5.2
2.8
1.0
0.7
0.6
2.3
Table 10
Traffic stop statistics of eight charging zones (SQ1: Road house, SQ2: Airfield, SQ3: Infrastructure,
SQ4: Equipment maintenance, SQ5: Plant crusher, SQ6: West facility, SQ7: North facility, SQ8: East facility)
and (3) energy consumptions of each truck based on the temperature-dependent fuel-economy for
light-duty trucks. Fig. 18 shows (a) the parking time distribution of 189 trucks at Charging Zone
6 in the selected 39 days and (b) the histogram shows parking durations ranging from 5 to 30
minutes.
Figure 18
(a) Parking time distribution of 189 trucks at Charging Zone 6 in the selected 39 days and (b) The
histogram shows parking durations ranging from 5 to 30 minutes.
D.2.1. Temperature-dependent fuel-economy for light-duty trucks
For each truck’s half-
hour energy consumption, we calculate its travel distance (in miles) based on the coordination.
Then, we convert these distances to energy consumption (in kWh) for each half-hour time window.


--- Page 43 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
43
We use a second-order, temperature-dependent fuel economy estimation model of U.S. electric
trucks while moving Goodall & Robartes (2024). The fitting curve is presented as follows.
y = 6.602 × 10−5x2 −8.929 × 10−3x + 7.745 × 10−1
x ∈[20,100]
(45)
where y is the fuel economy in kWh/mile, and x is the outdoor temperature in F. The hourly
temperature data of the mining site is taken from Staffell & Pfenninger (2016). Fig. 19 shows the
hourly temperature and the corresponding fuel economy across the year. Noted, we converted miles
into kilometers in the plot.
Figure 19
The outdoor temperature (F) and corresponding temperature-dependent fuel economy (kWh/mile)
across the year at the mining site
D.2.2. Selecting the representative days from the full-year datasets
The 39 represen-
tative days based on ten criteria are listed in Table 11. We ranked 365 days based on these ten
criteria, and the top or bottom indicates the direction how these days get selected. We selected the
39 days listed in Table 12. To maintain continuity in the truck-travel data, the days immediately
adjacent to these top-ranked dates are also included. Additionally, the first and last two days of
the whole year are incorporated to ensure completeness of the selected dataset.


--- Page 44 ---
44
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Table 11
10 criterion for representative days
No. Criteria Description
Ranking from First day
1
Total fleet distance
Top
2023-12-14
2
# of moving trucks
Top
2023-12-05
3
Average distance per moving truck
Top
2023-01-07
4
# of individual trucks > 296 km
Top
2023-06-16
5
Total fleet energy consumption (EC)
Top
2023-12-14
6
# of consuming trucks
Top
2023-11-21
7
Average EC per consuming truck
Top
2023-01-07
8
# of individual trucks with EC > 75 kWh
Top
2023-03-05
9
Total stopping hours (whole fleet) in any area
Bottom
2023-12-31
10
# of trucks stopped in any area along the day
Bottom
2023-01-08
Table 12
The 39-day summary by ten criteria
From
To
Number of days Criteria
2023-01-01 2023-01-02
2
Initial padding
2023-01-05 2023-01-10
6
criteria 3, 7, 10
2023-03-03 2023-03-07
5
criteria 8
2023-06-14 2023-06-18
5
criteria 4
2023-11-19 2023-11-23
5
criteria 6
2023-12-03 2023-12-07
5
criteria 2
2023-12-12 2023-12-19
8
criteria 1, 5
2023-12-29 2023-12-31
3
criteria 9
total
39
Appendix E: ML clustering for the charging duration
We begin by assembling features for clustering parking durations, incorporating both contextual
attributes (fleet groups) and numerical variables (half-hour of day, day-of-month, day-of-week, and
zone). The descriptions of full clustering features are presented in Table 13, and Fig. 20 shows
the correlation between these features and parking duration. The green bars represent the selected
features and the gray ones represent the discarded one.
Table 13
The descriptions of full clustering features
Features Numerical / Contextual values
Zones 1, 2, 3..., 8
Fleet groups
Support, Rail, Tech Services,
Uncategorized, Mobile Equipment,
Fixed Plant, Production,
Drill and Blast
Truck ID 200 truck IDs
Half Hour of a day 1, 2,...., 48
Day of Month 1, 2,..., 31
Day of Week 1, 2,..., 7


--- Page 45 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
45
Figure 20
The correlation of the full and selected features (The green bars represent the selected features and
the gray ones represent the discarded ones)
Here, we compared three clustering methods and show that clustering by truck categories per-
forms best.
• K-means: Cluster the charging duration into ten groups based on the k-means method, and
the number of clusters is determined by the silhouette score.
• Hierarchical clustering with truck category: With the truck category information, the
hierarchy clustering yields three subgroups per category, and yields a total number of 24 subgroups.
• Hierarchical clustering without truck category: Without using the category information,
the 200 trucks of the entire fleet are divided into 10 sub-groups by the hierarchical clustering, and
each group has an average of 10 trucks.
• Each truck as a cluster: Without using the category information and hierarchy clustering,
each truck is treated as an individual group as the baseline.
In total, there are 2,669,982 parking duration records throughout the year. We report the number
of clusters obtained under each scenario as well as the theoretical numbers of clusters under four
scenarios. Noted, the actual number of cluster are less than the theoretical numbers because some
hour-zone combinations do not have records (i.e., trucks do not visit the zone at the hour). We
assessed the clustering quality using a cluster-size-weighted Coefficient of Variation (CV). For each
cluster, the CV is defined as the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. An overall clustering
quality metric is then computed as the cluster-size-weighted average of the CV across all clusters.
This metric is introduced to quantify within-cluster heterogeneity. Since samples within each cluster
are treated as i.i.d., lower within-cluster heterogeneity indicates better clustering performance.


--- Page 46 ---
46
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Accordingly, a smaller weighted-average CV indicates higher clustering quality. In terms of charging
infrastructure planning, the size of the feature-based robust uncertainty set is defined as ∆p = ±σ.
Low-quality clustering will lead to overly conservative results with large uncertainty sets. Table 14
summarizes the number of clusters and the weighted CV (%) using four methods.
Cases
Names
# of clusters
Theoretical no.
Average no.
of trucks
Average no.
of samples
Weighted
CV (%)
1
K-means
10
-
266,998
22.00
2
Hierarchical clustering
w/ truck category
7,280 [9,216]
7.8
366
5.01
3
Hierarchical clustering
w/o truck category
3,804 [3,804]
18.8
701
19.68
4
Each truck as a cluster
42,251 [72,576]
-
63
4.24
Table 14
The number of clusters and the weighted CV (%) of four methods
We found that methods 2 and 4, hierarchical clustering with truck categories and each truck
as a cluster, perform best in terms of the weighted CV. However, treating each truck as a cluster
will yield only a few samples per cluster, which could be affected by outliers. We therefore use
the second method. Figs.21 and 22 show the hierarchical clustering process for one of the truck
categories (Method 2) and for all trucks (Method 3), respectively.
Figure 21
Average parking duration heatmap for all trucks within the rail services, constructed using rearranged
zone–hour features. The heatmap displays only the first 10 hours for each of the eight zones, with zone
boundaries indicated by black dashed lines. The hierarchical clustering dendrogram, based on feature
distances, is shown on the left.


--- Page 47 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
47
Figure 22
Average parking duration heatmap for all trucks, constructed using rearranged zone–hour features.
The color bars on the very left indicate truck categories.
Appendix F: Additional results of four deterministic cases
This section presents the detailed optimization result of four deterministic cases: Case 1 (Bench-
mark), Case 2 (Full parking duration), Case 3 (No special zones), and Case 4 (No range anxiety).
Figs. 23, 25, 27, and 29 present the aggregated charging results of eight zones for four cases, and
Figs. 24, 26, 28, and 30 present the individual charging results of 188 trucks at eight charging
zones.


--- Page 48 ---
48
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Figure 23
The aggregated charging results of eight zones for case 1 benchmark: (a) The total hours of parking,
charging, and abandonment during 39 representative days; (b) The average charging power for each
zone during 39 representative days and (c) the total charged energy for each zone during 39 represen-
tative days


--- Page 49 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
49
Figure 24
The individual charging schedules of 188 trucks across eight charging zones, arranged from left to right
and top to bottom, in the Case 1 benchmark


--- Page 50 ---
50
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Figure 25
The aggregated charging results of eight zones for case 2 full parking duration: (a) The total hours of
parking, charging, and abandonment during 39 representative days; (b) The average charging power
for each zone during 39 representative days and (c) the total charged energy for each zone during 39
representative days


--- Page 51 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
51
Figure 26
The individual charging scheduling of 188 trucks at eight charging zones, arranged from left to right
and top to bottom, in Case 2 full parking duration


--- Page 52 ---
52
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Figure 27
The aggregated charging results of eight zones for case 3, no special zones: (a) The total hours of
parking, charging, and abandonment during 39 representative days; (b) The average charging power
for each zone during 39 representative days and (c) the total charged energy for each zone during 39
representative days


--- Page 53 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
53
Figure 28
The individual charging scheduling of 188 trucks at eight charging zones, arranged from left to right
and top to bottom, in Case 3 no special zones


--- Page 54 ---
54
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Figure 29
The aggregated charging results of eight zones for case 4, no range anxiety: (a) The total hours of
parking, charging, and abandonment of each zone during 39 representative days; (b) The average
charging power for each zone during 39 representative days and (c) the total charged energy for each
zone during 39 representative days


--- Page 55 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
55
Figure 30
The individual charging scheduling of 188 trucks at eight charging zones, arranged from left to right
and top to bottom, in Case 4 no range anxiety


--- Page 56 ---
56
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
Appendix G: The detailed procedure of the fix-and-optimize algorithm
This section presents the detailed iteration procedures using the fix-and-optimize algorithm. Figs.
31 and 33 present changes to the enforced fast-charging constraints and the resulting solving time
for the 39-day instance. Figs. 32 and 34 present the evolutions of the number of slow and fast
chargers in each iteration.
Figure 31
The number of fast-charging constraints incorporated into the scheduling during each iteration and
the corresponding solving time for the 39-day instance after applying the constraints with a warm
start under the setting ∆c = ±2σ without DDU
Figure 32
Evolution of the number of slow and fast chargers in each iteration under the setting ∆c = ±2σ without
DDU


--- Page 57 ---
Author: Decision-dependent Robust Charging Infrastructure Planning
57
Figure 33
The number of fast-charging constraints incorporated into the scheduling during each iteration and
the corresponding solving time for the 39-day instance after applying the constraints with a warm
start under the setting of ∆c = ±2σ with DDU (Expect formulation)
Figure 34
Evolution of the number of slow and fast chargers in each iteration under the setting of ∆c = ±2σ
with DDU (Expect formulation)
After obtaining the charger planning results in the final iteration, we post-processed the results
by discarding the fast charger results greater than 2, and the rest of fast-charging installation
results are taken as hard constraints.
