--- Page 1 ---
Nodal Capacity Expansion Planning with Flexible
Large-Scale Load Siting
Tomas Valencia Zuluaga
Jean-Paul Watson
Center for Applied Scientific Computing
Cyber & Infrastructure Resilience
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA, USA
{tvalenciaz, watson61}@llnl.gov
Simon Pang
Materials Science Division
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA, USA
pang6@llnl.gov
Abstract—We propose explicitly incorporating large-scale load
siting into a stochastic nodal power system capacity expan-
sion planning model that concurrently co-optimizes generation,
transmission and storage expansion. The potential operational
flexibility of some of these large loads is also taken into account by
considering them as consisting of a set of tranches with different
reliability requirements, which are modeled as a constraint
on expected served energy across operational scenarios. We
implement our model as a two-stage stochastic mixed-integer
optimization problem with cross-scenario expectation constraints.
To overcome the challenge of scalability, we build upon existing
work to implement this model on a high performance computing
platform and exploit scenario parallelization using an augmented
Progressive Hedging Algorithm. The algorithm is implemented
using the bounding features of mpisppy, which have shown to
provide satisfactory provable optimality gaps despite the absence
of theoretical guarantees of convergence. We test our approach
to assess the value of this proactive planning framework on
total system cost and reliability metrics using realistic testcases
geographically assigned to San Diego and South Carolina, with
datacenter and direct air capture facilities as large loads.
Index Terms—Capacity Expansion Planning, Decomposition,
Mixed-Integer Programming, Stochastic Optimization, Large
Load Siting.
I. INTRODUCTION
For over a decade, the electricity grid has been undergoing
a transformation driven by the penetration of renewable,
intermittent, and decentralized generation. While we continue
to address the security and reliability difficulties posed by
this transformation, the proliferation of large-scale electricity
consumers, driven for example by datacenters as well as
proposed direct air carbon capture (DAC) facilities, is further
complicating an already taxing environment for grid planning
and is a topic of increasing interest across academia, industry
and policy makers [1], [2], [3].
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of
Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-
AC52-07NA27344 and was funded by LDRD project 25-SI-007. We thank
Gurobi for providing the academic license used to obtain the results provided
in this work.
In conventional planning methodologies, and consequently
in existing Capacity Expansion Planning (CEP) software tools,
it is customary to consider electricity load as a planning
parameter, over which the planner has no control. The scale
of the foreseen large-load increases challenges this view and
pushes planners to take a more proactive role, seeking to
influence load siting decisions as well as the possible co-
location of on-site generation in addition to grid investments
in generation, storage, and transmission. This approach takes
advantage of the fact that subject to some constraints like
access to low-latency areas for datacenters and geological
suitability for carbon capture facilities, siting decisions can
have a significant degree of flexibility. Such a framework
requires updated software tools that can handle this new
reality.
Besides siting flexibility, large loads can also provide value
to the grid through operational flexibility. Demand Response
(DR) programs exemplify this fact. CEP models that include
expansion of DR as a decision variable have been proposed [4],
but to the best of our knowledge, only in an aggregated zonal
system, not as a nodal siting decision at the scale proposed
here. The model we propose is a reliability-constrained CEP
model, which is an active topic of research. In [5] a zonal
CEP model is proposed where reliability is formulated as an
expectation constraint across operational scenarios, which is
then dualized to enable scenario decomposition, in the same
vein of the method we propose here. This is only done for
a single system-wide constraint instead of separately for each
tranche of large load in the system like we do in this work.
The idea of breaking load into tranches with differentiated
reliability is well-known, and is implemented routinely at
the consumer level through various mechanisms, including
physically separated circuits (like in hospitals) and smart
devices like controllable thermostats. Although we do not go
into the details of ground-level implementation, the framework
we propose here is inspired by the same concept.
It has been found that improving the spatial resolution of
CEP models improves the quality of the investment plans
obtained [6]. While computational challenges continue to
exist, prior work has shown that High Performance Computing
arXiv:2510.19781v1  [math.OC]  22 Oct 2025


--- Page 2 ---
platforms can allow increasing both the number of operational
scenarios and the spatial resolution of the power system
considered while maintaining computational tractability [7].
In this paper, we address the challenges mentioned above by
proposing a nodal power grid expansion planning model that
explicitly considers sizing and siting large loads as part of the
CEP co-optimization model, and considers their operational
flexibility. The concrete contributions of our work are listed
below.
Contributions:
• We introduce a two-stage mixed-integer stochastic opti-
mization model for capacity expansion planning that ex-
plicitly considers large loads, like DAC and datacenters,
part of the planning process, in addition to co-optimizing
generation, transmission and storage expansion.
• We propose a framework to represent the flexibility that
large consumers can provide to the grid by breaking each
large load into reliability tranches and adding expectation
constraints to guarantee that the model captures both the
limitations and the incentives of utilizing flexible large-
load resources.
• We develop an augmented Progressive Hedging Algo-
rithm to decompose the expectation constraints added
so that a scenario decomposition can be implemented
in a parallel computing cluster, and implement it with
mpisppy.
• We illustrate through examples the value and promise of
our model and solution technique.
Structure of this paper: Section II provides a description
of the base CEP model and the modifications proposed to
explicitly incorporate large load siting. Section III describes
the solution methodology adopted to decompose the problem
by scenario and corresponding solution in a parallel computing
platform. Section IV presents and discusses some numerical
tests performed; we close with some remarks in Section V.
II. MODEL
A. Base model
The basis for our CEP model is that of [8], [7]. It consists of
a two-stage stochastic program that co-optimizes generation,
transmission, and storage investments in the first stage and
solves a multi-period optimal operation problem in the second
stage. Second-stage suproblems, i.e., representative days, differ
from each other in the hourly nodal demand and generation
availability. This general framework is not uncommon in the
literature of CEP [9], [10], [5].
Inverter-based generation and storage investments are mod-
eled as continuous variables, turbine-based generation invest-
ments as integer variables (number of installed units), and
transmission investments as binary variables. All investment
costs are assumed to be linear in the size of the installed
capacity. Storage levels are assumed to be cyclic. See [8] for
a detailed discussion of the base model.
Next we provide a full, but compact description of the ex-
isting model with the minor changes made to incorporate load
siting. In sections II-B and II-C we present more significant
model extensions to handle the flexibility of these resources.
A full list of the symbols used in this model is provided in
Appendix A.
Objective: The objective is to minimize the total cost of
expanding, maintaining, and operating the system, which we
break into an investment cost Cinv and an expected operation
cost Eζ

Cop
ω

. The random variable ζ is used to represent in
compact form all scenario-dependent data.
Cinv =
X
ℓ∈L⋆
CLf
ℓ
xL
ℓ+
+
X
b∈B

X
g∈G
CGf
g P G
g xG
b,g +
X
s∈S
CSf
s xS
b,s +
X
d∈D
CDf
s
xD
b,d


(1a)
Eζ [Cop
ω ] =
X
ω∈Ω
πωCop
ω =
X
ω∈Ω
 
πω · 365
X
t∈T
X
b∈B
τ ·
"
Cshpsh
b,t,ω+
+
X
g∈G
CGv
g pG
b,g,t,ω +
X
s∈S
CSv
s pS-dch
b,s,t,ω +
X
d∈D
CDv
d pD
b,d,t,ω




(1b)
The operation cost during each representative horizon ω is
multiplied by 365 so that all costs are in $/year.
Decision variables:
a) Investment variables: The domains of the investment
variables are those of (2). For large-scale loads, we only
consider the case where investment variables must be integer
multiples of a unit size. The model could easily be extended
to also consider continuous load types.
xG
b,g ∈Z+ ∀b ∈B, ∀g ∈GZ
(2a)
xG
b,g ∈R+ ∀b ∈B, ∀g ∈GR
(2b)
xS
b,s ∈R+ ∀b ∈B, ∀s ∈S
(2c)
xD
b,d ∈Z+ ∀b ∈B, ∀d ∈D
(2d)
xL
ℓ∈{0, 1} ∀ℓ∈L⋆
(2e)
b) Operation variables: All operation variables are con-
tinuous (we do not include unit commitment or ramping in the
second-stage problem). All operation variables except branch
flows are non-negative.
Constraints:
c) Construction constraints: We consider construction
limits for new generation and storage resources. Limits are
considered for each generation, storage, and load type at each
bus (3). Limits across buses or types were omitted here but
can easily be added to the model.


--- Page 3 ---
P G
g xG
b,g + XG
b,g ≤KBG
b,g ∀b ∈B, g ∈G
(3a)
xS
b,s + XS
b,s ≤KBS
b,s ∀b ∈B, s ∈S
(3b)
xD
b,d ≤KBD
b,d ∀b ∈B, d ∈D
(3c)
d) Physical limits of generation and storage: The output
of each generator cannot exceed the available power, which
is dictated by the installed capacity and the availability of
intermittent resources (4a). Similarly, the charge and discharge
of storage facilities cannot exceed the installed power conver-
sion capacity (4b),(4c), and the availability of storage must be
respected (4d).
∀b ∈B, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω:
pG
b,g,t,ω ≤αb,g,t,ω

XG
b,g + P G
g xG
b,g

∀g ∈G
(4a)
pS-ch
b,s,t,ω ≤xS
b,s + XS
b,s ∀s ∈S
(4b)
pS-dch
b,s,t,ω ≤xS
b,s + XS
b,s ∀s ∈S
(4c)
pS
b,s,t,ω ≤U S
s
 xS
b,s + XS
b,s

∀s ∈S
(4d)
e) Energy storage: The change in energy storage level
at each facility is driven by its charge and discharge (5a).
To avoid end-of-horizon effects, we use the last period of the
horizon as the initial storage state (5b). A constraint to impede
simultaneous charging and discharging is omitted, as found to
be unnecessary in previous work [10], [7].
∀b ∈B, s ∈S, ω ∈Ω, t ∈T \ {|T|} :
pS
b,s,t,ω = pS
b,s,t−1,ω + τ
 ηS-ch
s
pS-ch
b,s,t,ω −pS-dch
b,s,t,ω

(5a)
pS
b,s,0,ω = pS
b,s,|T |−1,ω + τ
 ηS-ch
s
pS-ch
b,s,t,ω −pS-dch
b,s,t,ω

(5b)
f) Load shedding: Shedded load cannot exceed demand
(6). Note this excludes the large loads that are part of the
planning process.
psh
b,t,ω ≤Db,t,ω ∀b ∈B, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(6)
g) Power balance and power flow: We consider the
standard bθ formulation of power flow (7a), with its corre-
sponding big-M version for candidate transmission lines (7b).
The energy balance is ensured at each individual bus (8).
fℓ,t,ω = bℓ(θo(ℓ) −θd(ℓ)) ∀ℓ∈L†, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(7a)
−M(1 −xL
ℓ) ≤fℓ,t,ω −bℓ(θo(ℓ) −θd(ℓ))
≤M(1 −xL
ℓ) ∀ℓ∈L⋆, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(7b)
∀b ∈B, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω:
X
g∈G
pG
b,g,t,ω +
X
s∈S
 ηS-dch
s
pS-dch
b,s,t,ω −pS-ch
b,s,t,ω

−
X
ℓ∈L:o(ℓ)=b
fℓ,t,ω +
X
ℓ∈L◦:d(ℓ)=b
fℓ,t,ω
+ psh
b,t,ω −
X
d∈D
pD
b,d,t,ω = Db,t,ω
(8)
h) Transmission limits: Limits for existing branches are
enforced by (9a), while (9b) ensures them for built branches,
as well as that unbuilt branches have no flow.
−Fℓ≤fℓ,t,ω ≤Fℓ∀ℓ∈L†, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(9a)
−FℓxL
ℓ≤fℓ,t,ω ≤FℓxL
ℓ∀ℓ∈L⋆, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(9b)
B. Incorporating flexibility of large loads
Large loads that are included in the planning process are
assumed to be composed of tiers with different reliability
requirements. Each tier is defined by the fraction of total
demand that it encompasses and its required reliability level,
expressed as the expected capacity factor it must have. The
scheme adopted to represent this is illustrated in Figure 1.
Each tier k = 1, 2, . . . , |K| is defined by a pair (uk, ϕk), with
uk, ϕk ∈[0, 1]. Tier k consists of a fraction uk −uk−1 (with
u0 = 0) of the total installed capacity and must be served with
a capacity factor of at least ϕk.
Fig. 1.
Approach used to represent flexibility of large loads. Loads are
assumed to be composed of tiers k = 1, . . . , |K|, with tier k consisting
of a fraction uk −uk−1 of total load, and requiring expected service of at
least ϕk.
Without loss of generality, we may sort the tiers by level of
reliability and impose that ϕk be non-increasing. Note we must
also have u|K| = 1. Two special single-tier cases of worth are
a completely inflexible load, given by (u1, ϕ1) = (1, 1) and
a fully flexible load, given by (u1, ϕ1) = (1, 0). Finally, note
that for simplicity we consider that all load types have the
same number of tiers |K|. This is without loss of generality
since we can always add dummy tiers (0, 1) to any load type.


--- Page 4 ---
a) Flexibility tier constraints: Consistency of flexibility
tiers is ensured by (10) and (11), while (12) ensures that the
required reliability is respected.
∀b ∈B, d ∈D :
pDK
b,d,k,t,ω ≤ud,kxD
b,d , ∀k ∈K, t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(10)
X
k∈K
pDK
b,d,k,t,ω = pD
b,d,t,ω , t ∈T , ω ∈Ω
(11)
X
ω∈Ω
πω
X
t∈T
τ · pDK
b,d,k,t,ω ≥ϕd,kud,k |T | xD
b,d
(12)
C. Incentivizing construction and operation of large loads
Note that because the objective is cost minimization, it
would be trivially optimal to not build any large loads and
thus avoid the associated costs unless the model includes some
incentive for their construction and operation. We discuss next
different ways in which that can be addressed here.
1) Mandated expansion: Perhaps the most direct and obvi-
ous way of incentivizing construction is by mandating it via a
constraint like (13) below. This could be the case when system-
wide expansion plans already exist, which could come from
emissions policy in the case of DAC facilities, or expansion
plans of private developers in the case of datacenters.
X
b∈B
xD
b,d ≥Md∀d ∈D
(13)
Note that if the type in question is fully inflexible, i.e.
(ud,1, ϕd,1) = (1, 1), this mandate also provides a sufficient
incentive for serving the load sites built.
2) Incentive to produce output:
For flexible types, an
additional incentive must be given to utilize flexible resources;
otherwise, it would be trivially optimal to only utilize each tier
to its minimum service level required.
a) Via expectation constraints: We can provide such an
incentive via expectation constraints imposing some bound on
the output of those large loads, which could take the form of
constraint (14).
X
ω∈Ω
πω
 q · pG + r · pD
≤E
(14)
The interpretation of vectors q and r, and scalar E, differs
depending on the type of load. For the case of carbon capture,
q could encode emission factors for each generation type, and
r could encode capture factors for each DAC type, so that
E would represent a net emissions target that may be set by
policy. For the case of datacenters, q = 0 and r < 0 encodes
how consumed energy translates to a metric of interest, with
E < 0 and −E being the minimum threshold for that metric,
for example server availability, or total training core-hours of
AI models.
Note that if the threshold E for the metric of interest has
a non-trivial value (not 0), an expectation constraint in the
style of (14) also provides an incentive for expansion, so that
a mandate would be unnecessary.
b) Via negative costs: It is also possible to incentivize
the utilization of flexible resources by encoding the economic
value of their output into the objective, by substracting some
reward term rd it from its variable cost, such that −rd+CDv
d
<
0. Presumably, the resulting value of rd −CDv
d
would be in
an intermediate range among the levelized cost of energy of
the different generation types considered for expansion. Oth-
erwise, the solution would trivially be to always or never serve
that load type. In our experience, even in this case, having a net
negative cost with a free sizing decision xD
d leads to extreme
solutions where load sites and generation capacity are built to
their allowed maximum. This is a consequence of our simple
linear model not taking into account the diminishing economic
returns of the output pD
d .
While this could be addressed by considering a piecewise
linear reward instead of a single-block rd, we consider that
case out of the scope of this paper. Instead, we limit models
where costs are made negative to cases where we only have
a load siting (not sizing) problem, i.e., when constraint (13)
takes an equality form.
III. SOLUTION APPROACH
For instances of moderate size, the mixed-integer linear
program described above can be solved in Extensive Form
(EF). This is, however not a scalable approach as the size
of the problem increases in number of scenarios and/or power
system size.
(EF) : min (1)
s.t. (2) −(14)
A. Relaxing expectation constraints
Large instances will necessitate decomposition, so the ex-
pectation constraints introduced need to be reformulated. As
is standard practice, we will dualize these constraints. Let C
be the union set of all expectation constraints defined in (12)
and (14), indexed by c. We write each constraint c ∈C in
the form (15), then introduce a slack variable σc,ω given by
(16) and associate a Lagrangian multiplier λc ≥0 with it. We
use here abstract symbols x and yω to refer to the vectors of
all first-stage and second-stage variables respectively, and ec,
fc and hc to refer to a scalar and vectors of coefficients of
appropriate size.
X
ω∈Ω
πω (fc · x + hc · yω) ≥ec
(15)
σc,ω = ec −fc · x + hc · yω
(16)
Doing this allows introducing the Lagrangian relaxation of
(EF), which we call (LR)(λ).
(LR)(λ) : min (1) +
X
ω∈Ω
πω
X
c∈C
λcσc,ω
s.t. (2) −(11)


--- Page 5 ---
Through standard duality arguments, we can conclude that
(LR)(λ) provides a lower bound of (EF). Moreover, if
strong duality holds, the optimal solution of (EF) can be
obtained by solving the dual problem maxλ≥0 LR(λ). Note
that in general, problem (EF) might not be feasible. Relaxing
and dualizing the constraints in the manner exposed here
also ensures feasibility, which is convenient for computational
implementations.
B. Decomposition approach for large instances
By construction, the second-stage variables in (LR) are
no longer coupled across scenarios other than by the non-
anticipativity of first-stage variables x. This methodology can
thus be combined with existing decomposition techniques for
two-stage stochastic optimization programs, like the Progres-
sive Hedging Algorithm (PHA).
Recall that in the PHA, a copy of each first-stage variable
is created for each scenario, and an equality constraint making
all copies equal to each other is relaxed and dualized. In
addition to the conventional Lagrangian term added to the
objective, a so-called proximal term is added, resulting in
problem (PHA)ω for each scenario ω ∈Ω. A more detailed
description of the PHA is considered out of the scope of this
paper. We refer the interested reader for example to [11], [12].
(PHA)ω(λ) : min πω ·
 
Cinv + Cop
ω +
X
c∈C
λcσc,ω
+w · xω + ρ (xω −x)2
s.t. (2) −(11) for ω only
We propose to solve our problem via the augmented PHA
described below.
1: Initialize w0
ω ←0 ∀ω, λc ←λ0
c∀c ∈C , k ←0, choose
ρ, β > 0
2: repeat
3:
for each scenario ω do
4:
Solve scenario subproblem (PHA)ωto get xk+1
ω
:
5:
xk+1
ω
= arg minxω∈Xω

Cinv + Cop
ω
6:
wk
ωxω + ρ
2∥xω −¯xk∥2
7:
+ P
c∈C λk
cσc,ω
	
8:
end for
9:
Update avg: ¯xk+1 = P
ω πωxk+1
ω
10:
for each scenario ω do
11:
Update multipliers: wk+1
ω
= wk
ω + ρ(xk+1
ω
−¯xk+1)
12:
end for
13:
for each expectation constraint c ∈C do
14:
Update avg: ¯σk+1
c
= P
ω πωσk+1
c,ω ∀c ∈C
15:
Update multipliers: λk+1
c
= λk
c + β ¯σc
16:
end for
17:
k ←k + 1
18: until convergence criterion
About convergence guarantees: In the convex case, standard
strong duality arguments can be used to guarantee convergence
of the algorithm for an adequate choice of the step sizes β
and ρ (see for example [5], [13]). Because of the presence of
integers and binaries in the first-stage variables, our problem
is not convex and thus neither convergence nor optimality
at convergence are guaranteed. Consequently, this augmented
PHA is, as the original PHA itself, only a heuristic technique
on our non-convex case. However, it can be a satisfactory
heuristic if methods are leveraged to obtain valid upper and
lower bounds that provide quality guarantees of the solution
obtained.
1) Implementation in mpisppy: We implement our model
in Pyomo, and use mpisppy to run the PHA utilizing parallel
computing for the different scenario subproblems. The mp-
isppy package [14], [15] allows implementation in a parallel
computing cluster with minimal effort, as it takes care of the
necessary communication within the computing cluster during
the PHA update steps. To implement the subgradient update
feature that we describe here, we implement an mpisppy
“Extension” to handle communication between the different
compute nodes so that the update steps can be performed.
a) Obtaining upper and lower bounds on the solution:
A key feature of mpisppy is its ability to provide quality
guarantees during the execution of the algorithm. The package
allows dedicating certain groups of computing nodes, referred
to as spokes, to obtaining lower and upper bounds simultane-
ously as the PHA executes. Lower bounds may be obtained
by solving relaxations of the problem, while upper bounds are
obtained by testing feasible candidates. We refer the interested
reader to our previous work [7] for more details about the
implementation of a CEP model in a parallel computing cluster
using mpisppy.
b) Obtaining lower bounds: Note that for the model
proposed here, the values of λ and/or ¯σ need to be communi-
cated to the bounder spokes. Custom versions of the mpisppy
Lagrangian and reduced costs spokes [15] were developed for
this purpose.
c) Obtaining upper bounds: In the conventional PHA,
obtaining an upper bound consists in evaluating all second-
stage subproblems for a candidate first-stage solution. In mp-
isppy, this is done by fixing the values of all non-anticipative
variables to that of the evaluated candidate and solving the
resulting second-stage subproblems (possibly in parallel). To
facilitate evaluating upper bounds before the values of the
dual multipliers have stabilized, we write another mpisppy
“Extension” to fix the values of all first-stage variables but
continue iterating on the values of λ for a number of extra
iterations. Note that in general, as discussed above, it is not
guaranteed that for any given first-stage solution, all expecta-
tion constraints can be satisfied, i.e. we don’t necessarily have
complete recourse. Once the values of first-stage variables
is fixed, the resulting problem is an LP, and thus convexity
guarantees stabilization of the values of λ. However, it is not
guaranteed that this stabilization induces ¯σc = 0 ∀c ∈C.


--- Page 6 ---
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We illustrate the value of the approach proposed here with
a few numerical tests that we describe and discuss in this
section.
A. Test cases
We implement our tests on two sandbox systems: the
standard IEEE 24-bus test case, overlayed onto the San Diego
area, and the ACTIVSg 500-bus South Carolina test case [16].
Both systems were extended with capacity expansion tech-
noeconomic data and timeseries of load and generation avail-
ability downscaled from earth system models as in [8]. Some
details of these test systems are reported in [17] and will
be available in a separate publication in preparation at the
time of writing. We consider two types of large-scale loads
that are included in the expansion plan: “datacenter” and
“DAC”. Table I summarizes the characteristics of the types
considered. We conduct our tests on 12 operational scenarios
with different demand and generation availability. These are
sandbox testcases that are intended to represent a reasonable
power system, but not necessarily a real one.
TABLE I
CHARACTERISTICS OF LARGE-SCALE LOADS CONSIDERED IN TESTS.
Type
Unit Size
Utilization Incentive
Flexibility
DAC
100
ktCO2/y
• Net zero CO2
emissions
• 2MWh/tCO2
captured
Inflexible; Full-flex;
Mid-flex:
u = (0.5, 0.75, 1),
ϕ = (1, 0.5, 0)
Data-
center
800MW
• Mandated
datacenter target
• Economic value:
CDv
d
= −4$/MWh
Mid-flex:
u = (0.5, 0.9, 1),
ϕ = (1, 0.85, 0)
B. Experiments
We first conduct a series of runs solving the problem
in Extensive Form (EF) on the 24-bus instances, to better
illustrate the value of explicitly modeling the flexibility of
large loads as proposed in this paper. A handful of test cases
are proposed to illustrate the features included in this model,
in two groups. Test cases Ia, Ib, and Ic assume a net zero
emissions target with different assumptions of flexibility for
DAC facilities. Test cases IIa, IIb and IIc take Ia as base
case and assume one 800MW datacenter must be built. Case
IIc includes the datacenter siting problem with a set of 5
candidate sites with potential co-sited natural gas generation.
Case IIa assumes that the new datacenter is added after the
planning process is over, so it assumes the same buildout of
case Ic and adds one datacenter at the bus selected in case
IIc. Case IIb does the same but also adds one natural gas
generator co-located with the new datacenter. A summary of
the experiments presented here is shown in Table II.
To test the decomposition approach, we also implement in-
stances Ia, Ib, Ic and IIc on both test case systems and compare
the performance of the EF and decomposition approaches.
TABLE II
SUMMARY OF ILLUSTRATIVE TESTS CONDUCTED
Test
Load type
Description
Ia
DAC
Inflexible
Ib
DAC
Mid-flexible
Ic
DAC
Fully flexible
IIa
DAC+DatCent
No extra planning, 1 datacenter
IIb
DAC+DatCent
Co-sited generation; 1 datacenter
IIc
DAC+DatCent
Proactive planning; 1 datacenter
C. Results
Fig. 2 shows the obtained buildout and costs for the experi-
ments described above. Because of space limitations, only the
results of the 24 bus test case are shown here. In all cases,
both the EF and decomposition approaches return feasible
solutions, i.e. the emissions target and reliability requirements
are all satisfied. Note that despite the lack of a DAC mandate,
the zero emissions expectation constraints indeed incentivizes
construction of DAC facilities. An additional test case, not
reported in these Figures, defined a 75% CO2 emissions
reduction target. The model chose to decarbonize generation,
meeting the target without resorting to DAC construction,
which is in line with previous studies [18]. Note that in the
test cases Ia-Ic proposed, the cases with increased flexibility
are relaxations of the less flexible cases and should thus have
lower costs. This is indeed what is found (Fig. 2, Right).
The buildout provides some insight into how these savings
occur: as large loads become more flexible, the system can
afford to install less new storage and natural gas generators.
In addition to requiring more generation, a new datacenter
also necessitates a significant amount of new transmission with
respect to the other cases.
Fig. 3 shows the results of the experiments with datacenter
deployment with different levels of integration with the plan-
ning process. We observe two key insights in these results.
First, failing to adequately expand the grid for the addition of
such a significant load can lead to production costs orders of
magnitude higher (Fig. 3, Left) and to not being able to provide
the reliability these facilicies require (Fig. 3, Right). Co-siting
of generation can alleviate the reliability issue, but can come
at the expense of higher operational costs and compromise
reaching the emission goals set.
Admittedly, these are sandbox systems with a limited num-
ber of scenarios, but we believe these results provide support
for continuing to develop planning tools that incorporate large
loads, and pay particular attention to modeling their flexibility.
Performance of the decomposition approach: All tests were
conducted on the dane cluster at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. We use Gurobi to solve each MILP subproblem.
For 24-bus test cases, we used 3 compute nodes and a time
limit of 30 minutes; for 500-bus test cases, 4 compute nodes
and a time limit of 5 hours. Table III provides a summary of the
computational results of the decomposition approach proposed


--- Page 7 ---
Ia
Ib
Ic
IIc
T
est case
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Gen, Storage, T
ransmission buildout
 (MW)
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Large load buildout (MW)
Buildout legend
Wind
Nat Gas
Solar PV
Storage
T
ransmission
DAC
DatCnt
Cost & Emissions legend
Investment cost
Production cost
DAC Invest. cost
DAC Prod. cost
Gen emissions
CO2 Captured
Emissions T
arget
Ia
Ib
Ic
IIc
T
est case
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Costs (M$/year)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Emissions (MtCO2/y)
Fig. 2. Left: Resource buildout for each test case. Case IIa has by construction the same buildout as Ic. Case IIb has the same buildout plus one natural
gas unit co-sited with the datacenter; both are omitted from this figure. Transmission capacity is obtained by summing the capacities of all selected candidate
lines or transformers. Right: Total cost and CO2 emissions for each test case.
IIa
IIb
IIc
T
est case
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
Costs (M$/year)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Emissions (MtCO2/y)
Reliability legend
Required reliability
Cost & Emissions legend
Investment cost
Production cost
DAC Invest. cost
DAC Prod. cost
Gen emissions
CO2 Captured
Emissions T
arget
IIa
IIb
IIc
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Capacity F
actor
Fig. 3. Left: Costs and emissions for cases IIa, IIb, IIc. Note that costs are in a log scale. Right: Achieved and required reliability for each tranche of each
large load site built. Different shades of the same color show different tranches of the same site.
on the different cases tested. Final costs are normalized with
respect to the solution obtained with the EF formulation.
For the 24-bus test case, a very good candidate solution
is obtained for instances Ib and Ic. The results are already
satisfactory, but the lower bound could be tightened more
with more sophisticated bounding techniques, for example
implementing other spokes besides the reduced costs and
Lagrangian ones. This could also help tightening the lower
bound of the cases Ia and IIc, but in these two cases, the
solution candidates obtained are suboptimal. Obtaining a better
candidate would necessitate an improved update methodology
for the dual multipliers, with perhaps dynamic values for β
and ρ. Improving this approach will be undertaken in future
work but is outside the scope of the current paper.
For the 500-bus test cases, results are not yet satisfactory,
but the computational bottleneck has been identified and a
solution is under development Note however that the feasible
solutions obtained with the decomposition approach are orders
of magnitude better than the ones returned by the EF solver
within the same time limit. It is true that the decomposition
method had access to more computational resources (4x as
many), so the comparison is not necessarily fair, but illustrates
the potential of the methodology for instances where solving
an EF version of the problem is not viable, which is precisely
the intended use of this tool.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE OF THE DECOMPOSITION APPROACH
24 Buses
500 Buses
Test
Final Gap
Final Costa
Final Gap
Final Costa,b
Ia
26%
112%
75.2%
0.48%
Ib
4.3%
101%
76.4%
0.53%
Ic
4.0%
101%
75.0%
0.46%
IIc
73%
108%
80.1%
0.58%
a Normalized w.r.t. optimal cost returned by the EF.
b For all 500-bus instances, the EF returned very poor incum-
bents, with > 99% MIP gap.


--- Page 8 ---
V. CLOSING REMARKS
We have presented here a model that explicitly considers the
siting and sizing of large loads as part of the planning process.
Our numerical results illustrate that proactively including these
resources can save orders of magnitude in total system costs
compared to building co-located generation while satisfying
the reliability requirements of large loads. Moreover, explicitly
considering the flexibility these resources are able to offer can
provide a useful signal to planners for an optimal expansion
plan that minimizes collective costs while making sure that
the socially desired expansion occurs.
The 500-bus tests performed exhibit the computational chal-
lenges that arise with system size. Our tests of the proposed
decomposition approach are promising and support continuing
work to improve the method towards an implementation of a
real-sized test case.
REFERENCES
[1] A. F. Johnson and K. Kornecki, Eds., Implications of Artificial Intelli-
gence–Related Data Center Electricity Use and Emissions: Proceedings
of a Workshop. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, Jul. 2025.
[2] PG&E, “Data Center Demand Pipeline Swells to 10 Gigawatts with
Potential to Unlock Billions in Benefits for California,” Jul. 2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://investor.pgecorp.com/news-events/press-
releases/press-release-details/2025/PGE-Data-Center-Demand-Pipeline-
Swells-to-10-Gigawatts-with-Potential-to-Unlock-Billions-in-Benefits-
for-California/default.aspx
[3] E. O. Arwa and K. R. Schell, “Impact of direct air capture process
flexibility and response to ambient conditions in net-zero transition of
the power grid,” Applied Energy, vol. 386, p. 125549, May 2025.
[4] H. Mara˜n´on-Ledesma and A. Tomasgard, “Analyzing Demand Response
in a Dynamic Capacity Expansion Model for the European Power
Market,” Energies, vol. 12, no. 15, p. 2976, Jan. 2019, publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[5] M. Zampara, D.
´Avila, and A. Papavasiliou, “Capacity Expansion
Planning under Uncertainty subject to Expected Energy Not Served
Constraints,” Jan. 2025, arXiv:2501.17484 [eess]. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2501.17484
[6] A. F. Jacobson, D. L. Mauzerall, and J. D. Jenkins, “Quantifying the
impact of energy system model resolution on siting, cost, reliability, and
emissions for electricity generation,” Environmental Research: Energy,
vol. 1, no. 3, p. 035009, Sep. 2024, publisher: IOP Publishing.
[7] T. Valencia Zuluaga, A. Musselman, J.-P. Watson, and S. S. Oren, “Paral-
lel computing for power system climate resiliency: Solving a large-scale
stochastic capacity expansion problem with mpi-sppy,” Electric Power
Systems Research, vol. 235, p. 110720, Oct. 2024.
[8] A. Musselman, T. V. Zuluaga, E. Glista, M. Monteagudo, J. M.
Grappone, and J.-P. Watson, “Climate-Resilient Nodal Power System
Expansion Planning for a Realistic California Test Case,” Mar. 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://optimization-online.org/?p=29697
[9] F. D. Munoz and J.-P. Watson, “A scalable solution framework for
stochastic transmission and generation planning problems,” Computa-
tional Management Science, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 491–518, Oct. 2015.
[10] R. S. Go, F. D. Munoz, and J.-P. Watson, “Assessing the economic value
of co-optimized grid-scale energy storage investments in supporting high
renewable portfolio standards,” Applied Energy, vol. 183, pp. 902–913,
Dec. 2016.
[11] R. T. Rockafellar and R. J.-B. Wets, “Scenarios and Policy Aggrega-
tion in Optimization Under Uncertainty,” Mathematics of Operations
Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 119–147, Feb. 1991.
[12] V. Kaisermayer, D. Muschick, M. Horn, and M. G¨olles, “Progressive
hedging for stochastic energy management systems,” Energy Systems,
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–29, Feb. 2021.
[13] S. P. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization.
Cambridge
University Press, Mar. 2004.
[14] B. Knueven, D. Mildebrath, C. Muir, J. D. Siirola, J.-P. Watson, and
D. L. Woodruff, “A parallel hub-and-spoke system for large-scale
scenario-based optimization under uncertainty,” Mathematical Program-
ming Computation, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 591–619, Dec. 2023.
[15] D. L. Woodruff, B. Knueven, D. Mildebrath, C. Muir, J. D. Siirola,
and J.-P. Watson, “Pyomo/mpi-sppy,” Sep. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/Pyomo/mpi-sppy
[16] A. B. Birchfield, T. Xu, K. M. Gegner, K. S. Shetye, and T. J. Overbye,
“Grid Structural Characteristics as Validation Criteria for Synthetic
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 32, no. 4, pp.
3258–3265, Jul. 2017.
[17] T. Valencia Zuluaga, “Optimization of Electricity Systems Under Un-
certainty,” Ph.D. dissertation, UC Berkeley, 2024.
[18] J. Pett-Ridge, H. Ammar, and A. Aui, “Roads to Removal: Options for
Carbon Dioxide Removal in the United States,” Lawrence Livermore
National Laboratory, Tech. Rep. LLNL-TR-852901, 2023.
APPENDIX A
LIST OF SYMBOLS IN OPTIMIZATION MODEL
A. Nomenclature
Sets
B: Set of all buses (nodes) in the network. Indexed by b (or
i, m, n where noted).
G: Set of generation types, indexed by g, among which:
GZ: Types modeled with integer variables (turbine-based).
GR: Types modeled with continuous variables (inverter-based).
S: Set of storage types, indexed by s.
L: Set of transmission branches, indexed by ℓ.
L†: Set of existing transmission branches.
L⋆: Set of candidate transmission branches.
D: Set of large-scale load types, indexed by d
K: Set of interruptibility tiers of large loads, indexed by k
T : Set of periods in a representative horizon. Indexed by t.
Ω: Set of scenarios in the uncertainty set of the stochastic
optimization problem. Indexed by ω.
GZ and GR constitute a partition of G, i.e. GZ ∩GR = ∅and
GZ ∪GR = G.
Index maps
o(ℓ): Origin bus (also called ‘from’ bus) of branch ℓ
d(ℓ): Destination bus (also called ‘to’ bus) of branch ℓ
Parameters
Existing resources
XG
b,g: existing generation of type g at bus b, in MW.
XS
b,s: existing storage power conversion capacity of type s at
bus b, in MW.
Fixed costs
C(·)f
(·) : Annualized fixed costs (capital + fixed O&M) for
generation, storage or large load investment (in $/MWy)
CLf
ℓ
: Annualized fixed costs for transmission candidate (in
$/y)
Variable costs
C(·)v
(·) : Variable costs (fuel, consumables, + variable O&M) for
generation, storage and large load investment (in $/MWh)
Csh: Cost of load shedding, in $/MWh.
Operational parameters
P G
g : capacity per unit of generator type g, in MW.
U S
s : Duration of storage type s, in hours.


--- Page 9 ---
Db,t,ω: demand at bus b during period t of scenario ω,
excluding large loads that are part of the planning process.
αb,g,t,ω: fraction of generation capacity of type g that is
available at bus b during period t of scenario ω.
ηS-ch: power conversion efficiency for s when charging.
ηS-dch: power conversion efficiency for s when discharging.
ud,k, ϕd,k: pair defining expected service level of tier k of
large load type d.
bℓ: susceptance of branch ℓ, in p.u.
Fℓ: transmission capacity of branch ℓin MW.
Construction and planning parameters
KB(·)
b,(·): maximum buildable capacity of specific generation,
storage or large load at bus b, in MW.
Other model parameters
τ: length of each period t in a representative time horizon, in
h.
πω: probability assigned to scenario ω in the stochastic opti-
mization problem.
Decision variables
Investment variables
x(·)
b,(·): new storage, generation or large load of type (·) at bus
b.
xL
ℓ: binary variable indicating whether candidate ℓis built.
Operation variables
pG
b,g,t,ω: output of generator of type g at bus b during period
t of scenario ω, in MW.
pS
b,s,t,ω: energy stored (level) in storage facility of type s at
bus b during period t of scenario ω, in MWh.
pS-ch
b,s,t,ω: power input (charging) of storage facility of type s at
bus b during period t of scenario ω, in MW.
pS-dch
b,s,t,ω: power output (discharging) of storage facility of type
s at bus b during period t of scenario ω, in MW.
pDK
b,d,t,k,ω: power consumed by tier k of large load of type d
at bus b during period t of scenario ω, in MW.
psh
b,t,ω: load shed at bus b during period t of scenario ω, in MW
(excluding large loads that are part of the planning process).
fℓ,t,ω: power flow through branch ℓduring period t of scenario
ω, in MW.
Auxiliary variables and expressions
Cinv: Annualized total investment cost in $/y.
Cop
ω : Operation cost of scenario ω in $/y.
pD
b,d,t,ω: total power consumed by large load of type d at bus
b during period t of scenario ω, in MW.
σ(·): slack variable associated with an expectation constraint.
Notation
Unless otherwise specified, the vector is noted by omitting
the corresponding index, e.g. f = [fℓ]ℓ∈L. To allow for a
more compact description, (·) was used above as a wildcard
in superscripts and subscripts and may be substituted by G, g,
S, s or D, d as appropriate.
