--- Page 1 ---
Joint Satellite Power Consumption and Handover Optimization
for LEO Constellations
Yassine Afif∗‡, Mohammed Almekhlafi∗, Antoine Lesage-Landry∗‡ and Gunes Karabulut Kurt∗
∗Department of Electrical Engineering, Polytechnique Montr´eal & Poly-Grames Research Centre, QC, Canada
‡Mila & GERAD, Montr´eal, QC, Canada
Emails: {yassine.afif, mohammed.al-mekhlafi, antoine.lesage-landry, gunes.kurt}@polymtl.ca
Abstract—In satellite constellation-based communication sys-
tems, continuous user coverage requires frequent handoffs due
to the dynamic topology induced by the Low Earth Orbit (LEO)
satellites. Each handoff between a satellite and ground users
introduces additional signaling and power consumption, which
can become a significant burden as the size of the constellation
continues to increase. This work focuses on the optimization of
the total transmission rate in a LEO-to-user system, by jointly
considering the total transmitted power, user-satellite associa-
tions, and power consumption, the latter being handled through
a penalty on handoff events. We consider a system where LEO
satellites serve users located in remote areas with no terrestrial
connectivity, and formulate the power allocation problem as a
mixed-integer concave linear program (MICP) subject to power
and association constraints. Our approach can be solved with
off-the-shelf solvers and is benchmarked against a naive baseline
where users associate to their closest visible satellite. Extensive
Monte Carlo simulations demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method in controlling the handoff frequency while
maintaining high user throughput. These performance gains
highlight the effectiveness of our handover-aware optimization
strategy, which ensures that user rates improve significantly,
by about 40%, without incurring a disproportionate rise in the
handoff frequency.
Keywords—Low Earth orbit, handover management, non-
terrestrial networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE evolution of wireless communication systems to-
ward 6G is expected to bring unprecedented levels of
connectivity, bandwidth, and responsiveness [1]. To enable
global coverage and ultra-reliable low-latency communication
(URLLC), described in [2], the 3rd Generation Partnership
Project (3GPP) has formally included non-terrestrial networks
(NTNs) as a key component of its Release 17 [3]. In this
context, low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite constellations play a
crucial role in providing backhaul and direct access services
to mobile and fixed users worldwide [4]. This technology
is particularly valuable in remote, rural, and underserved
regions where the deployment of terrestrial infrastructure is
impractical or economically unfeasible. As such, LEO satellite
technology has been increasingly proposed to address the
digital divide and mitigate access inequality [5].
This work was supported in part by Fonds de recherche du Qu´ebec
secteur Nature et technologies (FQRNT) and the Natural Sciences and in
part by Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada Alliance grant
ALLRP 579869-22 (”Artificial Intelligence Enabled Harmonious Wireless
Coexistence for 3D Networks (3D-HARMONY)”).
Fig. 1: User handovers in a LEO satellite network: moving
satellites periodically trigger user reallocation to maintain
connectivity.
Due to their low orbital altitude, ranging typically around
450–2000 km, LEO satellites exhibit high relative velocities
with respect to ground users [6]. As a result, any user equip-
ment (UE) must undergo frequent handover events, switching
between satellite beams or even between satellites to maintain
service continuity [7]. The term user equipment refers to any
device that connects to the wireless network, such as mobile
phones, satellite terminals, or Internet of Things (IoT) sensors
deployed in the field. Each handover introduces signaling over-
head, increased latency, and additional power consumption,
the latter of which is especially critical in resource-constrained
systems. Therefore, minimizing unnecessary handoffs is essen-
tial to preserve system efficiency and user quality of service.
A summary of key existing approaches in the literature is
provided in Table I, highlighting the differences in handover
strategies, optimization formulations, and modelling assump-
tions compared to our work. This is particularly challenging
in dense constellations, where the handoff rate can reach up
to multiple events per minute for each user in worst-case
scenarios [12]–[14]. A metric used to quantify this behavior is
the effective frequency of change (EFC), which measures how
arXiv:2511.19745v1  [cs.IT]  24 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
TABLE I: Related Work in LEO Handover Optimization
Aspect
[8]
[9]
[10]
This Work
Handoff strategy
Closest / visibility /
CINR rules
Antenna
gain-based
handover
Uplink
assignment
heuristics
Joint optimization of
power and handover
Optimization method
Simulation-based
evaluation
Antenna gain heuris-
tics
Heuristic resource al-
location
Slot-by-slot
mixed-
integer convex
Channel model
Path loss + visibility
zone
Path loss + antenna
pattern
Path
loss
+
uplink
constraints
Rician fading + path
loss + elevation angle
Satellite positions
Simulated
geometry
(MATLAB)
3GPP NTN model
Random mobility in
3D space
Real-time
Skyfield
TLE data [11]
often user-satellite associations are updated over time. A high
EFC indicates increased signaling overhead and instability in
user connections, further motivating the need for mobility-
aware resource allocation strategies.
To address the aforementioned challenges, various handover
and resource management strategies have been proposed in
the literature [8]–[10], [15]–[17]. Reference [8] analyzed
handover strategies in emerging LEO, medium Earth orbit
(MEO), and highly elliptical Orbit (HEO) satellite networks,
evaluating closest-satellite, maximum visibility, and carrier
to interference plus noise ratio (CINR)-based approaches.
Their study highlighted key trade-offs between handover rates,
spectral efficiency, and propagation delays across different
constellation types. Howerver, their work does not consider
power consumption or beam-level constraints. The authors
of [9] propose antenna gain-based handover heuristics for 5G
LEO networks, aiming to reduce control signaling overhead
in highly mobile NTN environments. In [10], the authors
studied LEO-to-user assignment and resource allocation with
the goal of minimizing uplink power. While their approach
incorporated realistic channel models and power constraints,
handover dynamics and the impact of frequent beam switching
on system performance is not considered. Similarly, [15] ap-
plies multi-objective reinforcement learning (RL) to optimize
handovers in multi-beam LEO networks, achieving adaptive
policies that balance user throughput and mobility. While [8]
focuses on optimizing user-satellite association and beamform-
ing to improve handover performance and sum rate in ultra-
dense LEO networks, their model does not explicitly account
for users in remote areas lacking terrestrial connectivity, nor
does it optimize uplink and downlink transmit power jointly
during handover events.
Other works address handover strategies from different
perspectives. Reference [16] focuses on minimizing handovers
in LEO constellations through the optimization of user-satellite
association, though they relied on simplified geometrical mod-
els. Authors in [17] investigate massive multiple input multiple
output (MIMO) techniques in LEO systems, showing the
potential of advanced beamforming to enhance user coverage
and mitigate frequent handovers.
While these studies provide valuable insights into handover
strategies and resource management, the existing literature
falls short of one or more of the following aspects:
• They rely on heuristic or rule-based association policies
that cannot adapt optimally to dynamic user and satellite
configurations.
• They focus on small-scale networks or idealized handover
models, neglecting the power cost and signaling over-
heads inherent in large LEO constellations.
• They do not jointly consider power allocation and han-
dover minimization in a unified optimization framework.
In this paper, we address these gaps by proposing a power-
efficient handover optimization framework for medium-scale
LEO constellations. Our approach formulates the joint user
association and power allocation as a mixed-integer concave
program (MICP), i.e., a problem that is concave when binary
variables are relaxed to continuous, taking into account beam-
level constraints, visibility zones, and handover penalties.
We implement a slot-by-slot optimization scheme solvable
with off-the-shelf solvers and compare its performance to a
naive baseline that assigns each user to the closest visible
satellite. Simulation results based on real Starlink data (as
of January 2025) illustrates the effectiveness of our method
in reducing the handover frequency while maintaining a high
user throughput. Our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
• We develop a scalable simulation framework for user-
satellite association using real orbital data and a realistic
channel model incorporating Rician fading and propaga-
tion losses.
• We propose a mixed-integer concave formulation that
jointly maximizes total downlink path rate and handover-
induced penalties while satisfying the minimum user
throughput requirements.
• We evaluate the proposed scheme through extensive
Monte Carlo simulations and compare it to a baseline
strategy in terms of handover frequency, user rate, and
overall power efficiency. Our simulations demonstrate
an average increase of approximately 40% in per-user
downlink throughput compared to the baseline approach,
while maintaining a manageable handover rate.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces the system model, formulates the joint down-
link optimization problem and outlines the simulation settings
with our handover strategy. Section III presents simulation
results and performance evaluations. Section IV concludes the
paper and outlines future research directions.


--- Page 3 ---
II. SYSTEM MODEL
In satellite communications, orbiting satellites with high-
gain antennas establish links with UE on Earth, enabling
connectivity even in remote areas [18]. User devices com-
municate within allocated frequency bands, while satellites
maintain coverage through multiple beams. In LEOs, the
rapid motion of satellites combined with the Earth’s curvature
leads to frequent changes in visibility between users and
satellites, making continuous service challenging. Adaptative
user association and handover strategies are therefore essential
to ensure persistent connectivity.
We consider a medium-scale satellite communication sys-
tem based on a constellation of LEO satellites, each equipped
with multiple beams, where each beam represents an indepen-
dent channel realization rather than a distinct coverage area.
The network serves a set of geographically distributed users
on Earth over a sequence of discrete time slots t = 1, . . . , T,
where T ∈N is the time horizon. Due to the dynamic topology
of the constellation and the limited visibility of LEO satellites,
user-to-beam associations vary frequently, leading to inevitable
handovers.
A. System Representation and Handover Modeling
To formalize the system, let S ⊂N denote the set of
satellites, B ⊂N the set of beams per satellite, which is
the same for all satellite, and U ⊂N the set of users. Each
user can be associated with at most one beam of one satellite
at each time slot. This association is captured by a binary
variable It
u,s,b ∈{0, 1}, where It
u,s,b = 1 indicates that user
u is served by beam b of satellite s at time t, and It
u,s,b = 0
otherwise. The visibility of each user is represented by another
binary parameter V t
u,s,b, which depends on the relative position
of the satellite and the user, as well as the elevation angle.
When a satellite is above the horizon, i.e., the elevation angle
exceeds a certain threshold, a link can be established, denoted
as V t
u,s,b = 1; otherwise, V t
u,s,b = 0.
User handovers occur when the serving beam or satellite
changes between consecutive time slots. These are detected
by monitoring changes in It
u,s,b. Because excessive handovers
can degrade the user experience and increase system overhead,
we must actively control their frequency. This is because each
handover introduces additional signaling overheads, potential
service interruptions, and an increased power consumption
on both the satellite and user sides, which are particularly
limiting in resource-constrained environments such as LEO
systems [7], [12]. Then, a handover penalty α
>
0 is
introduced in the optimization objective to discourage unnec-
essary beam switches. This leads to a regularized formulation
that balances rate maximization and association changes. The
penalty term effectively adds a cost each time a user’s associa-
tion changes from one time slot to the next, thereby promoting
more persistent connections. Such regularization is particularly
useful in dynamic satellite networks where optimizing only
for instantaneous rate may result in excessive and inefficient
handovers.
B. Channel and Path Loss Model
The wireless channel between user u and beam b of
satellite s at time t is modelled as a Rician fading channel.
This model reflects the presence of a strong line-of-sight
(LOS) component, characteristic of satellite links, combined
with weaker multipath components resulting from atmospheric
scattering and reflections. The complex channel coefficient
ht
u,s,b is given by:
ht
u,s,b =
r
K
K + 1 hLOS +
r
1
K + 1 hNLOS,
(1)
where hLOS represents the deterministic LOS component, and
hNLOS ∼CN(0, 1) denotes a circularly symmetric complex
Gaussian random variable with zero mean and unit variance
that captures the random multipath scattering effects. The
Rician K-factor quantifies the relative strength of the LOS
and multipath components.
The total path loss Lt
u,s,b incorporates several physical
phenomena that attenuate the signal as it propagates through
the atmosphere:
Lt
u,s,b = LFS,t
u,s,b + Latm,t
u,s,b + Liono,t
u,s,b + Lrain,t
u,s,b.
(2)
where:
• LFS,t
u,s,b is the free-space path loss, which increases loga-
rithmically with the distance between the user and satel-
lite and depends on the carrier frequency. It is computed
using the Friis propagation model [19]:
LFS,t
u,s,b = 32.45 + 20 log10(fc) + 20 log10(dt
u,s,b),
(3)
With :
– fc being carrier frequency in MHz,
– dt
u,s,b being distance between user u and satellite s,
beam b at time slot t, in kilometers.
This empirical expression is a widely-used approximation
of the Friis transmission formula, valid in free-space line-
of-sight (LOS) conditions for frequency ranges typically
between 100 MHz and 100 GHz [19].
• Latm,t
u,s,b accounts for the atmospheric absorption, which
depends on the elevation angle θt
u,s,b and is modeled as:
Latm,t
u,s,b =
Azenith
sin(θt
u,s,b).
(4)
with Azenith being the the atmospheric attenuation at
zenith (i.e., for an elevation angle of 90◦).
• Liono,t
u,s,b models ionospheric and tropospheric effects. Iono-
spheric effects are significant for frequencies below
6 GHz [20], while tropospheric effects dominate above
6 GHz [20]. The corresponding values were interpolated
from Table 6.6.6.2.1-1 of [3].
• Lrain,t
u,s,b represents rain attenuation. As we consider fre-
quencies below or equal to 20 GHz, rain attenuation is
negligible in a temperate climate (such as France), as in
our scenario, and we assume rain attenuation is negligible
and thus set to zero. So we assume Lrain,t
u,s,b = 0 [21], for
all u, s, b and t.


--- Page 4 ---
C. SNR and Achievable Rate
After characterizing the channel and path loss, we compute
the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for each user as:
γt
u,s,b =
|ht
u,s,b|2
N0W10Lt
u,s,b/10 ,
(5)
where N0 is the noise power spectral density and W is the
system bandwidth. The achievable rate for user u is then given
by:
Rt
u,s,b =
W
log(2) log
 1 + γt
u,s,bP t
u,s,b

,
(6)
where P t
u,s,b is the power allocated to user u at time t.
D. Downlink Optimization Problem
In the downlink scenario, the objective is to maximize the
total user throughput Rt
u, defined as
Rt
u =
X
s∈S
X
b∈B
Rt
u,s,b,
(7)
where Rt
u,s,b is given by (6) when the link is active and zero
otherwise. At each time slot, a handover penalty αRt−1
u
is
introduced to discourage frequent user reassignments across
beams or satellites, thus balancing instantaneous rate maxi-
mization with long-term association stability. The optimization
problem can then be formulated as:
Pt : max
P,I
X
u∈U
 
Rt
u −αRt−1
u
 
1 −
X
s∈S
X
b∈B
It
u,s,bIt−1
u,s,b
!!
,
(8a)
s.t. Rt
u,s,b =
W
log(2) log
 1 + γt
u,s,bP t
u,s,b

, ∀u ∈U,
s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8b)
Rt
u ≥γth
u , ∀u ∈U,
(8c)
P t
u,s,b ≤It
u,s,bP max
s
, ∀u ∈U, s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8d)
X
u∈U
P t
u,s,b ≤P max
s
, ∀s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8e)
X
u∈U
It
u,s,b ≤1, ∀s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8f)
X
s∈S
X
b∈B
It
u,s,b ≤1, ∀u ∈U,
(8g)
V t
u,s,b ≥It
u,s,b, ∀u ∈U, s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8h)
0 ≤P t
u,s,b ≤P max
s
, ∀u ∈U, s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8i)
It
u,s,b ∈{0, 1},
∀u ∈U, s ∈S, b ∈B,
(8j)
The constraints above describe different aspects of the system
operation. Constraint (8b) defines the achievable rate expres-
sion Rt
u,s,b as a function of the allocated power and channel
gain, based on the Shannon capacity formula. Constraint (8c)
guarantees that each user u achieves a minimum data rate
γth
u
at every time slot. Constraint (8d) enforces that the
power allocated to a user on a given beam and satellite does
not exceed the maximum power if that beam is selected.
Constraint (8e) limits the total power transmitted by each
satellite on any beam to remain within its maximum capacity,
(a) It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 0
(b) It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 0
(c) It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 0
(d) It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 1
Fig. 2: Illustration of the four possible cases for the product
It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b. The binary product is used to detect handovers.
whereas Constraint (8f) ensures that each beam serves at most
one user simultaneously. Moreover, Constraint (8g) restricts
each user to be associated with at most one beam and satellite
per time slot, and Constraint (8h) guarantees that users are
only assigned to beams that are visible to them. Constraint (8i)
defines the feasible domain of the power variable, ensuring
their physical realizability. Finally, (8j) constraint imposes the
association variables to binary values.
Next, we discuss the objective function of (8a). We provide a
schematic representation of the product of It
u,s1,b and It−1
u,s1,b in
Fig. 2, which illustrates the four possible scenarios depending
on user-satellite association over two consecutive time slots.
We analyze the four possible cases shown in Fig. 2. This binary
product helps determine whether a handoff occurs between
two consecutive time slots. When It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 1 (Fig. 2d),
it means the user is served by the same satellite-beam pair at
both times t −1 and t. Consequently, 1 −It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b = 0,
and no handoff penalty is applied, as expected. Then, if
It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b
= 0 , then 1 −It−1
u,s1,bIt
u,s1,b
= 1, and a
potential handoff penalty may be triggered. However, among
the three remaining cases where the product is zero, only two
correspond to actual handoff events: (i) when It−1
u,s1,b = 1 and
It
u,s1,b = 0 (Fig. 2c, disconnection) and (ii) when It−1
u,s1,b = 0
and It
u,s1,b = 1 (Fig. 2b, new connection). In the fourth case
where both It−1
u,s1,b = 0 and It
u,s1,b = 0 (Fig. 2a), no service
is provided at either time slot, meaning the user is and was
not covered at all. Because It−1
u,s2,b = It
u,s2,b = 1, we will have
the same scenario as Fig. 2d, and so there will be no handoff
there.


--- Page 5 ---
Algorithm 1: Handover-aware Dynamic User-Satellite
Association (Downlink)
Input: User set U, satellite set S, beam set B, channel
coefficients ht
u,s,b, visibility mask V t
u,s,b, power
constraints P max
s
Output: User-satellite-beam associations It, allocated
powers Pt, achieved rates Rt, handover
statistics
Initialization: Set I0 using a minimum distance
approach, initialize rates R0 = 0, and set handover
counters Hu = 0, ∀u ∈U
for each time slot t ∈T do
Compute the SNR values γt
u,s,b using (5)
Solve Problem (8)
Update the association matrix It and compute user
rates Rt
Detect handovers by comparing It and It−1 as
described in Section II-D
return {It, Pt, Rt, Hu}
The double summation P
s∈S
P
b∈B It
u,s,bIt−1
u,s,b in (8a) is used
to account for all possible satellite-beam pairs in the system.
This ensures that the approach correctly detects whether a
user remains associated with the same satellite and beam
between consecutive time slots. Because each user can only
be connected to a single satellite-beam pair at a given time,
the sum evaluates to either 1 (no handover) or 0 (handover),
allowing the penalty term to be applied consistently across all
users.
In sum, P is formulated as MICP, which can be solved using
off-the-shelf solvers to determine optimal user associations and
power allocations under handover constraints.
E. Handover Strategy
To address the frequent handovers inherent in LEO satellite
networks, we propose a dynamic user-satellite association
strategy that jointly optimizes power allocation and user as-
signment while penalizing unnecessary beam switching events.
This approach ensures a trade-off between maximizing in-
stantaneous throughput and maintaining association stability
over time. The algorithm for the downlink case determines
optimal user associations and power allocations at each time
slot based on the system model and Problem (8). The process
is summarized in Algorithm 1
III. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present the simulation results to eval-
uate the performance of the proposed handover-aware power
allocation algorithm in comparison with a baseline minimum
distance association policy, where each user is assigned to the
closest visible satellite and beam without considering handover
costs or power optimization. All results are obtained using
simulation parameters provided in Table II [23].
TABLE II: Simulation Parameters
Parameter
Value
Satellite TLE data
(positions, elevation)
Start date
2025/01/01, 00:00
User locations
La Creuse (France), 10 km radius
Users
|U| = 30
Satellites
|S| = 30
Beams per satellite
|B| = 3
Satellite power
1 kW total
Visibility angle
20◦
Carrier frequency
20 GHz
Bandwidth
200 MHz
Noise density N0
10−20 W/Hz
Rician K factor
10 dB
Handoff penalty α
0.5
Time slots
20
Min rate γth
0.1 Mbps/user
Solver
MOSEK [22]
A. Throughput Comparison Over Time Slots
Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the total system throughput
(sum of all users’ rates) over 20 time slots for both the
proposed approach (blue) and the baseline minimum distance
policy (orange). As illustrated, our framework achieves a
higher total rate across all users at each time slot, demonstrat-
ing its ability to effectively allocate power and associate users
with satellites in a way that maximizes spectral efficiency.
B. Monte Carlo Simulation Statistics
We observe an increase in the total rate from about 9.5
Mbps under the naive baseline to 15 Mbps with our method,
i.e., a gain of nearly 58%. This illustrates the benefit of jointly
optimizing user association and power allocation instead of
simply connecting to the closest satellite. Since this result is
from a single run, we perform 1000 Monte Carlo realizations
to assess robustness and account for channel randomness.
Over T
= 10 slots, the baseline achieves an average of
0.351 Mbps per user, while our approach reaches 0.491 Mbps,
corresponding to a 40% improvement (Table III).
TABLE III: Monte Carlo Simulation Statistics (1000 runs)
Metric
Proposed
Approach
Minimum
Distance
Approach
Mean user rate [Mbps]
0.491
0.351
Standard deviation [Mbps]
0.062
0.113
Fig. 3: Total throughput of all users over 20 time slots for both
approaches.


--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 4: Monte Carlo simulation results over 1000 runs: user
rates for both approaches.
Fig. 5: Comparison of total number of handovers for the
proposed approach and the minimum distance policy.
Fig. 4 summarizes these results. The proposed approach
achieves a higher average user rate with lower standard devi-
ation, indicating more consistent service quality across users.
C. Handover Analysis
While the proposed method outperforms the baseline in
terms of throughput, it implies a significantly higher number of
handovers, as shown in Fig. 5. This is due to the optimization
algorithm frequently reassigning users to different satellites or
beams to maximize the instantaneous rate.
IV. CONCLUSION
Our approach showcases the advantages of slot-by-slot
joint optimization for maximizing user throughput in Low
Earth Orbit (LEO) satellite networks. While this fine-grained
optimization effectively maximizes user throughput, it leads
to a significantly higher number of handovers. This is because
users are reassigned at each time slot to improve instanta-
neous rates, without considering longer-term consistency. A
promising direction for future work is to perform optimization
over more coarse-grained time intervals or over the entire time
horizon to reduce handovers, although its non-convexity and
sequential nature pose major challenges. Alternatively, decom-
position methods such as block coordinate descent could be
explored to jointly minimize satellite power consumption and
handover frequency in large-scale constellations and very-large
networks.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Giordani and M. Zorzi, “Non-Terrestrial Networks in the 6G Era:
Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 244–
251, Mar. 2021.
[2] D. Feng, L. Lai, J. Luo, Y. Zhong, C. Zheng, and K. Ying, “Ultra-
Reliable and Low-Latency Communications: Applications, Opportuni-
ties and Challenges,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 64, Jan.
2021.
[3] “3GPP TR 38.811 v15.4.0: Study on New Radio (NR) to support
non-terrestrial networks,” 3GPP, Tech. Rep., 2020, technical Report.
[Online]. Available: https://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/38811.htm
[4] X. Lin, S. Cioni, G. Charbit, N. Chuberre, S. Hellsten, and J.-F.
Boutillon, “On the Path to 6G: Embracing the Next Wave of Low Earth
Orbit Satellite Access,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 36–42,
Dec. 2021.
[5] M. Almekhlafi, A. Lesage-Landry, and G. Karabulut Kurt, “Access
Inequality in LEO Satellite Networks: A Case Study of High-Latitude
Coverage in Northern Qu´ebec,” IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol., vol. 6, pp.
1613–1630, May 2025.
[6] E. Kang, Y. Park, J. Kim, and H. Choo, “Downlink Analysis of a
Low-Earth Orbit Satellite Considering an Airborne Interference Source
Moving on Various Trajectory,” Remote Sensing, vol. 16, no. 2, p. 321,
Jan. 2024.
[7] M. Hozayen, T. Darwish, G. Karabulut Kurt, and H. Yanikomeroglu,
“A Graph-Based Customizable Handover Framework for LEO Satellite
Networks,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2022, pp. 868–873.
[8] H. Zhou, J. Li, K. Yang, H. Zhou, J. An, and Z. Han, “Handover Analysis
in Ultra-Dense LEO Satellite Networks With Beamforming Methods,”
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 3676–3690, Mar. 2023.
[9] E. Juan, M. Lauridsen, J. Wigard, and P. Mogensen, “Handover Solutions
for 5G Low-Earth Orbit Satellite Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp.
93 309–93 325, 2022.
[10] H. Nguyen-Kha, V. N. Ha, E. Lagunas, S. Chatzinotas, and J. Grotz,
“LEO-to-User Assignment and Resource Allocation for Uplink Transmit
Power Minimization,” in Proc. IEEE WSA & SCC, 2023.
[11] B. Rhodes, “Skyfield: High precision research-grade positions for plan-
ets and Earth satellites generator,” Astrophysics Source Code Library,
pp. ascl–1907.024, 2019.
[12] A. Al-Hourani, “Session Duration between Handovers in Dense Low
Earth Orbit Satellite Networks,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 12,
pp. 2810–2814, oct 2021.
[13] C. Westphal, L. Han, and R. Li, “LEO Satellite Networking Relaunched:
Survey and Current Research Challenges,” ITU Journal on Future and
Evolving Technologies, vol. 4, no. 4, oct 2023.
[14] L. Gou, D. Bian, Y. Nie, G. Zhang, H. Zhou, Y. Shi, and L. Zhang, “Hi-
erarchical Resource Management for Mega-LEO Satellite Constellation:
A Review,” Sensors, vol. 25, no. 3, 2025.
[15] Y. Sun, Y. Zhai, W. Wu, P. Si, and F. R. Yu, “Handover for Multi-Beam
LEO Satellite Networks: A Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning
Method,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 2834–2838, 2024.
[16] N. Hedjazi, M. Ouacifi, R. Bouchouareb, M. Ouarghi, D. Benatia, and
M. Gareh, “Optimization of the Problem of Handover in Low Earth
Orbit Satellite Constellations,” in Proc. IEEE SETIT, 2012.
[17] L. You, K.-X. Li, J. Wang, X. Gao, X.-G. Xia, and B. Ottersten,
“LEO satellite communications with massive MIMO,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC).
Dublin, Ireland:
IEEE, Jun. 2020.
[18] G. Maral and M. Bousquet, Satellite Communications Systems: Systems,
Techniques and Technology, 5th ed.
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[19] A. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2005.
[20] “Propagation
Data
and
Prediction
Methods
Required
for
the
Design of Earth–Space Telecommunication Systems,” International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), ITU-R Recommendation P.618-14,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/R-REC-P.618
[21] E. Alozie, A. Abdulkarim, I. Abdullahi et al., “A Review on Rain Signal
Attenuation Modeling, Analysis and Validation Techniques: Advances,
Challenges and Future Direction,” Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 18, 2022.
[22] M. ApS, The MOSEK optimization toolbox for MATLAB manual.
Version 9.0., 2019. [Online]. Available: http://docs.mosek.com/9.0/
toolbox/index.html
[23] M.
Almekhlafi,
A.
Lesage-Landry,
and
G.
Karabulut
Kurt,
“Connectivity-Aware Task Offloading for Remote Northern Regions:
a Hybrid LEO-MEO Architecture,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Istanbul,
T¨urkiye, Sep. 2025.
