--- Page 1 ---
AREAL-HEX: Accommodating Asynchronous RL Training
over Heterogeneous GPUs
Ran Yan1∗, Youhe Jiang1∗, Tianyuan Wu1, Jiaxuan Gao2, Zhiyu Mei3, Wei Fu2, Haohui
Mai1, Wei Wang1, Yi Wu2, Binhang Yuan1
1HKUST, 2Tsinghua University, 3Ant Group
∗Equal contribution
Abstract
Maximizing the training throughput and cost-efficiency of reinforcement learning (RL) for large
language models (LLMs) is essential to democratize this advanced technique. One promising but
challenging approach is to deploy such a computational workflow over heterogeneous GPU clusters.
Unlike conventional large-scale LLM pretraining, RL training generally decomposes into three cou-
pled stages, i.e., rollout generation, reward computation, and policy/value updates, which exhibit
markedly different compute intensities, memory footprints, and communication patterns. Recent
research shows that fully asynchronous RL training can disaggregate these stages across disjoint
hardware pools without sacrificing training stability, creating a great opportunity for real-world
heterogeneous deployment. Towards this end, we present AREAL-HEX, a heterogeneity-aware asyn-
chronous RL training system that effectively schedules how to execute rollout generation and policy
model training over heterogeneous GPU clusters while enforcing data staleness bounds. Concretely,
AREAL-HEX uses a two-phase scheduler: (i) a constrained search with mixed-integer linear pro-
gramming to select per-stage parallelization strategies and workload assignments given a resource
budget, and (ii) a graph-partitioning step that allocates heterogeneous GPUs and interconnects to
maximize end-to-end throughput. Built atop a fully asynchronous RL architecture, AREAL-HEX maps
HBM-I/O-bound generation and compute-bound optimization to more cost-efficient resources and
balances their producer–consumer interactions to avoid both idleness and stale rollout trajectories.
On the mathematical reasoning task with various model scales (1.5B, 7B, and 14B), compared to
homogeneous deployments of state-of-the-art asynchronous RL systems: (i) When maintaining the
same total budgets, AREAL-HEX delivers up to 1.50× higher training throughput; (ii) When achieving
the same training throughput, AREAL-HEX results in up to 1.46× reduction in training cost.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a popular approach for enhancing large language models (LLMs)
across various tasks [1], including math [2], code generation [3], agentic tool use [4], etc, which becomes
essential to advance the development of AI. Unlike conventional large-scale pretraining by standard stochastic
gradient-based optimization, RL training comprises multiple coupled stages, where each stage includes
heterogeneous compute intensities, memory footprints, and communication patterns [5]; furthermore, recent
study suggests that asynchronous RL paradigm can effectively disaggregate these different stages over different
set of hardwares without compromising the stability in RL training [6, 7]. Such an intrinsic computational
heterogeneity under the disaggregated infrastructure naturally provides a great opportunity to deploy such a
1
arXiv:2511.00796v1  [cs.DC]  2 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
Pipeline Parallelism
Tensor Parallelism
Data Parallelism
H20-96G
H100-80G
Model Replica/DP Worker i
Trajectory
Workload
Model
Weights
Rollout Worker
Parallelism Strategy
Workload Assignment
Rollout Input
𝐑𝟏
Policy Training
Parallelism Strategy
Workload Assignment
Trajectory Workload
1
2
𝐑𝟏
𝐑𝟐
𝐑𝟑
𝐑𝟒
𝐑𝟏
𝐑𝟐
𝐑%
𝐑𝟏
𝐑𝟐
𝐑𝟏
𝐑𝟐
𝐑𝟑
𝐑𝟒
Rollout Worker 1
Rollout Worker 2
Rollout Worker 3
Rollout Worker 4
Train Worker 1
Train Worker 2
Time
Model Training
Rollout Generation
Model Update
Figure 1 Left: Illustration of the asynchronous RL training workflow. The computations for rollout generation and model
training are overlapped. When a new version of model weights becomes available, both rollout and training processes
are temporarily paused to update the rollout workers’ weights. Right: An example of scheduling results. Multiple rollout
replicas, potentially configured with distinct parallelization strategies and hardware resources, are created to perform
rollout generation tasks. (i) Once rollouts are completed, they are transmitted to the training workers. (ii) When the
updated model weights are ready, training workers broadcast the new weights to rollout workers via NCCL collective
communication operations.
workflow over a heterogeneous GPU cluster. In this paper, we explore how to effectively schedule asynchronous
RL workloads on heterogeneous resources to maximize end-to-end RL training throughput and cost-efficiency.
Deploying asynchronous RL training in heterogeneous environments promises substantial gains in resource
utilization and reductions in service cost. RL training for LLM is highly resource-intensive and includes three
different stages: (i) rollout generation, which conducts HBM IO–bound inference on GPUs that produces
multiple responses (known as rollout) per prompt; (ii) reward estimation, which uses strategies that may require
large numbers of CPU cores (e.g., sandboxed execution for coding tasks or rule-based evaluation for math)
or additional GPU capacity for LLM-based value models; and (iii) model training, which is compute-bound
GPU updates of the policy (and optionally value) LLMs via stochastic gradient-based optimizations, potentially
with a reference model for stability. Recently, fully asynchronous RL training paradigm has been shown
to be effective, where the three stages can execute over disjoint GPU pools, and the rollout worker GPU
keeps the generation continuously while training GPUs update opportunistically, rather than waiting for
the longest rollout sequence in a synchronous batch. This multi-stage disaggregated paradigm exhibits
inherent heterogeneity in terms of compute intensity, memory bandwidth, and communication paradigm in
corresponding parallel execution for each stage, making it a natural fit for clusters with different GPU with
the heterogeneous GPU-interconnects, which are common in cloud and enterprise settings. We believe an
efficient scheduler that is able to map the distributed execution in each stage to more cost-efficient devices and
balances their asynchronous interactions could fully exploit available heterogeneous hardware, lower both
time and monetary cost, and make large-scale RL more accessible.
However, scheduling asynchronous RL training workflows over heterogeneity is also fundamentally challenging
due to the complex training dynamics of RL and the constraints it imposes on the data staleness [8]. The
state-of-the-art asynchronous RL training paradigm operates as a producer–consumer paradigm in which the
rollout worker GPUs use the policy LLM to continuously generate rollouts while the training worker GPUs
concurrently update the policy LLM. In such an asynchronous situation, an effective heterogeneity-aware
scheduler must regulate this interaction under the explicit data staleness constraints, i.e., the training worker
GPUs require a steady supply of rollouts, yet such rollouts must not be generated by policy LLM too stale
that the rollout trajectory becomes obsolete. The difficulty is further amplified by the heterogeneity that
enlarges the search space: GPU devices differ in compute throughput, HBM memory capacity and bandwidth,
and interconnect topology, turning computation task placement into a complicated search problem in an
exponential search space. The scheduled plan must simultaneously maintain high GPU device utilization and
limit rollout data staleness, which demands some careful design of the scheduler.
Despite growing interest in heterogeneity-aware scheduling for LLM serving, existing efforts address only iso-
2


--- Page 3 ---
lated slices of the problem, i.e., either inference or training, thus falling short of the end-to-end requirements of
asynchronous RL training. For the LLM training workloads, heterogeneous LLM systems such as HexiScale [9]
and Metis [10] optimize synchronous LLM training across heterogeneous GPUs; on the inference side, serving
frameworks including Helix [11], HexGen [12], and HexGen-2 [13] orchestrate largely general inference
workloads on heterogeneous clusters. Simply composing these techniques is inadequate: an asynchronous
RL training pipeline is inherently multi-stage and requires explicit control of rollout data staleness, ensuring
that rollouts consumed by the training worker GPUs are bounded by the configured data staleness constraint.
Thus, an effective scheduler must therefore jointly consider cross-stage heterogeneity and inter-stage coupling,
which makes the scheduling space of asynchronous RL training fundamentally departs from synchronous LLM
training or general LLM inference.
In this paper, we introduce AREAL-HEX, a novel asynchronous RL training system designed to maximize
end-to-end training throughput and cost-efficiency for RL training workloads on heterogeneous GPU clusters.
The core of AREAL-HEX is a heterogeneity-aware scheduling algorithm that determines effective allocation of
generation and training computation and corresponding communication under different parallelism across
heterogeneous GPUs and network interconnects. Concretely, we summarize our contributions as follows:
• Contribution 1. We systematically characterize multi-stage asynchronous RL workloads and demon-
strate that their intrinsic computational heterogeneity, i.e., HBM IO-bound rollout generation versus
compute-bound policy model training, naturally aligns with heterogeneous GPU clusters. Through
extensive profiling, we show that matching each stage’s resource demands to appropriate GPU types can
substantially improve overall system efficiency compared to homogeneous deployments.
• Contribution 2. We formulate the problem of asynchronous RL training scheduling over heterogeneity,
which encompasses resource allocation, parallel strategies, and workload assignments, as a constrained
optimization problem with explicit data staleness bounds. To efficiently solve the scheduling problem, we
propose a two-phase algorithm: (i) the first phase employs constrained search and mixed-integer linear
programming (MILP) to determine optimal parallel strategies and workload assignments for generation
and training under a given resource allocation; and (ii) the second phase uses graph partitioning to
optimize resource allocation across heterogeneous devices, maximizing end-to-end training performance.
• Contribution 3. We implement AREAL-HEX and conduct extensive experiments for mathematical reason-
ing RL tasks and model scales (1.5B, 8B, and 14B). We want to highlight that compared to homogeneous
deployments of state-of-the-art asynchronous RL systems, AREAL-HEX achieves 1.31× ∼1.50× improve-
ment in training throughput given the same training budget, demonstrating the substantial benefits of
heterogeneity-aware scheduling for asynchronous RL training. On the other hand, when achieving the
same training throughput, AREAL-HEX results in up to 1.46× reduction in training cost.
2
Preliminaries and Related Work
2.1
RL Training System for LLMs.
RL has been applied to enhance the reasoning capabilities of LLMs [14, 15]. Existing RL training demonstrates
strong performance on reasoning tasks, achieving significant improvements in various tasks, including
mathematical problem solving, code generation, and multi-hop question answering [16–20]. RL training
includes both the HBM IO-bound rollout generation phase and the compute-bound training phase [6, 7, 21],
where both phases require careful orchestration of different parallelism strategies (e.g., data-, pipeline-,
and tensor model- parallelisms), GPU resource allocation, and sequence-level scheduling (e.g., packing, KV
cache management) [22–26]. RL training for LLMs can be categorized into synchronous and asynchronous
paradigms. In synchronous RL training, different phases are iteratively executed: the rollout generation phase
uses the latest model parameters to produce reasoning traces for each input question, and the training phase
updates the model parameters based on these rollouts [5, 27]. On the other hand, in asynchronous RL training,
these phases can run in parallel: the generation phase continuously produces rollouts using potentially stale
model parameters, and the training phase updates the parameters based on such rollouts [6, 28–31].
Due to the distinct computational characteristics of RL training with a multi-stage pipeline, recent efforts
attempt to develop efficient RL training systems [21, 32, 33]. Among them, Verl [5] accelerates RL training
3


--- Page 4 ---
with a 3D-HybridEngine for zero-redundancy resharding between actor training and generation, and an
auto-mapping algorithm for GPU allocation and placement. StreamRL [7] addresses the pipeline bubbles and
skewness-induced inefficiencies present in existing disaggregated RL frameworks, enabling flexible resource
allocation. AsyncFlow [34] allows one-step parameter asynchronization between rollout generation and policy
model update, minimizing hardware idling across iterations while maintaining algorithmic integrity. AReaL [6]
decouples streaming generation from training through a fully asynchronous architecture and incorporates
several algorithmic innovations, including staleness-aware training and a decoupled RL objective, which
enables efficient and stable RL training for LLM reasoning. Different from existing works, AREAL-HEX focuses
on effectively scheduling multi-stage asynchronous RL training workflows across heterogeneous GPU clusters
in order to maximize resource utilization and minimizing training costs.
2.2
LLM Service over Heterogeneity.
Earlier cluster management frameworks laid some groundwork for heterogeneous resource scheduling in
distributed computation [35, 36]. For instance, Mesos [35] pioneered a two-level scheduling architecture that
enables fine-grained sharing of cluster resources among diverse frameworks, while Paragon [37] provided a
QoS-aware scheduler that classifies incoming workloads to places them on the most appropriate servers based
on hardware differences. Collectively, these efforts explored adapting scheduling policies to heterogeneous
infrastructures.
Recent research has investigated methods for leveraging heterogeneous computational resources to enhance
the cost-efficiency of LLM services [10, 38–43]. For instance, several works [44, 45] explore training LLMs
on heterogeneous GPUs to enhance cost-effectiveness and resource utilization. Among them, HexiScale [9]
supports hybrid and asymmetric parallelism implementations to leverage heterogeneous GPU capabilities, and
optimizes these asymmetric computations with a hierarchical graph partitioning algorithm. In the context of
LLM inference and serving, Helix [11] formulates heterogeneous GPU allocation and network connectivity as a
max-flow problem, applying mixed-integer linear programming to identify optimal strategies for LLM inference
serving. HexGen [12] introduces asymmetric partitioning and advanced scheduling mechanisms for generative
inference in decentralized, heterogeneous settings. HexGen-2 [13] further extends the heterogeneity-aware
scheduling on top of the disaggregated inference paradigm.
3
Observation and Opportunity
Asynchronous RL training exhibits intrinsic computational heterogeneity, where the HBM I/O-bound rollout
generation and compute-bound model training can be disaggregated over different sets of GPUs. This
disaggregated computational heterogeneity motivates the design of AREAL-HEX: Heterogeneous clusters
can naturally align their different hardware capabilities with the heterogeneous computational demands of
asynchronous RL training, providing opportunities to reduce the real-world training costs. We explore this
motivation and present our observations through an illustrative case study.
Benchmark setups. We maintain the same total budget, and benchmark the asynchronous RL training throughput
across three settings on the 1.5B, 7B, and 14B models: (i) Homogeneous setting 1: 32 H800 GPUs. (ii)
Homogeneous setting 2: 88 H20 GPUs. (iii) Heterogeneous setting: 24 H800 GPUs and 24 H20 GPUs. We
benchmark both the rollout generation latency and model training latency, which comprise the major execution
cost of RL training. We use the reported H800 and H20 GPU rental price by MegaScale-Infer [46]—For the
H800 GPU, the rental price is $5.28 per hour; and for the H20 GPU, the rental price is $1.85 per hour.
Observation 1: H800 GPUs with high computational power are not efficient for inference. H800 GPUs have
limited HBM memory bandwidth; to avoid being bound by rollout generation, we must allocate a large
fraction of H800 GPUs to rollout generation while allocating only a small fraction to model training. Under
asynchronous execution, although we can balance rollout generation and model training throughput, the
overall performance remains suboptimal due to inefficient rollout generation performance.
Observation 2: H20 GPUs are insufficient for computationally intensive model training. Homogeneous setting 2
falls short in compute-bound model training, as the H20 GPUs have limited computational capabilities in terms
of peak FLOPS. Since H20 GPUs provide only limited computational power, we must allocate a large fraction
4


--- Page 5 ---
Homo 1Homo 2 Hetero
Model 1.5B
0
32
64
95
127
Execution Latency (s)
Homo 1Homo 2 Hetero
Model 7B
0
69
138
206
275
Homo 1Homo 2 Hetero
Model 14B
0
195
390
586
781
Homo 1-Inf
Homo 1-Train
Homo 2-Inf
Homo 2-Train
Hetero-Inf
Hetero-Train
Figure 2 Rollout inference (short as INF) and model training (short as TRAIN) execution latency comparison between
homogeneous setting 1, 2 and heterogeneous setting across different model scales.
of H20 GPUs to model training. Additionally, training with a large number of H20 GPUs introduces scalability
issues; empirically, we find that training with 5× H20 GPUs cannot sufficiently achieve the same training
throughput as H800 GPUs, even if the theoretical computation power of 5 H20 GPUs is equal to 1 H800 GPU.
As a result, the overall performance of homogeneous setting 2 remains suboptimal due to inefficient model
training.
Observation 3: Heterogeneous setting naturally leverages the advantages of both GPU types. The heterogeneous
setting, which hybridizes compute-efficient H800 GPUs and memory bandwidth-efficient H20 GPUs, naturally
leverages the advantages of both GPU types, thereby demonstrating superior system performance. We
disaggregate the rollout generation and model training on different hardware. On the one hand, we assign
the HBM memory-bound rollout generation phase to H20 GPUs, fully utilizing the abundant HBM memory
bandwidth. On the other hand, we assign the compute-bound model training phase to H800 GPUs, fully
leveraging the advanced computational power. Under this arrangement, both phases achieved optimal
performance, thereby boosting the system performance. Compared with the homogeneous settings 1 and 2,
the heterogeneous setting achieved up to 2.67×, and at least 1.49× reduction in the end-to-end RL training
execution time.
Table 1 Rollout and training per-token cost comparison of different GPU types on different model scales.
Model
GPU
$ Per Inference Token
$ Per Training Token
1.5B
H800
$5.58 × 10−3
$1.66 × 10−3
H20
$2.06 × 10−3
$5.16 × 10−3
7B
H800
$1.14 × 10−2
$3.05 × 10−3
H20
$4.15 × 10−3
$9.51 × 10−3
14B
H800
$3.43 × 10−2
$0.99 × 10−2
H20
$1.27 × 10−2
$3.10 × 10−2
Cost-efficiency analysis of different GPU types. Asynchronous RL training workloads across heterogeneous
disaggregated GPUs naturally align with the distinct cost-efficiency of different GPU types. In Table 1, we
present the per-token cost for H800 and H20 GPUs under both training and inference computation. For rollout
generation, H20 demonstrates 2.72× higher cost efficiency; for training, H800 demonstrates 3.12× higher
cost efficiency. These results confirm that the performance gains from hybridizing different GPUs originate
from utilizing more cost-efficient devices for the two phases of RL training.
4
Scheduling with Heterogeneity
We first introduce the scheduling problem and the overview of our two-phase solution in§4.1 and then propose
introduce the search phase in §4.2 and repartition phase in §4.3.
5


--- Page 6 ---
4.1
Problem Formulation
Formulation. Given a set of heterogeneous GPUs noted by D, staleness constraint parameterized by η, and
an expected generated rollout length distribution P, the goal of the scheduler is to identify the optimal
asynchronous RL execution plan that minimizes the δ(η)-step averaged RL training time, where δ(η) represents
a window size used to calculate the average training time under asynchronous rollout generation, depending
on the staleness η. Concretely, to optimize asynchronous RL training, the scheduling algorithm should
determine two essential components:
• Resource allocation, which determines the optimal allocation of the GPU set for policy (and optionally
value) model training, noted by DT , where DT ⊂D and the GPU set for rollout generation by generative
inference noted by DI, where DI ⊂D. Note that DT ∪DI = D, DT ∩DI = ∅, and the ideal balances
between DT and DI should maximize overall RL training throughput.
• Parallel strategy and workload assignment, that determines the allocation of the distributed computational
workload to each heterogeneous GPU under asynchronous RL training, given a particular resource
allocation. To be more specific, this component needs to assign the parallel inference execute plan τ
over the GPU set DI and the training plan σ over the GPU set DT .
We define a solution including these two components as a scheduled plan as the output. Concretely, given
D = {d1, . . . , dN} as a set of N GPUs, where we note the device memory limit Md for GPU d, we define
the scheduling problem to seek optimal parallel execution plans σ∗for model training and τ ∗for rollout
generation over the optimal resource allocation noted by D∗
T and D∗
I that utilize all N GPUs in D to minimize
δ(η)-step average RL training execution time subject to each GPU’s memory constraints:
σ∗, τ ∗, D∗
T , D∗
I = arg
min
σ,τ,DT ,DI max{CT , CI}
where CT = CTRAIN (σ, DT , δ(η)) ,
CI = CROLLOUT (τ, DI, P, δ(η)) + CREWARD (δ(η)) + CUPDATE(σ, DT , τ, DI, δ(η)),
s.t. DT ∪DI = D, DT ∩DI = ∅, MEM-CUMSUM (d) ≤Md
∀d ∈D.
(1)
where CT represents the δ(η)-step average training execution cost, including CTRAIN(σ, DT , δ(η)) that captures
the gradient computation and parameter update for policy (optionally value) model; CI represents the δ(η)-
step average rollout cost, including CROLLOUT (τ, DI, P, δ(η)) for rollout generation; CREWARD (δ(η)) for reward
computation (involving reward and reference model computation) latency; and CUPDATE(σ, DT , τ, DI, δ(η))
that represents the cost of synchronizing updated policy model weights to rollout workers. . MEM-CUMSUM(d)
denotes memory consumption on device d to execute the allocated policy σ and τ. We want to be explicit that
our algorithm assumes rollout generation execution cost generally exceeds the model training execution cost
(i.e., CI > CT ). Because when model training execution cost exceeds rollout generation execution cost (i.e.,
CT > CI), the system gradually approaches its data staleness tolerance threshold, causing rollout workers to
stall and wait for slow model training before resuming rollout generation after at least one training batch is
consumed—In this scenario, computational resources on rollout workers are significantly wasted, degrading
overall system throughput. Conversely, when the rollout generation execution cost exceeds the model training
execution cost (i.e., CI > CT ), the system can leverage the asynchronous rollout feature to minimize the
stalling time of model training. Therefore, we exclude cases where the model training execution cost exceeds
the rollout generation execution cost.
Overview of the scheduling algorithm. Notice that finding the optimal scheduled plan is NP-hard due to the
exponential space of candidate allocations. Furthermore, one can imagine that the process of determining
these two essential components (i.e., resource allocation DT , DI and parallel strategy and workload assignment
σ, τ) introduces a “chicken and egg” dilemma—the optimal plan σ, τ can only be estimated over the optimal
resource allocation DT , DI; while the resource allocation DT , DI should be determined by the underlying
optimal potential plan σ, τ. To resolve this issue, we propose a two-phase scheduling approach enlightened by
the classic EM algorithm [47], summarized as below:
• Search-Phase: Given a particular fixed resource allocation, we employ constrained and MILP-based search
6


--- Page 7 ---
Algorithm 1 Scheduling Algorithm
Input: (D0
T , D0
I): initial allocation, D: GPU device info,
K: stable iteration threshold, δ(η): window size
/* σ: model training plan, τ: rollout generation plan */
Output: optimized σ∗, τ ∗, D∗
T , D∗
I
Intermediate Variables:
CT : Model training cost, CI: Rollout generation cost
/* Initialize training and inference resource allocation. */
DT , DI ←D0
T , D0
I
while convergence not reached do
/* Search-Phase: Optimize execution plans (§4.2) */
(σ, CT ) ←CONSTRAINED_SEARCH(DT )
(τ, CI) ←MILP(DI, P, δ(η))
/* Repartition-Phase: Optimize resource allocation (§4.3) */
(DT , DI) ←GRAPH_PARTITION(CT , CI, D)
/* Check convergence condition. */
if max{CT , CI} is stable for K iterations then
break
end if
end while
to determine the optimal parallel strategy and workload assignment (§4.2). This phase optimizes system
performance for both model training and rollout generation within the allocated resources, generating
execution plans with minimum cost.
• Repartition-Phase: Given the estimated execution costs obtained from the Search-Phase, we apply a
cost-guided graph partition algorithm to identify the optimal resource allocation (§4.3). This phase
balances computational resources between model training and rollout generation, ensuring globally
optimized system performance.
These two phases alternate iteratively and terminate when the maximum execution cost (i.e., max{CT , CI})
remains stable for multiple consecutive iterations (e.g., 20 iterations). We summarize this process in Algo-
rithm 1.
4.2
Search Phase Algorithm
Given a particular resource allocation DT and DI, the search phase determines the optimal execution plans
for model training σ and rollout generation τ that maximize their training or inference throughput.
4.2.1
Searching Model Training Execution Plan
Given the resources set DT allocated for the model training, we determine an optimal training execution plan
σ, which involves both parallel strategy and workload assignment noted as CONSTRAINED_SEARCH(DT ), as
follows:
Parallel strategy search. Given the heterogeneous resources allocated to model training, we propose an efficient
and effective constrained search algorithm to determine an optimal parallel strategy i.e., a combination of
data parallelism (DP), tensor model parallelism (TP), and pipeline parallelism (PP), that minimizes training
execution cost. Our approach is motivated by the observation that different GPU types are typically connected
via low-bandwidth networks in real-world distributed environments [9, 10]. To mitigate extensive cross-
GPU-type communication overhead, we impose a simple yet effective practical constraint: Both TP and DP
must utilize GPUs of the same type. Under this constraint, we systematically enumerate all feasible parallel
strategies. This constraint substantially reduces the search complexity while maintaining solution quality.
Finally, we follow the search algorithm in Metis [10] to select the parallel strategy that yields the maximal
training throughput across all evaluated configurations. The scheduled results will ensure that across pipeline
7


--- Page 8 ---
stages, we allocate transformer layers proportionally to the computational capabilities of heterogeneous
devices, where each pipeline stage is configured with distinct data and tensor model parallelism.
Workload assignment optimization. We employ a greedy sequence packing strategy [6] to balance token
distribution across data parallel workers and optimize GPU memory utilization: For each training batch, we
sequentially assign sequences to the DP worker with the minimum current workload, measured by token
count.
4.2.2
Searching Rollout Generation Execution Plan
Let DI be the set of GPUs allocated for rollout generation, we formulate how to find the optimal rollout
generation plan as a mixed integer linear program problem (MILP) noted as MILP(DI, P, δ(η)) as below.
Model replica configurations. Different from model training, multiple rollout inference replicas should work in
parallel to generate rollouts independently. Note that such replicas could duplicate the same configuration,
i.e., execute the same parallel strategy over the same type of GPUs connected by the network with the same
bandwidth. To enumerate this process, we include some new notations: Suppose there are T different types
of GPUs, define TI = [i1, i2, ..., iT ] as the count of each type of GPUs, e.g., it represents the count of type-t
GPUs. To determine the execution plan τ, we characterize rollout replica parallel strategies, replica counts,
and workload assignment as follows:
Let Ψ denote possible configurations for one rollout inference replica. Each configuration ψ ∈Ψ represents
the configuration for a rollout inference replica characterized by (vψ, sψ, hψ, yψ): (i) Vector vψ = [iψ
1 , iψ
2 , ..., iψ
T ],
0 ≤iψ
t ≤it, ∀t ∈[1, T] indicates GPU count of each type indexed by t used in configuration ψ. (ii) Vector
sψ = [tpψ
1 , tpψ
2 , ..., tpψ
Sψ] indicates this inference serving replica is equipped with Sψ pipeline stages, where tpψ
s
is the TP degrees of the s-th stage (s ∈[1, Sψ]). (iii) The estimated inference throughput hψ is estimated based
on the parallel strategy following the cost model from HexGen [12]. (iv) Free integer variable yψ suggests the
number of replicas following configuration ψ.
Workload assignment to rollout replicas. During rollout generation, the input prompt length is predefined by the
task; in contrast, the output length of each rollout is nondeterministic during RL training. Here, we sample the
output length from the skew distribution P that can be profiled during the cold-start of RL training to estimate
the output tokens, where we note the output sequence length lenrollout ∼P. The allocation problem should
determine the number of rollouts that each rollout inference replica should host in its local inference batch.
Formally, let Xδ(η) denote the maximum processing capacity (measured in number of rollouts) within δ(η)
training steps, and let B denote the total number of rollouts that all of the rollout replicas should process. Our
algorithm determines an assignment AI = {xψ : ψ ∈Ψ}, where xψ ∈[0, B] represents the number rollouts
assigned to configuration ψ, subject to the constraints that P
ψ∈Ψ xψ = B.
Optimization objective. We define a makespan variable Θ ≥0 that represents the overall rollout generation
completion time across δ(η) training steps.
For each configuration ψ ∈Ψ that is duplicated yψ times
and processes xψ rollout sequences from the total rollout count B, the total effective throughput of all ψ
configuration is yψ · hψ (noted that hψ denotes the per-replica throughput of configuration ψ defined before).
Consequently, the time required for configuration ψ to complete its assigned workloads is Θψ = xψ·lenrollout
yψ·hψ
.
Since all rollout inference replicas operate in parallel, the system completes when the slowest configuration
finishes, which imposes the constraint Θψ ≤Θ for all ψ ∈Ψ. Our objective is to minimize the makespan Θ.
MILP formulation. The problem for optimizing rollout generation throughput can be summarized as the
following Mixed-Integer Linear Program (MILP):
arg min
Θ
s.t.
X
ψ∈Ψ
xψ = B, xψ · lenrollout
yψ · hψ,w
≤Θ, ∀ψ ∈Ψ,
X
ψ∈Ψ
iψ
t · yψ ≤it, ∀t ∈[1, T].
(2)
8


--- Page 9 ---
After solving this MILP, we obtain a rollout generation execution plan τ, which encompasses replica counts for
each configuration (yψ) and workload assignment (AI) through the above formulation, subject to memory and
GPU availability constraints. To accelerate the algorithm, we restrict rollout replicas to use bandwidth-sensitive
tensor model parallelism only within single machines to reduce the search space. Additionally, since reward
computation varies minimally across rollout generation tasks, we treat the reward computation cost as a
constant obtained through profiling, which would not influence MILP results.
Optimize across different δ(η) values. Across algorithm iterations, we iteratively optimize parallel strategy and
workload assignment for model training and rollout generation under varying step window δ(η). The choice of
δ(η) involves a fundamental tradeoff: optimizing over the entire training horizon (δ = ∞) is computationally
infeasible and requires an unknown total training iteration, while optimizing over too few steps (δ ≈1) fails to
accurately capture asynchronous RL training and data staleness characteristics. To balance these concerns, we
adopt an adaptive strategy: We initialize δ(η) to a small value empirically determined from the data staleness
parameter η, then iteratively increase δ(η) until the scheduling results exhibit stable RL training execution
latency. This approach leverages the key insight that when δ(η) accurately captures the asynchronous training
dynamics and data staleness characteristics, scheduling decisions remain stable under larger values of δ(η),
indicating diminishing returns from further increases of δ(η).
4.3
Repartition Phase Algorithm
The previous search-phase presented an approach for obtaining the optimal execution plans for a given
resource allocation. On the other hand, in this section, we introduce a cost-guided graph partition algorithm
noted by GRAPH_PARTITION(CT , CI, D) to find a resource allocation that minimizes the overall execution cost
of the system.
Cost-guided graph partition. To determine the optimal resource allocation of the GPU set D for model training
DT and the set of GPUs for rollout generation DI, we design a graph partition approach guided by the costs
generated in the first phase. We extend the GPU set D to a graph G = (D, E), where each GPU d ∈D is a
vertex noted with a computation power cd, HBM memory bandwidth md, and HBM limit Md; ∀d1, d2 ∈D,
communication bandwidth βd1,d2 represents an edge between GPUs in set E. We bisect graph G into partition
D = {DT , DI}, where DT ∪DI = D and DT ∩DI = ∅. When partitioning the graph, we adopt the following
heuristics:
• High network bandwidth should be allocated for model training. Since model training involves intensive
collective communication operations (e.g., all-reduce in TP and DP) that demand high communication
volume [7], we prioritize allocating GPUs with high aggregate interconnect bandwidth to model training.
Formally, we define the metric
P
d1,d2∈DT βd1,d2
P
d′
1,d′
2∈D βd′
1,d′
2 , i.e., the aggregated communication bandwidth of DT
over the aggregated communication bandwidth of D, to guide the graph partition by this heuristic.
• High HBM bandwidth GPUs should be allocated for rollout generation. Since rollout generation is mainly
HBM I/O-bound during generative inference computation, we prioritize allocating GPUs with high HBM
bandwidth to rollout generation. Formally, denoting we define the metric
P
d∈DI md
P
d′∈D md′ , i.e. the aggregated
HBM bandwidth of DI over the aggregated HBM bandwidth of D, to guide the graph partition.
• Careful balance of the computation power should maintained between model training and rollout inference.
Both rollout generation and model training demands the computation capacity, to maintain an adaptive
balance, we let the fraction of computation capacity occupied by model training, i.e.,
P
d∈DT cd
P
d′∈D cd′ , to fall
into a tunable range [γL, γH], where γL and γH will be tuned automatically along with the iterative
resource allocation as we will enumerate next.
By integrating the above criteria into our graph partition formulation, we define the final constrained
optimization as:
9


--- Page 10 ---
D∗
T , D∗
I = arg max
DT ,DI
 P
d1,d2∈DT βd1,d2
P
d′
1,d′
2∈D βd′
1,d′
2
+
P
d∈DI md
P
d′∈D md′
!
s.t.
γL ≤
P
d∈DT cd
P
d′∈D cd′ ≤γH
(3)
Iterative refinement. Across graph partition optimization iterations, we dynamically adjust the fraction of total
computational power allocated to model training (i.e., γL and γH) based on the execution costs generated
in the search phase algorithm (i.e., CT and CI). To balance model training and rollout generation costs, we
fine-tune γL and γH, which control the computational power ratio between them. We initialize γL = γH = 1,
assigning all FLOPS to model training. In subsequent iterations, the optimal resource allocation is determined
by tuning γL and γH using a binary search procedure. Specifically, we define the search range as [q, r], where
q = 0 and r = 1 initially. At each iteration, we first update the FLOPS allocated to model training by updating
γL = γH = (q + r)/2, and then evaluate the execution costs CT and CI: If CT < CI, we set the upper bound
r = (q + r)/2; otherwise, if CT ≥CI, we update the lower bound q = (q + r)/2. This process continues until
CT ≈CI, at which point the final resource allocation is selected to minimize the overall execution cost.
This section presents a comprehensive evaluation of AREAL-HEX across various configurations. We aim to
investigate the following research questions:
• RQ1: What is the end-to-end performance of AREAL-HEX under heterogeneous clusters and AREAL under
homogeneous clusters with the same total budget?
• RQ2: What is the breakdown performance of AREAL-HEX and AREAL, and how does each RL training
component contribute to the RL training step execution latency?
• RQ3: What is the ablation performance and cost efficiency of AREAL-HEX and AREAL?
• RQ4: How effective is the scheduling algorithm of AREAL-HEX?
4.4
Experimental Setup
Experimental environments. Our heterogeneous RL training experiments are conducted using two distinct GPU
architectures: NVIDIA H20 GPUs[48], which provide 148 TFLOPS of tensor core computational power, 4
TB/s memory bandwidth, and 450 GB/s single-direction NVLink intra-machine bandwidth; and NVIDIA H800
GPUs[49], which deliver 756 TFLOPS of tensor core computational power, 2 TB/s memory bandwidth, and
200 GB/s single-direction NVLink intra-machine bandwidth. The inter-machine bandwidth between H20 or
H800 machines is 5 GB/s, while the communication bandwidth between H20 and H800 machines is 1.5 GB/s.
The homogeneous RL training experiments are conducted using homogeneous NVIDIA H800 GPUs or H20
GPUs.
Baselines. Since our primary focus is accommodating RL training on heterogeneous GPUs, we primarily
compare the asynchronous RL training end-to-end performance of AREAL-HEX in heterogeneous environments
against AREAL in homogeneous environments under equivalent total budgets. For RL training algorithms, we
evaluate AREAL-HEX and AREAL on the GRPO algorithm, which is among the most impactful RL algorithms
in current practice. We employ identical training hyperparameters to those used in AREAL [6].
Evaluation metrics. Following established practices in prior research [6], we employ the RL training throughput
metric to assess system efficiency. RL training throughput is calculated by dividing the average number
of tokens processed by the average RL training execution time, which is defined as the sum of the weight
synchronization latency and the maximum duration between rollout generation (encompassing both rollout
and reward computation) and model training (encompassing policy and, optionally, value model gradient
computation). Given that RL training with AREAL-HEX and AREAL operates asynchronously, we compute the
RL training throughput as the average value across 30 RL training steps.
10


--- Page 11 ---
0
8158
16315
24472
32630
Throughput (t/s)
2.80×
1.36×
1.5B model
0
2542
5083
7624
10166
2.76×
1.31×
7B model
0
1056
2112
3169
4225
2.29×
1.50×
14B model
AReaL (H20)
AReaL (H800)
AReaL-Hex
Figure 3 We present the end-to-end experimental results of AREAL-HEX operating on H800 and H20 mixed heterogeneous
GPUs compared to AREAL operating on homogeneous H800 or H20 GPUs. All experimental settings maintain the same
total budgets using the same prices as in §3.
0
100
200
301
401
Latency (ms)
1.5B model
0
181
362
543
724
7B model
0
362
724
1085
1447
14B model
AReaL (H20)-Infer
AReaL (H20)-Train
AReaL (H800)-Infer
AReaL (H800)-Train
AReaL-Hex-Infer
AReaL-Hex-Train
Figure 4 We present a breakdown of experiments comparing AREAL-HEX running on a 56-GPU heterogeneous cluster
against AREAL running on a 24-GPU H800 homogeneous cluster. The terms INFER and TRAIN denote the execution
latencies for rollout generation and model training.
4.5
End-to-end System Performance Comparison (Q1)
End-to-end experimental results: On the GRPO RL training workloads, we benchmark the end-to-end training
performance of AREAL-HEX with heterogeneous clusters against AREAL with homogeneous clusters (either
homogeneous H800 GPUs or H20 GPUs) under the same total budget. We compare the asynchronous RL
training throughput of AREAL-HEX and AREAL. As shown in Figure 3, experimental results across different
model sizes (ranging from 1.5B to 14B parameters) of the DeepSeek Distilled Qwen-2.5 models [50–52]
demonstrate that AREAL-HEX consistently reduces RL training latency across all evaluated cases when both
AREAL-HEX and AREAL apply the optimal parallel configurations. Compared to the baseline where AREAL
runs on H800 homogeneous GPUs, AREAL-HEX achieves up to 1.50× speedup (on the 14B model), at least
1.31× speedup (on the 7B model), and an average 1.39× speedup; compared to the baseline where AREAL
runs on H20 homogeneous GPUs, AREAL-HEX achieves up to 2.76× speedup (on the 7B model), at least
2.29× speedup (on the 14B model), and an average 2.62× speedup.
Discussion: In essence, heterogeneous RL training aligns diverse hardware capabilities with the heterogeneous
computational demands of RL training. By strategically allocating H20 GPUs for memory-bound rollout
generation and H800 GPUs for compute-bound model training, we effectively leverage the advantages of
both GPU architectures. H800 GPUs excel at computation-intensive tasks, while H20 GPUs demonstrate
superior performance in rollout generation due to their distinct hardware specifications on computational
power and HBM memory bandwidth. Our experimental results demonstrate that AREAL-HEX deployed on
heterogeneous GPUs consistently outperforms AREAL running on either homogeneous H800 or H20 GPU
clusters. Specifically, the H800 homogeneous baseline exhibits suboptimal performance in rollout generation,
whereas the H20 homogeneous baseline underperforms in model training phases. These findings confirm that
strategic heterogeneous deployment, which respects the distinct computational characteristics of different
hardware architectures, yields superior overall performance.
11


--- Page 12 ---
24 GPUs
32 GPUs
40 GPUs
56 GPUs
0
68
136
204
272
Throughput per $ (t/s)
1.5B model
24 GPUs
32 GPUs
40 GPUs
56 GPUs
0
21
42
62
83
7B model
24 GPUs
32 GPUs
40 GPUs
56 GPUs
0
8
16
24
32
14B model
Figure 5 Case study of AREAL-HEX’s performance cost-efficiency across different cluster sizes ranging from 24 to 56 GPUs.
For the H20 and H800 GPU per-hour costs, we follow the prior practice [46].
4.6
Breakdown System Performance Comparison (Q2)
Performance breakdown results. We present a comprehensive breakdown performance of the asynchronous
GRPO RL training using AREAL-HEX (running over heterogeneous GPUs) and AREAL (running over homo-
geneous H800 or H20 GPUs) across various model sizes in Figure 4. Compared to AREAL running over
homogeneous H800 GPUs, AREAL-HEX achieves a maximum of 1.61×, a minimum of 1.35×, and on average
1.46× lower rollout generation execution latency; compared to AREAL running over homogeneous H20
GPUs, AREAL-HEX achieves a maximum of 3.13×, a minimum of 1.85×, and on average 2.46× lower model
training execution latency. The comparison of weight synchronization execution cost, which comprises a
small fraction for both AREAL-HEX and AREAL, is presented in Table 2. For AREAL operating on H800 GPUs,
weight synchronization costs represent, on average, 1.9% of the GRPO RL training iteration duration. For
AREAL-HEX operating in heterogeneous GPU environments with 1.5 GB/s communication bandwidth, weight
synchronization costs account for 13.54% of the total RL training time.
Table 2 Weight update time comparison across homogeneous and heterogeneous GPU configurations.
Model
AREAL (H800)
AREAL (H20)
AREAL-HEX
1.5B model
4.75 s
2.74 s
10.06 s
7B model
14.79 s
7.46 s
58.34 s
14B model
26.00 s
13.05 s
112.93 s
Discussion: Experimental results demonstrate that rollout generation in AREAL running on homogeneous H800
GPUs frequently emerges as the primary system bottleneck, as the relatively short model training duration
fails to provide sufficient temporal overlap with rollout generation. In contrast, AREAL-HEX running on
heterogeneous GPUs exhibits more balanced rollout generation and model training speeds, achieving optimal
system performance under asynchronous operation. Fundamentally, the integration of H20 GPUs enhances
rollout generation capacity, thereby delivering substantial system performance improvements. Moreover, the
communication overhead between heterogeneous devices remains acceptable under 1.5GB/s inter-machine
bandwidth constraints. Given that 1.5GB/s communication bandwidth between heterogeneous GPUs is
typically readily available in practice, heterogeneous RL training deployment represents a practical solution
for real-world applications without requiring extensive engineering efforts for network communication across
heterogeneous devices.
Table 3 Throughput comparison between AREAL and AREAL with uniform resource allocation, i.e., AREAL (u).
Model
AREAL (u)
AREAL
1.5B model
1.17 × 104 t/s
1.84 × 104 t/s (1.57×↑)
7B model
3.57 × 103 t/s
5.98 × 103 t/s (1.68×↑)
14B model
1.29 × 103 t/s
2.16 × 103 t/s (1.67×↑)
12


--- Page 13 ---
Table 4 Cost-efficiency comparison between AREAL-HEX running on a 32-GPU heterogeneous cluster and AREAL running
on 24 H800 GPUs.
Model
System
Throughput
Cost
1.5B model
AREAL (H800)
1.84 × 104 t/s
$126.72/h
AREAL-HEX
1.79 × 104 t/s
$86.64/h
7B model
AREAL (H800)
5.98 × 103 t/s
$126.72/h
AREAL-HEX
6.00 × 103 t/s
$86.64/h
14B model
AREAL (H800)
2.16 × 103 t/s
$126.72/h
AREAL-HEX
2.30 × 103 t/s
$86.64/h
4.7
Ablation Study & Case Studies (Q3)
Ablation on resource allocation. In Table 3, we present the performance variations of AREAL under different
resource allocation strategies. The experimental results demonstrate that our resource allocation optimization
approach (detailed in §4.3) delivers substantial and consistent improvements in system performance for 1.5B,
7B, and 14B models. Specifically, our resource allocation optimization achieves a maximum speedup of 1.68×,
and an average speedup of 1.63× compared to configurations where this scheduling optimization is disabled.
These results highlight the necessity of careful scheduling of the resource allocation.
Case study on the cost efficiency of AREAL-HEX. In Figure 5, we present the per-dollar end-to-end system
performance of AREAL-HEX under varied cluster sizes. Experimental results demonstrate that AREAL-HEX
maintains stable per-dollar system throughput across heterogeneous GPU clusters ranging from 24 to 56
GPUs. Concretely, the per-dollar throughput for the 1.5B, 7B, and 14B models is around 200, 62, and 24
tokens/s, across cluster configurations ranging from 24 to 56 heterogeneous GPUs. These results validate that
heterogeneous RL training can deliver stable performance, regardless of the cluster size.
Case study on the cost efficiency comparison. In Table 4, we present the experimental results where AREAL-HEX
and AREAL achieves the same throughput. In this case, AREAL-HEX running over heterogeneous GPUs
demonstrates a lower per-hour training cost than AREAL running over homogeneous GPUs. For 1.5B, 7B, and
14B models, the heterogeneous setting demonstrates 1.42×, 1.31×, and 1.50× lower per-hour training cost
than the H800 homogeneous baseline. For the H20 baseline, our heterogeneous settings achieving the same
throughput also demonstrate a 50% RL training cost reduction. These results confirm that heterogeneous RL
training is an economical choice.
4.8
Evaluation on Scheduling Algorithm (Q4)
Table 5 Scheduling (algorithm convergence) time across different cluster sizes. “Ours (w/o Search)" and “Ours (w/o
Repartition)" mean replacing the search phase (§4.2) and the repartition phase (§4.3) of our scheduling algorithm with
exhaustive search, respectively. The algorithm is considered converged when the solution remains stable for more than 20
consecutive iterations.
Cluster Size
Ours
Ours (w/o Search)
Ours (w/o Repartition)
24 GPUs
14.9s
6.1min (24.6×↑)
5.0min (20.1×↑)
32 GPUs
23.1s
11.3min (29.4×↑)
7.7min (20.0×↑)
40 GPUs
46.7s
34.4min (44.2×↑)
16.4min (21.1×↑)
56 GPUs
2.0min
≥40min (≥20.0×↑)
≥40min (≥20.0×↑)
Algorithm execution speed. In Table 5, we present a comparative analysis of the execution speed of our
scheduling algorithm against two baselines where each of our algorithm phases is replaced with an exhaustive
search approach. Experimental results demonstrate that our algorithm efficiently determines optimal resource
allocation and parallelization strategies for rollout generation and model training, achieving a substantial
speedup of 20.0× to 44.2× in search time compared to the exhaustive search baseline algorithms.
13


--- Page 14 ---
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced AREAL-HEX, a novel system that enhances asynchronous RL training on heteroge-
neous GPUs. We carefully designed a two-phase scheduling algorithm, which is capable of effectively and
efficiently determining the resource allocation and parallel strategy for rollout generation and model training.
Maintaining the same total, experimental results demonstrate that AREAL-HEX running over heterogeneous
GPUs achieves superior performance than AREAL running over homogeneous GPUs on models with 1.5B,
7B, and 14B model parameters. By allocating suitable resources for rollout generation and model training,
AREAL-HEX has unlocked the potential of heterogeneous resources and provides an economic alternative
compared to the homogeneous clusters.
References
[1] Kaiyan Zhang, Yuxin Zuo, Bingxiang He, Youbang Sun, Runze Liu, Che Jiang, Yuchen Fan, Kai Tian, Guoli Jia, Pengfei
Li, et al. A survey of reinforcement learning for large reasoning models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08827, 2025.
[2] ZZ Ren, Zhihong Shao, Junxiao Song, Huajian Xin, Haocheng Wang, Wanjia Zhao, Liyue Zhang, Zhe Fu, Qihao Zhu,
Dejian Yang, et al. Deepseek-prover-v2: Advancing formal mathematical reasoning via reinforcement learning for
subgoal decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.21801, 2025.
[3] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming
Lu, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12186, 2024.
[4] Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik R Narasimhan. τ-bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user
interaction in real-world domains. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[5] Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu, Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and Chuan
Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference on
Computer Systems, pages 1279–1297, 2025.
[6] Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Xujie Shen, Chen Zhu, Zhiyu Mei, Chuyi He, Shusheng Xu, Guo Wei, Jun Mei, Jiashu Wang,
et al. Areal: A large-scale asynchronous reinforcement learning system for language reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.24298, 2025.
[7] Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Xiaoniu Song, Hanpeng Hu, Chao Jin, Bingyang Wu, Nuo Chen, Yukun Chen, Yu Zhou,
Changyi Wan, et al. Streamrl: Scalable, heterogeneous, and elastic rl for llms with disaggregated stream generation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15930, 2025.
[8] Michael Noukhovitch, Shengyi Huang, Sophie Xhonneux, Arian Hosseini, Rishabh Agarwal, and Aaron Courville.
Asynchronous rlhf: Faster and more efficient off-policy rl for language models. In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[9] Ran Yan, Youhe Jiang, Xiaonan Nie, Fangcheng Fu, Bin Cui, and Binhang Yuan. Hexiscale: Accommodating large
language model training over heterogeneous environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01143, 2024.
[10] Taegeon Um, Byungsoo Oh, Minyoung Kang, Woo-Yeon Lee, Goeun Kim, Dongseob Kim, Youngtaek Kim, Mohd
Muzzammil, and Myeongjae Jeon. Metis: Fast automatic distributed training on heterogeneous {GPUs}. In 2024
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24), pages 563–578, 2024.
[11] Yixuan Mei, Yonghao Zhuang, Xupeng Miao, Juncheng Yang, Zhihao Jia, and Rashmi Vinayak. Helix: Serving
large language models over heterogeneous gpus and network via max-flow. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1,
pages 586–602, 2025.
[12] Youhe Jiang, Ran Yan, Xiaozhe Yao, Yang Zhou, Beidi Chen, and Binhang Yuan. Hexgen: Generative inference of
large language model over heterogeneous environment. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
21946–21961. PMLR, 2024.
[13] Youhe Jiang, Ran Yan, and Binhang Yuan. Hexgen-2: Disaggregated generative inference of llms in heterogeneous
environment. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[14] OpenAI. Learning to reason with llms. OpenAI Blog, 09 2024.
[15] OpenAI. Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini. OpenAI Blog, 04 2025.
14


--- Page 15 ---
[16] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri
Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[17] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob
Steinhardt. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the math dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03874,
2021.
[18] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men, Kejuan
Yang, et al. Agentbench: Evaluating llms as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688, 2023.
[19] Yiping Wang, Qing Yang, Zhiyuan Zeng, Liliang Ren, Liyuan Liu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Xuehai He, Kuan Wang,
Jianfeng Gao, et al. Reinforcement learning for reasoning in large language models with one training example. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.20571, 2025.
[20] Jiaxuan Gao, Wei Fu, Minyang Xie, Shusheng Xu, Chuyi He, Zhiyu Mei, Banghua Zhu, and Yi Wu. Beyond ten turns:
Unlocking long-horizon agentic search with large-scale asynchronous rl. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.07976, 2025.
[21] Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yukun Chen, Changyi Wan, Hanpeng Hu, Lei Xia, Ranchen
Ming, Yibo Zhu, et al. Optimizing {RLHF} training for large language models with stage fusion. In 22nd USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25), pages 489–503, 2025.
[22] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng, Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao
Zhang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. {AlpaServe}: Statistical multiplexing with model parallelism for deep learning
serving. In 17th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 23), pages 663–679,
2023.
[23] Yanping Huang, Youlong Cheng, Ankur Bapna, Orhan Firat, Dehao Chen, Mia Chen, HyoukJoong Lee, Jiquan Ngiam,
Quoc V Le, Yonghui Wu, et al. Gpipe: Efficient training of giant neural networks using pipeline parallelism. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 32, 2019.
[24] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-
lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053,
2019.
[25] Xupeng Miao, Yujie Wang, Youhe Jiang, Chunan Shi, Xiaonan Nie, Hailin Zhang, and Bin Cui. Galvatron: Effi-
cient transformer training over multiple gpus using automatic parallelism. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment,
16(3):470–479, 2022.
[26] Youhe Jiang, Fangcheng Fu, Xupeng Miao, Xiaonan Nie, and Bin Cui.
Osdp: Optimal sharded data parallel
for distributed deep learning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pages 2142–2150, 2023.
[27] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[28] Volodymyr Mnih, Adria Puigdomenech Badia, Mehdi Mirza, Alex Graves, Timothy Lillicrap, Tim Harley, David Silver,
and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Asynchronous methods for deep reinforcement learning. In International conference on
machine learning, pages 1928–1937. PmLR, 2016.
[29] Lasse Espeholt, Hubert Soyer, Remi Munos, Karen Simonyan, Vlad Mnih, Tom Ward, Yotam Doron, Vlad Firoiu,
Tim Harley, Iain Dunning, et al. Impala: Scalable distributed deep-rl with importance weighted actor-learner
architectures. In International conference on machine learning, pages 1407–1416. PMLR, 2018.
[30] Lasse Espeholt, Raphaël Marinier, Piotr Stanczyk, Ke Wang, and Marcin Michalski. Seed rl: Scalable and efficient
deep-rl with accelerated central inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.06591, 2019.
[31] Zhiyu Mei, Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Guangju Wang, Huanchen Zhang, and Yi Wu. Srl: Scaling distributed reinforcement
learning to over ten thousand cores. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.16688, 2023.
[32] Zhiyu Mei, Wei Fu, Kaiwei Li, Guangju Wang, Huanchen Zhang, and Yi Wu. Real: Efficient rlhf training of large
language models with parameter reallocation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14088, 2024.
[33] Junyu Wu, Weiming Chang, Xiaotao Liu, Guanyou He, Haoqiang Hong, Boqi Liu, Hongtao Tian, Tao Yang, Yunsheng
Shi, Feng Lin, et al. G-core: A simple, scalable and balanced rlhf trainer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.22789, 2025.
15


--- Page 16 ---
[34] Zhenyu Han, Ansheng You, Haibo Wang, Kui Luo, Guang Yang, Wenqi Shi, Menglong Chen, Sicheng Zhang, Zeshun
Lan, Chunshi Deng, et al. Asyncflow: An asynchronous streaming rl framework for efficient llm post-training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.01663, 2025.
[35] Benjamin Hindman, Andy Konwinski, Matei Zaharia, Ali Ghodsi, Anthony D Joseph, Randy Katz, Scott Shenker, and
Ion Stoica. Mesos: A platform for {Fine-Grained} resource sharing in the data center. In 8th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 11), 2011.
[36] Gunho Lee and Randy H Katz. {Heterogeneity-Aware} resource allocation and scheduling in the cloud. In 3rd
USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud 11), 2011.
[37] Christina Delimitrou and Christos Kozyrakis. Qos-aware scheduling in heterogeneous datacenters with paragon.
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 31(4):1–34, 2013.
[38] Zizhao Mo, Jianxiong Liao, Huanle Xu, Zhi Zhou, and Chengzhong Xu. Hetis: Serving llms in heterogeneous gpu
clusters with fine-grained and dynamic parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.08309, 2025.
[39] Ziming Mao, Tian Xia, Zhanghao Wu, Wei-Lin Chiang, Tyler Griggs, Romil Bhardwaj, Zongheng Yang, Scott Shenker,
and Ion Stoica. Skyserve: Serving ai models across regions and clouds with spot instances. In Proceedings of the
Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, pages 159–175, 2025.
[40] Youhe Jiang, Fangcheng Fu, Xiaozhe Yao, Guoliang He, Xupeng Miao, Ana Klimovic, Bin Cui, Binhang Yuan, and
Eiko Yoneki. Demystifying cost-efficiency in llm serving over heterogeneous gpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00722,
2025.
[41] Youhe Jiang, Fangcheng Fu, Xiaozhe Yao, Taiyi Wang, Bin Cui, Ana Klimovic, and Eiko Yoneki. Thunderserve:
High-performance and cost-efficient llm serving in cloud environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09334, 2025.
[42] Chris Tong, Youhe Jiang, Gufeng Chen, Tianyi Zhao, Sibian Lu, Wenjie Qu, Eric Yang, Lynn Ai, and Binhang Yuan.
Parallax: Efficient llm inference service over decentralized environment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26182, 2025.
[43] You Peng, Youhe Jiang, Chen Wang, and Binhang Yuan. Hexgen-text2sql: Optimizing llm inference request scheduling
for agentic text-to-sql workflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.05286, 2025.
[44] Binhang Yuan, Yongjun He, Jared Davis, Tianyi Zhang, Tri Dao, Beidi Chen, Percy S Liang, Christopher Re, and
Ce Zhang. Decentralized training of foundation models in heterogeneous environments. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:25464–25477, 2022.
[45] Xupeng Miao, Yining Shi, Zhi Yang, Bin Cui, and Zhihao Jia.
Sdpipe: A semi-decentralized framework for
heterogeneity-aware pipeline-parallel training. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 16(9):2354–2363, 2023.
[46] Ruidong Zhu, Ziheng Jiang, Chao Jin, Peng Wu, Cesar A Stuardo, Dongyang Wang, Xinlei Zhang, Huaping Zhou,
Haoran Wei, Yang Cheng, et al. Megascale-infer: Serving mixture-of-experts at scale with disaggregated expert
parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.02263, 2025.
[47] Todd K Moon. The expectation-maximization algorithm. IEEE Signal processing magazine, 13(6):47–60, 1996.
[48] NVIDIA.
Nvidia
h20
solution
brief.
https://images.nvidia.com/content/pdf/dgx-apps/
NVIDIA-H2O-Solution-Brief-June17.pdf, 2024.
[49] NVIDIA. Nvidia ai enterprise product support matrix, 2024. H800 Tensor Core GPU specifications.
[50] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-1.5b, 2024.
[51] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-7b, 2024.
[52] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1-distill-qwen-14b, 2024.
16
