--- Page 1 ---
Fast Algorithms for Scheduling Many-body
Correlation Functions on Accelerators
Oguz Selvitopi∗, Emin Ozturk†, Jie Chen§, Ponnuswamy Sadayappan†, Robert G. Edwards§, Aydın Buluc¸∗‡
∗Applied Mathematics and Computational Research Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
†School of Computing, University of Utah
‡Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California
§Jefferson Lab, Newport News
Abstract—Computation of correlation functions is a key opera-
tion in Lattice quantum chromodynamics (LQCD) simulations to
extract nuclear physics observables. These functions involve many
binary batch tensor contractions, each tensor possibly occupying
hundreds of MBs of memory. Performing these contractions on
GPU accelerators poses the challenge of scheduling them as
to optimize tensor reuse and reduce data traffic. In this work
we propose two fast novel scheduling algorithms that reorder
contractions to increase temporal locality via input/intermediate
tensor reuse. Our schedulers take advantage of application-
specific features, such as contractions being binary and locality
within contraction trees, to optimize the objective of minimizing
peak memory. We integrate them into the LQCD analysis soft-
ware suite Redstar and improve time-to-solution. Our schedulers
attain upto 2.1x improvement in peak memory, which is reflected
by a reduction of upto 4.2x in evictions, upto 1.8x in data traffic,
resulting in upto 1.9x faster correlation function computation
time.
Index Terms—Lattice QCD, Correlation functions, Tensor
contraction, Directed acyclic graph, Scheduling
I. INTRODUCTION
Calculations of many-particle correlation functions play an
important role in producing observables in scientific physics
systems such as Lattice quantum chromodynamics (LQCD)
simulations [1]. Correlation function computations for LQCD
simulations involve contractions of quark propagations that
describe the interactions between hadrons. Hadronic systems
consist of mesons and/or baryons, which are subatomic par-
ticles consisting of quarks held together by gluons. These
computations include the evaluation of quark propagation
diagrams, whose number has factorial growth in the number
of quarks and degrees of freedom of the hadronic system,
making it computationally challenging to compute even simple
systems such as two mesons.
A natural way to represent the evaluation of hadronic
correlation functions is through graphs, for which vertices
are used to represent the quarks in hadrons and edges are
used to represent the quark propagations. In order to evaluate
the function, a series of quark contractions is performed by
eliminating one edge at a time until there are two hadrons
left. Each quark contraction necessitates a batched tensor
contraction, where the dimension of the tensors (N) in the
contraction are typically in hundreds but it is desirable to have
the dimension as large as possible. Moreover, terms of the
summation used to evaluate the correlation function can be in
the scale of tens of thousands. Hence, from a computational
perspective, we have thousands of graphs, each of which
contain considerable amount of batched tensor contractions
with individual contraction sizes reaching up to 1024, and with
some of the contractions appearing in multiple graphs.
Computing tensor contractions is both compute- and
memory-intensive. To give an example, storing a single hadron
node may require hundreds or thousands of MBs: a single
baryon node with 64 spin components and dimension of
N = 128 will need 2 GB to store. On an accelerator with
32 GB of memory, this will result in fewer than 16 hadron
nodes that can be stored on device memory at any point
of the execution. Moreover, since the same hadron nodes
appear in different graphs, data reuse becomes critical in
optimizing the memory footprint. Throughout the execution
many intermediate tensors are produced, which are released as
soon as there are no contractions depending on them. Hence,
it is important to perform the contractions that depend on the
same tensors in a short window of time frame as to improve
data reuse. In this regard, scheduling of contractions becomes
critical for efficient computation of correlation functions.
In this work, we address the problem of scheduling ten-
sor contractions needed by hadronic correlation functions on
accelerators. Although there are several works that optimize
tensor contractions [2]–[6], few focus on scheduling. Due to
the limited device memory, intermediate tensors may need to
be moved in and out of the device memory using the PCIe
link between the host and the device. As same tensors may
be needed by different contractions, an important objective
of the scheduling should be maximizing tensor reuse (i.e.,
temporal locality) to reduce the data traffic between host and
the device. This data traffic can be a big bottleneck preventing
efficient computation of correlation functions on accelerators,
especially for large N. When we consider the architectural
trend that time to process data is reduced faster than the time
to move the data, designing algorithms that focus on the latter
becomes more important in performance.
We propose two novel and fast algorithms for schedul-
ing contractions that are needed by the correlation function
computations in LQCD simulations. Both of the proposed
schedulers take advantage of the specific properties that stem
from the application. Our first scheduler is called the sibling
scheduler and it exploits the property that each contraction
arXiv:2511.02257v1  [cs.DC]  4 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
is binary. Our second scheduler is called the tree scheduler
and it exploits the locality found within contraction trees to
schedule them as a whole. Sibling scheduler is faster but
makes localized decisions. On the other hand, tree scheduler
is more involved and takes into account the entire state of the
memory in making scheduling decisions with a well-defined
gain definition. Both schedulers make use of the contraction
directed acyclic graph (DAG), which is constructed from the
individual graphs that represent the correlation functions.
We realize the proposed schedulers in the LQCD analysis
software suite Redstar. Redstar solves correlation functions to
obtain phsyics observables of many-particle systems. It is ca-
pable of running on shared-memory systems and accelerators
involving GPUs. With our experiments, we demonstrate that
the proposed schedulers greatly benefit the computation of
correlation functions on GPUs within Redstar by optimizing
data movement. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose a scheduler, called the sibling scheduler, that
exploits the property that each contraction is binary and the
contraction DAG is shallow.
• We propose another scheduler, called the tree scheduler, that
utilizes the locality inherent in contraction trees and uses the
global state of the memory to make scheduling decisions.
• We integrate the proposed schedulers into the LQCD anal-
ysis software Redstar.
• We validate the proposed schedulers by assessing how well
they optimize their target objective on the contraction DAGs
corresponding to the hadronic correlation functions.
• We conduct extensive experiments within Redstar on six
different correlation functions to demonstrate their effec-
tiveness in reducing data traffic between CPU and GPU and
improving time-to-solution of correlation functions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we introduce the notation and define the problem addressed.
We describe the proposed schedulers and analyze them in
Section III. We present the obtained results in Section IV.
We provide the related work in Section V and conclude in
Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Redstar software suite
Redstar1 is a Lattice QCD analysis software suite developed
for the purpose of constructing and evaluating correlation
functions on shared-memory and many-core architectures. It
manages a workflow that consists of several stages and makes
use of different libraries. A unique feature and central to
the design of Redstar is the graph representation of quark
propagations [7] in which hadron nodes and quarks in them are
represented by vertices and quark propagations are represented
by edges. Redstar’s input is a list of correlation functions that
describe a physics system, from which it produces hadron
nodes and associated graphs. Using these graphs, it forms a
general directed acyclic graph (DAG) that encompasses all
correlation functions, and performs graph-based optimizations
1https://github.com/JeffersonLab/redstar
to efficiently generate execution queues to perform hundreds
of thousands of tensor contractions. Redstar is capable of
performing contractions in parallel on CPUs and GPUs.
Among some of the libraries Redstar uses are Hadron and
Colorvec, the former mainly responsible for performing tensor
contractions and the latter construction of hadron nodes.
Data reuse and scheduling. In order to increase data reuse
and reduce memory footprint, in determining a contraction
path for a correlation function Redstar first pre-processes edges
to compute the occurrence of each edge in all contraction
trees. Then, it assigns a value to each edge in a contrac-
tion tree using the computed frequencies and the computa-
tional complexity of the respective contraction (which can
be O(N 3), O(N 4), O(N 5)). Hence, in selecting a contraction
path, it prefers edges that occur across different contraction
trees and contractions that are expensive. By doing so, it can
avoid repeated computation of expensive contractions. Redstar
also exploits data reuse by processing contraction trees that
share common contractions successively. To do so, it sorts
the contraction trees based on their similarity. In this way,
a shared tensor can be released as soon as the contraction
trees that need this tensor are processed. However, such a
static and localized approach may still suffer high memory
footprint because reordering of the trees does not consider
the entire state of the memory, but rather similarity to another
contraction tree. In our work, we propose schedulers that aims
to find contraction orders that improves data reuse and reduce
peak memory. Redstar has another scheduler [8] for multiple
GPUs but this is not focus of our work.
GPU memory management. Tensor contractions require
large amount of memory. Each tensor can occupy hundreds
of MBs of memory and computation of the correlation func-
tions can produce hundreds of thousands of intermediate
tensors. Limited amount of GPU memory necessitates efficient
management of memory resources on the device. For this
purpose, Redstar relies on a custom memory management
framework called MemHC [9]. MemHC includes several op-
timizations specifically targeting correlation functions such
as duplication-aware management, lazily-released memory
blocks, pre-protected LRU eviction policy, etc. When there is
not enough memory on the device for a contraction, MemHC
evicts memory blocks to host memory. If the scheduling order
of contractions has poor tensor reuse, this will result in a lot
of data movement between the host and the device due to
evictions. The data moved from host to device can go up to a
few TBs, making the PCI bus a bottleneck. For example, the
default sorting-based contraction scheduler in Redstar causes
more than 7 TB of data traffic between host and device on the
roper dataset for the tensor dimension of 64. The proposed
schedulers in this work aim to overcome this bottleneck.
B. Notation
The input to the computations of correlation functions is a
set of k contraction trees, denoted with T = {T1, T2, · · · , Tk},
which are rooted and directed. The node sets of a pair of trees
in T need not be disjoint except the roots of these trees. Each


--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 1: The contraction DAG formed from three contraction
trees. Nodes that appear in multiple trees are shown in green
color. The edges that appear in multiple trees are shown with
dashed arrows.
tree constructed for the computation of correlation functions
in our application typically has a few nodes in it, usually no
more than 10 or 15, and there are many contraction trees
whose number can range from a few thousand to hundreds
of thousands, depending on the type and parameters of LQCD
simulations.
From T , a contraction DAG G = (V, E) is formed, in
which each node u ∈V
represents a tensor contraction
and/or a tensor, and each directed edge (u, v) ∈E represents
the dependency of the contraction represented by v to the
tensor represented by u. The leaf nodes in V represent only
a tensor, while the non-leaf nodes represent both a tensor
contraction and the output tensor produced by that contraction.
Fig. 1 shows an example contraction DAG formed from three
contraction trees. We have the following fields for each node
u:
• u.child: Inputs of a tensor contraction (for non-leaf nodes).
We also use u.left and u.right to refer to the specific child
of a node as in context as there are only two children of a
non-leaf node u.
• u.parents: The contractions that depend on this tensor. For
the roots of trees in T , u.parents = ∅.
• u.type: The type of a node can be one of the following:
LEAF, INTERIOR, ROOT. The nodes that do not have any
input edges are of type LEAF, whereas the nodes that do
not have any output edges are of type ROOT and there
is one root for every contraction tree Ti, i.e., there are k
ROOT nodes. The remaining set of nodes are INTERIOR
nodes that correspond to the contractions which need to be
scheduled and their outputs need to be stored as long as
they are needed. The total number of contractions hence is
given by the number of INTERIOR and ROOT nodes, i.e.,
number of non-leaf nodes.
• u.cost: The computational cost of the binary contraction.
• u.size: The size of the tensor represented by u in memory.
Finally, there is a weight associated with each edge (u, v),
denoted with w(u, v), which is equal to the size of the tensor
needed by the contraction represented by v, i.e., w(u, v) =
u.size.
Finally, the proposed algorithms are easily generalized to the
general case where each node has arbitrary number children
without affecting their runtime complexity. We use the notation
TABLE I: Memory used in two different schedules on the
contraction DAG in Fig. 1.
Memory contents
Schedule
Contraction
Before
After
Size
S1
e
∅
{b, e}
2
g
{b, e}
{a, b, e}
3
h
{a, b, e}
{a, b}
2
f
{a, b}
∅
0
S2
f
∅
{a, b}
2
e
{a, b}
{a, e}
2
g
{a, e}
{a}
1
h
{a}
∅
0
u.left and u.right when the scheduler exploits the property
that each node has two children (i.e., sibling scheduler in
Section III-A), and the notation u.child otherwise (i.e, tree
scheduler in Section III-B).
C. Problem definition
We first describe the memory model we use for scheduling
the nodes of the contraction DAG. A tensor remains in memory
as long as it is needed by a contraction that is not yet
performed. At the beginning, we assume the tensors that
correspond to the leaf nodes reside in the host memory and
not in device memory. Hence, a tensor corresponding to a
leaf node is not considered to be consuming memory until
the first contraction that depends on that leaf is performed.
Consider a sequence of n contractions c1, c2, · · · , cn and let
Mi−1 be the amount of memory used before performing ci,
where M0 = 0. Processing ci has the following steps: (i) bring
any tensor that correspond to leaf nodes that ci depends on to
memory, if any, (ii) perform ci and produce its output tensor,
and (iii) release the tensors that do not have any contractions
depending on them, including the one produced by ci. Note
that the tensors that correspond to interior nodes that ci depend
on are already in memory before performing ci. After these
steps, the used memory is Mi. The peak memory in this
sequence of contractions is given by maxi Mi and the memory
change due to performing ci is Mi−Mi−1. Note that Mn = 0.
Table I presents the contents of the memory for two different
contraction schedules S1 and S2 on the contraction DAG in
Fig. 1.
We address the problem of finding a sequential schedule of
the contraction DAG that minimizes the peak memory, i.e., that
minimizes maxi Mi. A good scheduler should intuitively max-
imize data reuse in order to reduce peak memory. Reducing the
peak memory should reduce the evictions in Redstar described
earlier, resulting in reduced data transfers between host and
device, and hence improved runtime for the computation of
correlation functions.
III. SCHEDULING HEURISTICS
In this section propose two schedulers, sibling scheduler and
tree scheduler, to solve the problem defined in Section II-C.
A. Sibling scheduler
The sibling scheduler aims to exploit the structural property
of the contraction DAG that each contraction is binary. As


--- Page 4 ---
Algorithm 1 SB-SCHEDULER (G = (V, E))
1: Let Q1, Q2, · · · , Qq be empty queues
2: while There are contractions to schedule do
3:
if All queues are empty then
4:
Let u be a random leaf with u.state = WAITING
5:
else
6:
Let i be the largest integer such that Qi ̸= ∅
7:
u = DEQUEUE(Qi)
8:
SB-PROCESS(u)
soon as the contraction represented by u is complete and
its output is produced, it strives to complete the contractions
represented by each node v that are sibling of u as to enable
the parent contractions. The scheduler gives a higher priority
to the available contractions that are further in the topological
ordering of G and in this manner aims to achieve a depth-first
scheduling of the contractions to reduce the memory footprint
of the stored intermediate tensors.
The sibling-based scheduler computes and/or maintains the
following information associated with each vertex u:
• u.rank: Rank of each node in the contraction DAG, where
u.rank =
(
0
if u is LEAF,
max
v∈u.child (v.rank) + 1
otherwise.
(1)
Ranks are computed prior to scheduling and does not change
throughout the scheduling of the contractions.
• u.rs: Number of contractions that depend on the tensor
represented by u and that are not yet performed, i.e., number
of remaining successors to enable the release of u. Initially,
u.rs = |u.parents|.
• u.rp: Number of tensors that the contraction represented by
u depends on and that are not yet available, i.e., number of
remaining predecessors to enable u for contracting. Initially,
u.rp = |u.child|.
• u.state: There are four states that may be associated with
nodes: WAITING, QUEUED, INMEM, and RELEASED. Ini-
tially, all nodes are in state WAITING.
The field u.rs is maintained to check whether the tensor
represented by u is releasable from memory upon completing
a contraction that depends on it, i.e., it becomes releasable
when u.rs = 0 where there is not any contraction task that
depends on this tensor. On the other hand, the field u.rp
is maintained to see whether we can enqueue the respective
contraction operation upon a child of u being contracted and
hence an input tensor for u being available.
The state field has different semantics depending on whether
node is leaf or not. A leaf node is in state (i) WAITING if the
respective tensor is not brought to memory yet, (ii) INMEM
if the respective tensor is in memory, and (iii) RELEASED
if the respective tensor is not needed any more and released
from memory. A non-leaf node, on the other hand, is in state
(i) WAITING if the respective contraction is not yet available
for computing, (ii) QUEUED if the respective contraction can
be scheduled and is in one of the queues, (iii) INMEM if the
output tensor generated by the respective contraction resides
in memory, and (iv) RELEASED if the respective tensor is
not needed any more and released from memory. The state
Algorithm 2 SB-PROCESS (u)
1: if u.type ̸= LEAF then
2:
Perform the contraction corresponding to u
3: else
4:
Bring the tensor represented by u to memory
5: u.state = INMEM
// Check for releasable nodes
6: if u.type ̸= LEAF then
7:
for v ∈u.child do
8:
v.rs = v.rs −1
9:
if v.rs == 0 then
10:
v.state = RELEASED
11:
if u.type == ROOT then
12:
u.state = RELEASED
// Process siblings or enqueue parents
13: for v ∈u.parents do
14:
v.rp = v.rp −1
15:
if v.rp == 1 then
16:
Let w with parent v be the sibling of u
17:
if w.state == WAITING then
18:
SB-PROP-DOWN(w)
19:
else if v.rp == 0 then
20:
ENQUEUE(Qv.rank, v)
21:
v.state = QUEUED
QUEUED cannot be used by leaf nodes as it is for the nodes
that signify a contraction, i.e., non-leaf nodes.
The sibling-based scheduler maintains a number of queues
throughout the scheduling process to distinguish between
contractions of different ranks. Excluding the leaf nodes, we
maintain q = maxu∈V u.rank queues Q1, Q2, · · · , Qq, where
Qi contains the nodes v.rank = i. The higher the rank of a
contraction, the higher its priority, i.e., the contractions in Qi
has a higher priority than the contractions in Qj, where i > j.
The sibling scheduler given in Alg. 1 utilizes two helper
routines SB-PROCESS and SB-PROP-DOWN, presented in
Alg. 2 and Alg. 3, respectively. In each iteration of the
scheduler in Alg. 1, we select a contraction task from the
highest level queue available. If all the queues are empty
yet there are still contraction tasks that need to be scheduled
(which may happen at the beginning of the scheduling process
or due to the structure of the contraction DAG), we select a
random leaf node. Then we perform some operations triggered
by the selection of that node by calling SB-PROCESS.
The SB-PROCESS in Alg. 2 performs the operations after
a tensor becomes available in memory, which can happen
either by bringing a tensor that corresponds to a leaf in the
contraction DAG (line 4 of Alg. 2) or completing a contraction
task represented by a non-leaf node (line 2 of Alg. 2). These
operations can be classified into two. In the first (lines 6-
12 of Alg. 2), we first check for any releasable tensors from
memory after completing a contraction task u corresponding
to a non-leaf node by traversing u’s children, and updating and
checking their rs field. Note that the nodes with ROOT type are
immediately releasable after being contracted as there are no
contraction tasks that depend on them (line 11-12 of Alg. 2).
The second kind of operations involve processing siblings or
enqueueing parent nodes of u (lines 13-21 of Alg. 2). For
parent v of u, if u’s respective sibling w is not yet contracted
and hence the corresponding output tensor is not available, we


--- Page 5 ---
Algorithm 3 SB-PROP-DOWN (u)
1: if u.state ̸= WAITING then
2:
return
3: if u.type == LEAF then
4:
SB-PROCESS(u)
5:
return
6: SB-PROP-DOWN(u.left)
7: SB-PROP-DOWN(u.right)
try to make this sibling available by propagating down all the
nodes in the sub-tree whose root is w (line 18 of Alg. 2) by
calling SB-PROP-DOWN. Otherwise, both tensors represented
by u and w are available and in memory, hence the contraction
represented by parent v can now be performed. Thus, we
enqueue the corresponding contraction task to the respective
queue (line 20 of Alg. 2). The operations ENQUEUE and
DEQUEUE on the queues are self-explanatory.
The SB-PROP-DOWN in Alg. 3 aims to make the sibling
of a node available as to enable their parent contraction as
soon as possible. For this purpose, the leaf descendants of
the sibling are brought to memory if they are not already in
memory. The call to SB-PROP-DOWN is done only if there
is one remaining predecessor of the parent node (line 15 of
Alg. 2). This is expected to be more effective especially when
each contraction is binary.
Runtime complexity. In the sibling scheduler, the routine
SB-PROCESS can be called on leaf nodes whose state is
WAITING and for the non-leaf nodes whose state is QUEUED.
Once SB-PROCESS is called for node u, its state permanently
changes to either INMEM or RELEASED. Hence SB-PROCESS
is called only once for each node. Once called for u, this
routine traverses incoming and outgoing edges of u. Hence,
runtime complexity of sibling scheduler is O(V + E).
B. Tree scheduler
Contraction trees harbor a certain degree of locality within
themselves as all the tensors produced within a tree will
be needed by the contractions in that tree. Hence, we can
take advantage of this specific feature provided by the input
trees to schedule contractions on a coarse-grain level by
scheduling contraction trees as a whole. To this end, we
propose a scheduler based on selecting contraction trees as
a whole that utilizes the global information about the most
recent state of the memory. A contraction operation may
require its input tensors brought to memory which can stay
in memory after the contraction if there are other contractions
depending on them, increasing the utilized memory; or it
may cause its input tensors to be released from memory if
they are already in memory and do not depend on any other
contraction, decreasing the utilized memory. The proposed tree
scheduler efficiently maintains how much increase the subset
of contractions in a tree will cause in memory and selects
the next tree based on this information. Note that the memory
increase can be negative, which means a reduction in memory
consumption.
The tree scheduler does not rely upon each non-leaf node
having two children and can handle contraction DAGs in
which nodes have arbitrary number of children. Moreover,
Fig. 2: At each iteration, tree scheduler selects a contraction
tree (shown on the right), then processes the nodes in that
contraction tree, and then either keeps tensors in memory
if they are needed by other contraction trees (shown in the
middle) or releases them from memory if they are not needed
by any other contractions (shown on the left).
although we describe our algorithms for contraction trees, our
scheduler also works where each Ti is not a tree but a DAG.
Fig. 2 illustrates the high-level concepts of the tree scheduler.
The tree scheduler maintains information on both node and
tree level. For each vertex u, we have the following:
• u.ctree: The set of trees node u is in.
• u.state: There are three states that may be associated with
nodes: AVAIL, INMEM, and RELEASED. All nodes are
initially in state AVAIL.
• u.outAv: The set of outgoing neighbors of u that is in state
AVAIL, i.e., {v : v ∈u.parents and v.state = AVAIL}.
• τ(u, Ti): Number of outgoing neighbors of u that are in state
AVAIL and in Ti, i.e., |{v : v ∈u.parents and v.state =
AVAIL and v ∈Ti}|.
• δ(u, Ti): Number of outgoing neighbors of u that are
in
state
AVAIL
and
not
in
Ti,
i.e.,
|{v
:
v
∈
u.parents and v.state = AVAIL and v /∈Ti}|.
A node is in state (i) AVAIL if the respective tensor has not
been brought to memory yet or the respective contraction has
not been performed yet, (ii) INMEM if the respective tensor
is in memory, and (iii) RELEASED if the respective tensor is
not needed any more and released from memory. We maintain
u.ctree as u may appear in more than one contraction tree.
Observe that τ(u, Ti) + δ(u, Ti) = |u.outAv|. The purpose
of these will be clear later, but in brief the functions τ and
δ allow us to perform necessary updates efficiently. Among
these fields, u.ctree is used for nodes in state AVAIL and the
rest of them are used for nodes in state INMEM.
We introduce the concept of gain, which is used to signify
the change in memory if a contraction or subset of contractions
were to be performed. Gain is positive if memory consumption
decreases and negative if memory consumption increases. If
the utilized memory space before contracting Ti is M, and it
becomes M ′ after contracting Ti, the gain of Ti is given by
M −M ′. We do not include temporary memory that might be
needed while processing the contractions in Ti. We associate
gains with nodes as well as trees. However, the choices are
made on the gain values of trees. For each tree Ti, we maintain


--- Page 6 ---
Algorithm
4
TR-SCHEDULER (G
=
(V, E), T
=
{T1, T2, · · · , Tk})
1: TR-INIT(G, T )
2: A = T
3: while A ̸= ∅do
4:
T ′ = maxTi∈A Ti.tgain
5:
PROCESS-CTREE(T ′)
6:
A = A −T ′
the following:
• Ti.pred: The set of vertices that have an outgoing neighbor
in Ti and in state INMEM, i.e., {u : ∃v ∈Ti and (u, v) ∈
E and u.state = INMEM}.
• Ti.u.igain: The individual gain signifying the memory
increase or decrease if the contraction represented by u ∈Ti
were performed.
• Ti.cgain: The coarse gain (i.e., Ti as a whole) due to the
amount of tensors released from memory if contractions in
Ti were performed.
• Ti.tgain: The overall gain signifying the memory increase
or decrease if contractions in Ti were performed. This is
equal to the summation of individual gains and coarse gain,
i.e., Ti.cgain + P
u∈Ti Ti.u.igain.
Ti.u indicates node u in Ti. We maintain the predecessors
of Ti, Ti.pred, in order to determine whether performing the
contractions in Ti enables release of any tensor corresponding
to a node in Ti.pred. Among the gains associated with each
tree, only the overall gain, i.e., Ti.tgain, is used in choosing
the trees for contracting. The rest of the gain fields are kept
in order to make the description of the algorithms easier.
The tree scheduler selects the contraction tree Ti with the
highest gain (using the field Ti.tgain) at each iteration among
the trees that are not yet contracted (Alg. 4). In that sense, we
determine a scheduling order for the contraction trees. After
processing the nodes in Ti, some of the tensors produced
may remain in memory and some of them may be released
depending on whether there are contractions in other trees that
depend on them. The processing of Ti may necessitate gain
updates of other trees that are not yet contracted. This can
be done by computing all gains from scratch. However, this is
prohibitively expensive. We show that the proposed algorithms
can perform the updates much faster with the help of the fields
maintained and described above.
Tree scheduler first initializes the described fields with the
routine TR-INIT (Alg. 5) and then repeatedly selects a tree
whose contraction leads to minimum increase (or maximum
decrease) in memory. Processing of a contraction tree may lead
to gain updates of other contraction trees. This is handled with
the routine PROCESS-CTREE (Alg. 6) along with necessary
field changes due to the operations that result from performing
contractions in the selected tree.
Initialization. In Alg. 5 we initialize the fields for nodes
and contraction trees besides the initial contraction tree gains.
For the initialization of gains for Ti, we only have individual
node gains because contracting Ti will not cause any tensor
that is in memory to be released as the memory is empty
at the beginning. Hence, Ti.cgain = 0. Recall that the
Algorithm 5 TR-INIT (G = (V, E), T = {T1, T2, · · · , Tk})
1: for u ∈V do
2:
u.outAv = u.parents
3:
u.ctree = ∅
4:
u.state = AVAIL
5: for Ti ∈T do
6:
Ti.pred = ∅
7:
Ti.cgain = 0, Ti.tgain = 0
8:
for u ∈Ti do
9:
u.ctree = u.ctree ∪Ti
// Initialize individual gains
10: S = ∅
11: for Ti ∈T do
12:
for u ∈Ti do
13:
g(u, Ti) = |outAv(u)|
14:
S = S ∪g(u, Ti)
15: for (u, v) ∈E do
16:
for Ti ∈u.ctree do
17:
if Ti ∈v.ctree then
18:
g(u, Ti) = g(u, Ti) −1
19: for g(u, Ti) ∈S do
20:
if g(u, Ti) == 0 then
21:
Ti.u.igain = 0
22:
else
23:
Ti.u.igain = −u.size
24:
Ti.tgain = Ti.tgain + g(u, Ti)
individual gain of a node u ∈Ti determines whether the tensor
represented by u will remain in memory after processing Ti.
The tensor represented by u will be kept in memory if there
are contractions in other trees that depend on this tensor, in
which case this individual gain is equal to −u.size; otherwise
it is 0. The individual gains are computed between lines 10-
24 of Alg. 5 and the initial gain Ti.tgain of Ti is set to the
summation of these individual gains.
Fig. 3 illustrates the individual gains of various nodes in
three trees after initialization. Initial Ti.tgain values are equal
to the summation of individual gains of these nodes.
Processing a selected contraction tree. After selecting
a contraction tree T, Alg. 6 processes the nodes in T in
topologically sorted order from left to right. It makes use of
two helper routines for processing a node u ∈T, PROCESS-
CHILD and PROCESS-NODE, the former for updates related
to child v of u and the latter for u itself. Processing a node u
in Alg. 6 changes u’s state from AVAIL to either INMEM or
RELEASED after making necessary fields updates and possible
gain updates due to its children. The topological order utilized
to process nodes in T ensures that upon calling PROCESS-
Fig. 3: Individual gains of nodes in trees after initialization,
indicated with the numbers near the nodes. The example
assumes the nodes have unit sizes.


--- Page 7 ---
Algorithm 6 PROCESS-CTREE (T)
1: for u ∈T in topologically sorted order do
2:
if u.type ̸= LEAF then
3:
for v ∈u.child do
4:
PROCESS-CHILD(u, v)
5:
PROCESS-NODE(u)
Algorithm 7 PROCESS-CHILD (u, x)
1: for Ti : x ∈Ti.pred do
2:
if u ∈Ti then
3:
if τ(x, Ti) == 1 and δ(x, Ti) == 0 then
4:
Ti.cgain = Ti.cgain −x.size
5:
Ti.tgain = Ti.tgain −x.size
6:
τ(x, Ti) = τ(x, Ti) −1
7:
if τ(x, Ti) = 0 then
8:
Ti.pred = Ti.pred −x
9:
else
10:
if δ(x, Ti) == 1 then
11:
Ti.cgain = Ti.cgain + x.size
12:
Ti.tgain = Ti.tgain + x.size
13:
δ(x, Ti) = δ(x, Ti) −1
14: x.outAv = v.outAv −u
15: if x.outAv == ∅then
16:
x.state = RELEASED
CHILD for child v of u, the state of v is INMEM while the
state of u is AVAIL.
Updates due to child x of a node u being processed in
the selected contraction tree. Contracting a node u ∈Ti
may trigger gain updates due to its child x as u’s state
changes from AVAIL to INMEM. Observe that x.state =
INMEM, otherwise u could not have been processed due to
the topological ordering used in Alg. 6. In order to handle
such cases, we present Alg. 7, which makes the necessary
gain updates for each successor tree of x, i.e., the set of trees
which has x as their predecessor. To perform these updates
efficiently, we make use of the functions τ and δ. There are
a total of five cases of interest, two of which trigger a gain
update. We consider each Ti where x ∈Ti.pred. Note that
u may or may not be in Ti and that τ(x, Ti) > 0 as x is
a predecessor of Ti. We categorize these five cases into two,
where in three of them u ∈Ti and in two of them u /∈Ti.
These cases are also illustrated in Fig. 4. Among these five
cases, the cases (1.b), (1.c), and (2.b) do not cause any gain
updates, while the case (1.a) causes decrease in Ti’s gain by
an amount of x.size (lines 3-5 in Alg. 7) and the case (2.a)
causes an increase in Ti’s gain by an amount of x.size (lines
10-12 in Alg. 7).
Apart from the gain updates, Alg. 7 may also update
functions τ and δ as well as Ti’s predecessor information. At
the end of Alg. 7 x’s outgoing neighbors with state AVAIL
excludes u as u’s state is not AVAIL any more (line 14). If
nothing depends on x, we can release the tensor represented
by x from memory (line 15-16).
Updates due to node u being processed in the selected
contraction tree. After the gain updates due to u’s children
have been completed (lines 3-4 in Alg. 6), the final task is
to perform the updates due to node u’s state change from
AVAIL to either INMEM or RELEASED. These are presented
in Alg. 8 and consist of gain updates stemming from individual
Algorithm 8 PROCESS-NODE (u)
// Individual gain updates
1: for Ti ∈u.ctree do
2:
Ti.tgain = Ti.tgain −Ti.u.igain
// Setup functions τ(u, ·) and δ(u, ·)
3: S = ∅
4: for v ∈u.outAv do
5:
for Ti ∈v.ctree do
6:
if Ti /∈S then
7:
τ(u, Ti) = 0
8:
δ(u, Ti) = |u.outAv|
9:
S = S ∪Ti
10:
Ti.pred = Ti.pred ∪u
11:
δ(u, Ti) = δ(u, Ti) −1
12:
τ(u, Ti) = τ(u, Ti) + 1
// Coarse gain updates
13: for Ti ∈S do
14:
if δ(u, Ti) == 0 then
15:
Ti.cgain = Ti.cgain + u.size
16:
Ti.tgain = Ti.tgain + u.size
17: if u.outAv == ∅then
18:
u.state = RELEASED
19: else
20:
u.state = INMMEM
and coarse gains as well as setting of functions τ and δ for u.
Note that we process the nodes in T ′, of which u is one, but u
may also appear in other trees. After processing u, it will not
be an element of these trees, hence we exclude the individual
gains contributed by u (lines 1-2). Then, we set up functions τ
and δ for each tree u was in (lines 3-12). For this purpose we
visit the trees for which u has at least one outgoing edge, i.e.,
S
v∈u.outAv v.ctree. Contraction of a tree Ti of which u is a
predecessor would cause release of the tensor represented by
u from memory if u’s all outgoing connections are only in Ti,
which is when δ(u, Ti) = 0. To find such trees, we go over all
the trees u is a predecessor of and update the respective gains
due to coarse gains (lines 13-16). We finally check whether we
can release the tensor represented by u (lines 17-20), which
happens in the case u has no outgoing vertex neighbors whose
state is AVAIL, i.e., when u.outAv is empty.
Runtime complexity. We define Fv and Fe to aid the
runtime complexity analysis. Fv is defined as the average
number of times a vertex appears in a contraction tree, i.e.,
(P
u∈V |u.ctree|)/|V |. Similarly, Fe is defined as the average
number of times an edge appears in a contraction tree, i.e.,
Fig. 4: Various cases that may trigger a gain update regarding
node x whose parent u is being processed.


--- Page 8 ---
TABLE II: Properties of the correlation functions.
Contraction DAG
Corr. Func.
Type
#Trees
Complexity
N
#Vertices
#Edges
Fv
Fe
a0-111
MxM
19041
O(N3)
1024
18552
36120
5.09
4.09
a0-d3
MxM
3921
O(N3)
1536
3826
7232
4.83
3.83
f0
MxMxM
27999
O(N3)
768
30473
59416
4.95
3.96
roper
BxM
84894
O(N4)
64
90378
180008
5.67
4.67
deuteron
BxB
109444
O(N4)
64
156508
312720
7.00
6.00
tritium
BxBxB
6085
O(N5)
32
7597
15178
10.11
9.75
(P
(u,v)∈E |{Ti : u ∈Ti and v ∈Ti}|)/|E|. Although in
theory Fv and Fe can be as large as number of all contraction
trees, k, in practice it is constant (see Table II).
The routine TR-INIT takes O(Fv(V + E)) since for the
source node of an edge in E, it traverses all the trees that
source node is in, which on the average is Fv. We next analyze
on the runtime complexity of all PROCESS-CHILD calls.
Observe that this routine is called for each edge in E and
not for each replicated edge in trees. When it is called for an
edge (x, u) it traverses the successor trees of x and makes
necessary updates, each of which takes constant time. Hence,
it takes O(kE). We next focus on the runtime complexity of
all PROCESS-NODE calls. Observe that PROCESS-NODE is
called once for each node, and once it is called for node u, u’s
outgoing edges are checked in line 4 of Alg. 8. Hence, each
edge in E is checked once in all calls. When making this check
for edge (u, v), each tree in which the target node v appears
needs to be processed (line 5 of Alg. 8). The number of such
trees is on the average Fv. Hence, all PROCESS-NODE calls
take a total of O(FvE).
As a result, tree scheduler takes a total of O(FvV +FvE +
kE). Since, Fv ≤k and in practice |E| > |V |, resulting in
O(kE).
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Setting
We conduct our experiments on six correlation functions
consisting of different meson and baryon configurations. For
these function computations we construct the contraction DAG
as described in Section II. As it is challenging to evaluate the
correlation functions for larger distillation space basis N and
Redstar can run out of memory for large N, we select a large
enough value for N that does not go out of memory. We
test hadron nodes with different N for our experiments. The
properties of the tested correlation functions are presented in
Table II. The columns on the left of the table summarize the
properties of the correlation functions while the columns under
“Contraction DAG” summarize the properties of the formed
contraction DAG for the computation of these functions.
We evaluate the schedulers on a system that consists of
a NVIDIA A100 GPU (Ampere architecture), which has 40
GB HBM2 memory with 1215 MHz clock rate and 6912
cores with 1.41 GHz clock rate, and a 64-core AMD EPYC
7763 (Milan) CPU with 2.45 GHz clock rate and a total of
256 GB DDR4 memory. The CPU and GPU is connected
with PCIe 4.0. The host codes are compiled with GNU gcc
13.2 and the device codes use CUDA Toolkit version 12.4.
We integrated our schedulers into Redstar software suite,
(a) a0-111
(b) a0-d3
(c) f0
(d) roper
(e)
deuteron
(f) tritium
Fig. 5: Structures of the contraction DAGs.
specifically the component that is responsible for managing
correlation function computations.
B. Assessment of peak memory on the contraction DAGs
We compare the peak memory obtained by the schedulers in
terms of the metric described in Section II-C on the contraction
DAGs. The purpose of this section is to assess the effectiveness
of the schedulers in terms of the objective. To do so, we utilize
execution queues produced in Redstar using the schedulers.
Each operation in this queue may be one of three operations:
(i) exterior contract for interior nodes, (ii) contract all for root
nodes, and (iii) tensor deletion. The tensors corresponding
to the leaf nodes and that are required by a contraction are
brought to memory if they are not in memory. After each
operation in the queue, we record the total sum of sizes of
the nodes that are in memory. The nodes sizes are divided
by the greatest common divisor of all distinct sizes to make
the plots more presentable. Recall that node sizes correspond
to sizes of the tensors they represent, which may be one
of {O(N 2), O(N 3), O(N 4)}. Not all of them appear in a
specific correlation function: in a0-111 (a MxM system) only
O(N 2) sizes exist while in tritium (a BxBxB system) all
of them exist. We plot the memory utilization obtained by the
schedulers in Fig. 6, where the x axis is the operation id in the
queue and y axis is the memory occupied after that operation.
The compared schedulers are Redstar’s graph sorting ordering
of the contractions, abbreviated as RS-GS (Section II), sibling
scheduler, abbreviated as Sibling (Section III-A), and tree
scheduler, abbreviated as Tree (Section III-B).
When we compare the schedulers in the plots in Fig. 6,
it is seen that the proposed schedulers do a good job of
addressing the target metric compared to RS-GS. In all six
datasets, one of the two proposed schedulers achieves smaller
peak memory than RS-GS. In datasets a0-111, a0-d3, f0,
roper, deuteron, and tritium, the best of the Sibling
and Tree attains 2.1x, 1.8x, 1.7x, 1.4x, 1.4x, and 2.0x peak
memory improvement over RS-GS, respectively. In relatively
smaller instances a0-111, a0-d3, and f0, Sibling per-
forms the best, though Tree attains close values to it. In the
larger instances roper, deuteron, and tritium, Tree
is clearly the best performing scheduler, while Sibling’s
performance drops below RS-GS in two of the instances. The


--- Page 9 ---
Fig. 6: Memory utilization of the schedulers for the six different correlation functions. Black dots indicate the peak memory.
worse performance of Sibling in larger instances can be
attributed to its disregard of the node sizes and locality of the
scheduling decisions. Tree on the other hand, attains superior
peak memory, which validates the design motivation of it:
having global view of the state of the memory and making
scheduling decisions dynamically based on this information
results in better memory optimization. Overall, it can be said
that Tree is preferable over Sibling and RS-GS.
C. Effect of scheduling algorithms in Redstar
In this section we evaluate the performance of the schedulers
in the LQCD analysis software Redstar. After forming the con-
traction DAG in Redstar, prior to performing the contractions
we run schedulers to determine an order. From this order,
an execution queue is produced and it is used to perform
contractions or remove tensors that are not needed as the
operations take place. We use four different metrics to assess
the schedulers: (i) overall time spent in contractions, (ii)
total number of evictions, (iii) total number of data transfers
between host and device, and (iv) total size of data transfers
between host and device. Recall that an eviction happens when
a contraction is to be performed on the device but there is not
enough device memory for performing that contraction. We
present the time spent for the contractions, which consists
of allocation, transfer, and deletion of tensors as well as
performing the contraction. Hence, it is a direct measure of the
effectiveness of the schedulers within the application. There
are other components of the Redstar, but those are not of
interest to our work, and contractions constitute a big portion
of the overall application time. We also present more detailed
metrics number and size of transfer operations between host
and device to assess the reduction in data movement. Among
these four metrics, reducing the number of evictions is a direct
consequence of reducing the peak memory (which is the goal
of the proposed schedulers), and the remaining metrics follow
from it.
We present the values obtained by the three schedulers
regarding the four described metrics on six correlation func-
tions in Fig. 7. The four metrics time spent in contractions,
number of evictions, number of data transfers, and size of data
transfers described above are presented in charts as “Run-
TABLE III: Total size of data movement (TB).
Corr. Func.
RS-GS
Sibling
Tree
a0-111
2.00
1.12
1.11
a0-d3
1.12
0.84
0.88
f0
1.01
0.55
0.55
roper
7.35
4.91
5.47
deuteron
0.21
0.29
0.20
tritium
0.53
1.34
0.74
time”, “#Evictions”, “#Transfers”, and “Size”, respectively.
The values obtained by Sibling and Tree in each metric
are normalized with respect to the values obtained by RS-GS
at that metric. For the bars in the figures, a bar lower than
1.0 indicates better performance in that metric. For example,
a value 0.5 for a bar in metric “Size” indicates a 2x reduction
in amount of data transferred over RS-GS.
When we compare the number of evictions attained by
the schedulers in Fig. 7, it can be seen that in all instances
Sibling and Tree lead to significant reductions. In smaller
three datasets (a0-111, a0-d3, f0), Sibling performs
slightly better than Tree in this metric and as the datasets
get bigger Tree gets to perform the best. Observe that the
values attained by the schedulers are in agreement with our
assessment in Section IV-B, validating the effectiveness of
the target objective of minimizing peak memory utilization.
When we consider the best of the two proposed schedulers,
the improvements over RS-GS in the number of evictions are
1.7x, 1.3x, 1.9x, 1.5x, 4.2x, and 2.4x for a0-111, a0-d3,
f0, roper, deuteron, and tritium, respectively. The ef-
fectiveness of Tree is especially noteworthy in larger datasets
deuteron and tritium.
The proposed scheduling algorithms often reduce the num-
ber and size of data transfers, which are presented with bars
“#Transfers” and “Size” in Fig. 7. In a0-111, a0-d3, f0,
and roper, our schedulers are able to reduce data movement
on the PCIe link, while in deuteron they attain similar
numbers with RS-GS, and in tritium they increase size
of data movement despite Tree scheduler reduced both the
number of evictions and data transfers. We present the amount
of data moved in Table III, with the lowest entry in each row
is indicated in bold. As seen from the table, the proposed
schedulers are able to reduce the amount of data moved
significantly with improvements up to 1.84x. In deuteron


--- Page 10 ---
Fig. 7: Comparison of schedulers in terms of four different metrics within the LQCD analysis software Redstar on six different
correlation functions. The bars below 1.0 signify an improvement over the baseline scheduler RS-GS.
TABLE IV: Time spent in computing a schedule (msec).
Corr. Func.
RS-GS
Sibling
Tree
a0-111
3.5
29.5
189.1
a0-d3
0.5
3.8
19.2
f0
5.9
50.0
295.2
roper
26.0
234.3
3095.9
deuteron
38.4
451.0
17005.5
tritium
1.5
25.0
212.5
and tritium, the proposed schedulers are not able to make
gains. This can be attributed to hadron nodes having varying
sizes, which may prevent the reductions obtained in theory to
be reflected in practice.
We finally compare the contraction time in Redstar that
results from the schedules computed by the schedulers in
Fig. 7. As seen from the metric “Runtime”, the improvements
obtained in data transfers reflected in the execution time of the
contractions. In four of the six correlation functions, we ob-
serve significant reduction in computing correlation functions,
while in the remaining two (deuteron and tritium), the
proposed scheduler Tree is slightly worse than the baseline.
These runtime results validate the claim that our scheduler
Tree is a safe and sound alternative for scheduling hadronic
correlation function computations.
D. Scheduling overhead
We compare the time spent by the schedulers to find a
contraction order for six different systems. Table IV presents
the runtime of the schedulers in milliseconds. As seen from
the table, proposed schedulers run slower than the sorting
used by the Redstar for scheduling. The higher scheduling
runtime of Tree is in agreement with the runtime com-
plexity of it. Overall, the time to find a schedule is usually
negligible compared to the time for performing contractions.
For example, for roper dataset the overall time spent for
performing contractions using Tree 631.1 seconds, whereas
the scheduler overhead is 3.1 seconds. The overhead of Tree
is somewhat higher for deuteron dataset. However, the
scheduling overhead stays the same irrespective of the tensor
dimension: once a good schedule is found, it can reused in
correlation function computations of any size and while the
contraction time increases with increasing tensor dimension,
the scheduling overhead stays the same.
V. RELATED WORK
Scheduling of task graphs under memory or I/O constraints
is an old problem starting with the study of register allocation
for evaluating expressions [10], with several variants after-
wards [11]–[13]. In some applications the task graph may be
a tree and in this case the problem gets easier [14], [15].
Several memory-aware schedulers have been proposed for
such cases [16], [17].
The problem of minimization of peak memory has been
recently studied for the dataflow graphs [18]. The authors
focus on two variants of the dataflow graphs, task graphs and
synchronous dataflow graphs, and propose transformations to
apply classical algorithms such as branch and bound. The
memory model utilized in that work, shared buffer model,
largely differs from the memory model used in our work.
Another work [19] that aims to reduce peak memory focuses
on series-parallel task graphs and introduces a new model that
is based on graphs with weighted vertices. The authors propose
a polynomial-time algorithm, however it is not feasible in
practice for large graphs.
There is also another study [20] that tackles the memory
footprint of workflows represented by task graphs in order to
avoid schedules that exceed available memory. Authors’ goal
is to find the schedule with minimum makespan among a set
of schedules that do not exceed memory. For this purpose they
extend the graph with fictitious edges to restrict the concurrent
execution of memory-intensive tasks. The described work
focuses on and uses DAGs for parallel applications on shared-
memory platforms, whereas in our case temporal locality and
data reuse are the main concerns in finding a good schedule.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed two schedulers to optimize tensor reuse in
batch contractions produced by the correlation functions in


--- Page 11 ---
LQCD simulations. Our approaches aim to optimize the peak
memory of the contractions and in this way reduce evictions
from device memory. We realized and validated our schedulers
in the LQCD analysis software Redstar. We demonstrated
the proposed schedulers are able to reduce time-to-solution
in several tested correlation functions. In future, we aim to
develop a general node-based scheduler that uses the gain
concept used by the proposed tree scheduler. We plan to apply
this scheduler to the contraction DAGs as well as general
DAGs to demonstrate its efficiency. We also plan to develop
partitioning models to schedule contractions for multi-GPU
systems.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Peardon, J. Bulava, J. Foley, C. Morningstar, J. Dudek, R. G.
Edwards, B. Joo, H.-W. Lin, D. G. Richards, and K. J. Juge, “A Novel
quark-field creation operator construction for hadronic physics in lattice
QCD,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 80, p. 054506, 2009.
[2] A. Abdelfattah, M. Baboulin, V. Dobrev, J. Dongarra, C. Earl,
J. Falcou, A. Haidar, I. Karlin, T. Kolev, I. Masliah, and S. Tomov,
“High-performance tensor contractions for gpus,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 80, pp. 108–118, 2016, international Conference on
Computational Science 2016, ICCS 2016, 6-8 June 2016, San Diego,
California, USA. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1877050916306536
[3] A. Bibireata, S. Krishnan, G. Baumgartner, D. Cociorva, C.-C. Lam,
P. Sadayappan, J. Ramanujam, D. E. Bernholdt, and V. Choppella,
“Memory-constrained data locality optimization for tensor contractions,”
in Languages and Compilers for Parallel Computing, L. Rauchwerger,
Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 93–108.
[4] J. Kim, A. Sukumaran-Rajam, C. Hong, A. Panyala, R. K. Srivastava,
S. Krishnamoorthy, and P. Sadayappan, “Optimizing tensor contractions
in ccsd(t) for efficient execution on gpus,” in Proceedings of the 2018
International Conference on Supercomputing, ser. ICS ’18.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 96–106.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3205289.3205296
[5] J. Liu, D. Li, R. Gioiosa, and J. Li, “Athena: high-performance sparse
tensor contraction sequence on heterogeneous memory,” ser. ICS ’21.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2021, p.
190–202. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3447818.3460355
[6] Y. Shi, U. N. Niranjan, A. Anandkumar, and C. Cecka, “Tensor con-
tractions with extended blas kernels on cpu and gpu,” in 2016 IEEE
23rd International Conference on High Performance Computing (HiPC),
2016, pp. 193–202.
[7] J. Chen, R. G. Edwards, and W. Mao, “Graph contractions for
calculating correlation functions in lattice qcd,” in Proceedings of the
Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing Conference, ser. PASC
’23.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3592979.3593409
[8] Q. Wang, B. Ren, J. Chen, and R. G. Edwards, “Micco: An enhanced
multi-gpu scheduling framework for many-body correlation functions,”
in 2022 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo-
sium (IPDPS), 2022, pp. 135–145.
[9] Q. Wang, Z. Peng, B. Ren, J. Chen, and R. G. Edwards, “Memhc:
An optimized gpu memory management framework for accelerating
many-body correlation,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 19,
no. 2, Mar. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3506705
[10] R. Sethi, “Complete register allocation problems,” ser. STOC ’73.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1973, p.
182–195. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/800125.804049
[11] J. R. Gilbert, T. Lengauer, and R. E. Tarjan, “The pebbling problem is
complete in polynomial space,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual
ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, ser. STOC ’79.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1979, p. 237–248.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/800135.804418
[12] P. van Emde Boas and J. van Leeuwen, “Move rules and trade-offs in
the pebble game,” in Theoretical Computer Science 4th GI Conference,
K. Weihrauch, Ed.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
1979, pp. 101–112.
[13] H. Jia-Wei and H. T. Kung, “I/o complexity: The red-blue pebble
game,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual ACM Symposium
on Theory of Computing, ser. STOC ’81.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 1981, p. 326–333. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/800076.802486
[14] C.-C. Lam, T. Rauber, G. Baumgartner, D. Cociorva, and P. Sadayappan,
“Memory-optimal evaluation of expression trees involving large objects,”
Computer Languages, Systems and Structures, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 63–
75, 2011. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1477842410000278
[15] J. W. H. Liu, “An application of generalized tree pebbling to
sparse matrix factorization,” SIAM Journal on Algebraic Discrete
Methods, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 375–395, 1987. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1137/0608031
[16] E.
Agullo,
P.
R.
Amestoy,
A.
Buttari,
A.
Guermouche,
J.-Y.
L’Excellent,
and
F.-H.
Rouet,
“Robust
memory-aware
mappings
for parallel multifrontal factorizations,” SIAM Journal on Scientific
Computing, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. C256–C279, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1137/130938505
[17] L. Eyraud-Dubois, L. Marchal, O. Sinnen, and F. Vivien, “Parallel
scheduling of task trees with limited memory,” vol. 2, no. 2, Jun. 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2779052
[18] P. Fradet, A. Girault, and A. Honorat, “Sequential scheduling of
dataflow graphs for memory peak minimization,” in Proceedings of the
24th ACM SIGPLAN/SIGBED International Conference on Languages,
Compilers, and Tools for Embedded Systems, ser. LCTES 2023.
New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p.
76–86. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3589610.3596280
[19] E. Kayaaslan, T. Lambert, L. Marchal, and B. Uc¸ar, “Scheduling
series-parallel task graphs to minimize peak memory,” Theoretical
Computer Science, vol. 707, pp. 1–23, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304397517307053
[20] L. Marchal, B. Simon, and F. Vivien, “Limiting the memory footprint
when dynamically scheduling dags on shared-memory platforms,”
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 128, pp. 30–
42, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0743731518305112
