--- Page 1 ---
PICNIC: Silicon Photonic Interconnected Chiplets
with Computational Network and In-memory
Computing for LLM Inference Acceleration
Yue Jiet Chong1†, Yimin Wang2†, Zhen Wu3, Xuanyao Fong4
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Email: {jason.yj.chong1, kelvin.xy.fong4}@nus.edu.sg, {yimin.wang2, e03230833}@u.nus.edu
Abstract—This paper presents a 3D-stacked chiplets based
large language model (LLM) inference accelerator, consisting
of non-volatile in-memory-computing processing elements (PEs)
and Inter-PE Computational Network (IPCN), interconnected
via silicon photonic to effectively address the communication
bottlenecks. A LLM mapping scheme was developed to optimize
hardware scheduling and workload mapping. Simulation results
show it achieves 3.95× speedup and 30× efficiency improvement
over the Nvidia A100 before chiplet clustering and power
gating scheme (CCPG). Additionally, the system achieves further
scalability and efficiency improvement with the implementation
of CCPG to accommodate larger models, attaining 57× efficiency
improvement over Nvidia H100 at similar throughput.
Index Terms—LLM Inference, Hardware Accelerator, HW-SW
Co-design
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language model (LLM) inference involves static and
dynamic data. The static data are pre-trained weights obtained
during supervised training of the model, whereas the dynamic
data are temporary data generated during query-key-value
(QKV) projections in the attention layers [1]. In most existing
LLM accelerator architectures, both static and dynamic data
are constantly moved between main memory (RAM) and
computing units [2]. Recent trends in the development of
LLMs show a dramatic increase in model size [3], implying
that the volume of data transfer between memory and compute
units will increase and lead to increasing power consumption
and processing latency [4].
In response, researchers are exploring alternative hardware
architecture design approaches [5], [6] to address the increas-
ing volume of data movement. Nevertheless, new challenges
arise due to differences in hardware scheduling, data locality,
and workload mapping [7], [8]. These challenges must be
addressed to fully exploit hardware resources while main-
taining scalability, energy efficiency, and improving system
performance.
Chiplet-based system design has emerged as a promising
approach to enhance scalability in modern VLSI architectures
This work is funded in part by the National University of Singapore through
the Microelectronics Seed Grant (FY2024); and in part by the National
Research Foundation (NRF), Singapore, under the Competitive Research
Programme (Award NRF-CRP24-2020-0002 and NRF-CRP24-2020-0003)
Corresponding author: Xuanyao Fong
† Both authors contributed equally to this work.
Fig. 1. LLM Model Size and US Data Center Total Energy Consumption
[9]. However, this implementation introduces challenges in
energy efficiency, particularly in electrical chip-to-chip (C2C)
communication. In fact, communication can account for as
much as 30% of the total energy consumption in VLSI systems
[10]. For instance, electrical C2C communication typically
incurs an energy cost of 3 pJ/bit, while off-chip memory access
consumes up to 30 pJ/bit [11]. These energy costs become es-
pecially significant in highly parallel multi-core systems, such
as the GPUs and NPUs used for AI workloads—where massive
data movement leads to communication energy consumption
that is comparable to computational energy [12].
To mitigate the LLM inference bottlenecks, we studied and
implemented hardware-software co-design for LLM inference
accelerator, named PICNIC, with the following characteristics:
• An Inter-PE Computational Network (IPCN) as inter-
connecting platform for In-memory Computing (IMC)
macros, integrated with computational capabilities and
re-programmability via a dedicated instruction set for
efficient data flow.
• Heterogeneous 3D Stacked-IC compute tile to increase
computing, communication, and area efficiencies via ver-
tical integration of chiplets in different domains, i.e.,
digital, analog, and optical.
• Temporal hardware scheduling that incorporates ded-
icated context window tiling and efficient key-value
caching (KV cache), ensuring balanced network traffics
arXiv:2511.04036v1  [cs.AR]  6 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
Fig. 2. Challenges and Solutions for LLM Inference
and utilization of processing elements (PEs).
• Chiplet clustering scheme with power gating technique
(CCPG) ensuring system power scales sub-linearly for
increasing model sizes.
The simulation results of PICNIC show 3.95× speedup and
30× efficiency improvement over Nvidia A100 in Llama-8B
inference, as well as 57× efficiency improvement over Nvidia
H100 at similar throughput via CCPG.
II. PICNIC HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
The hardware architecture of PICNIC LLM Inference Ac-
celerator is shown in Fig. 3(a). It consists of multiple compute
tiles (CT), each of which is implemented as a 3D-Stacked IC
(3D-SIC) for heterogeneous design shown in Fig. 3(b). These
CTs are interconnected with silicon photonics for inter-tile
data transfer and memory access (DRAM). The DRAM acts
as a hub for external data communication. Each CT consists
of multiple processing elements (PEs) interconnected via the
2D-mesh Inter-PE Computational Network (IPCN). The PEs
perform static weight multiply-accumulate (SMAC) operations
while the IPCN conducts dataflow control and dynamic data
multiply-accumulate (DMAC) operations.
A. Processing Element (PE)
The PE consists of a non-volatile resistive random access
memory array compute-in-memory macro (RRAM-CIM) [13]
to perform SMAC operations. Each unit of RRAM cell stores a
unit weight/parameter of the neural networks as the resistance
state. Due to the non-volatile nature of RRAM, the weights
only need to be programmed once for a given model, signifi-
cantly reducing reconfiguration overhead. Once initialized, the
PEs perform SMAC operations directly in the analog domain,
leveraging the inherent parallelism and energy efficiency of
in-memory computing.
To mitigate hardware non-idealities, the macro incorporates
a feedback-loop calibration mechanism. During the initializa-
tion phase, it calibrates the macro to fully utilize the ADC
input swing, thereby minimizing discretization errors. Offsets
identified during calibration are stored for subsequent com-
pensation during inference. Furthermore, the macro employs
voltage-mode sensing, which inherently normalizes the wide
variations in output dynamic range [13].
B. Inter-PE Computational Network (IPCN)
The IPCN is designed as an interconnecting platform for
In-memory Computing (IMC) macros to orchestrate dataflow
and perform various computations on the network data to
accommodate different AI workloads, as shown in Fig. 3(c).
For computations, SMAC operation is performed in PE while
other mathematical operations, e.g. DMAC, are performed
in the routers. The IPCN consists of three main parts, i.e.,
Program Memory, Network Main Controller (NMC), and 2D-
mesh of routers with PE, shown in Fig. 3(d). It supports re-
programmability via a dedicated instruction set for efficient
control of data flow.
1) Network Program Memory (NPM): The NPM stores
the instructions that control the operations of routers and
processing elements. The NPM consists of 3 Banks, i.e., Bank
1 (B1), Bank 2 (B2), and Control/Status Register Bank (CSR).
Each of B1 and B2 consists of two sub-banks: the command
register (CMR) and the configuration register (CFR). In each
row, the CMRs store 2 different commands to be executed by
the routers while the CFRs store the command selection signal
for each router and the number of command repetitions. In
parallel, each router will combine information from the CMR
and CFR to determine whether to IDLE or to execute CMD1
or CMD2, and to repeat the same operation by the number of
times defined in CFR.
2) Configuration Co-processor: The NPM is configured
alternately between B1 and B2 by the co-processor, using
firmware stored in the system main memory. Concurrently, the
Network Main Controller (NMC) performs sequential reads
from the NPM. Specifically, while the NMC is reading data
from B2, the co-processor configures B1, and vice versa. This
interleaved configuration and access mechanism minimizes
IPCN idle cycles during runtime. Also, this approach ensures
continuous data flow and enhances overall system throughput.
3) Network Main Controller (NMC): The NMC reads and
decodes the contents in NPM to control the operations of
routers and PEs within the 2D-mesh network and establish
a dedicated data flow. The sub-modules are as follows: (i)
Instruction Decoder: Decodes the instruction into three sec-
tions, i.e., routing command, command selection and number
of command repetitions. (ii) Command Crossbar: A 3-input-
N-output crossbar (N: number of routers in the network).
Each individual router is fetched with either CMD1, CMD2
or IDLE based on their selection signals from the Command
Selector. (iii) Command Repeat Counter: Stores the number of


--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 3. PICNIC Hardware Architecture: IPCN, Computing Macros, Interconnects and Instruction Set
repetitions for the command and decrements by 1 when each
command completes execution.
4) Unit Router: The unit router in the IPCN 2D Mesh,
as shown in Fig. 3(e), has two main functions: data packets
routing and in-network computing. The sub-modules are as
follows: (i) Data I/O ports: 4 planar ports for inter-router
connections, a pair of AXI-Stream adapters for router-PE con-
nection (shown in Fig. 3(f)) and 2 vertical ports with through-
silicon-via (TSV). Each port is integrated with First-In, First-
Out buffer (FIFO) for temporary data storage. (ii) Decoder and
Controller: Decodes the command from NMC and controls the
operations of each macro in the unit router. (iii) Computational
Macros: Enables digital in-network computing on data stored
in the router, optimized for AI workload. The macros include
partial summation, linear activation and DMAC. Each unit
router is attached with a PE, forming a router-PE pair.
5) IPCN Instruction Set Architecture (ISA): The IPCN
instruction is a 30-bit vector, as shown in Fig. 3(g), consisting
of the following sub-fields: (i) rd en indicates FIFO indices
for data read, (ii) mode sel to select the operation mode of the
router, (iii) out en indicates output directions of data packet,
(iv) intxfer en for internal data movement between FIFOs and
scratchpad memory within the router, and (v) SP addr as
address to access the scratchpad memory. For data movement
in the IPCN, unicast and broadcast are supported. Unicast
moves data in one direction whereas broadcast moves data
in multi-directions (up to all I/O ports).
A toolchain consists of an application programming inter-
face (API) and a program compiler is developed in Python
to facilitate the hardware utilization. The API is a library
containing the ISA, enabling the user to develop firmware
for system data flow control based on the AI workload. The
Fig. 4. Softmax Compute Unit
compiler converts the user program into a hex file to be loaded
into the NPM.
C. Softmax Compute Unit (SCU)
The SCU, shown in Fig. 4, is controlled by a finite state
machine (FSM) that has three different states. Initially, the
SCU receives inputs from the router sequentially. The cal-
culated exponential results is sent to both indexed cache and
partial sum adder. In the second state, when the full input data
sequence has been transmitted, the partial sum result is used
to calculate its reciprocal as the denominator of the softmax
function. In the last state, the multiplier unit multiplies the
reciprocal with the data in the cache (nominator) to produce
the final softmax result. The SCU then switches between
state 2 and state 3 to produce a continuous output. The
exponential function is expressed with an eight-segment piece-
wise linear approximation.
D. 3D-Stacked IC and Optical Inter-chiplets Connection
3D-SIC consists of heterogeneous dies that are vertically
stacked and interconnected using TSVs [14]. As shown in


--- Page 4 ---
Fig. 5. Illustration of Chiplet Clustering with Power Gating Scheme
Fig. 3(b), the top chiplet consists of the activation function
macros, which perform computations of non-linear activation
functions such as softmax (SCU). The next highest die consists
of the IPCN 2D-Mesh and PEs for dataflow orchestration,
SMAC, and DMAC. The bottom die is the optical engine to
enable efficient C2C communications utilizing silicon photon-
ics [15]. It consists of an optical transceiver including a laser
source, waveguides, microring modulators (MRM), network
switching elements, and photo-detectors. The silicon optical
waveguide is embedded in the silicon substrate [16], forming
an optical network connecting all the chiplets of the system.
The TSVs are allocated in an alternating column-wise
pattern within the IPCN, i.e., TSVs in odd-numbered columns
connect to the top die, whereas those in even-numbered
columns connect to the bottom die, as shown in Fig. 3(c).
This arrangement reduces the TSV density, thereby mitigating
signal interference and improving inter-die communication
reliability [17].
E. Chiplet Clustering and Power Gating (CCPG)
For running an LLM, the workloads are executed in a
sequential, layer-by-layer manner. During the computation of
a given layer, all other layers remain idle, which presents
an opportunity for power optimization. To exploit this char-
acteristic, PICNIC adopts a chiplet-based layer-wise weights
allocation strategy, wherein each layer is mapped to a cluster
of adjacent chiplets (details are discussed in Section III). For
CCPG, as shown in Fig. 5, four adjacent compute-tile chiplets
are grouped as a cluster. During computation runtime, only
one cluster is fully activated; whereas for all other clusters,
only the scratchpad memory modules stay activated for context
window data retention (KV caching) while other hardware
macros are power gated (sleep mode). This selective activation
significantly reduces system power consumption. The weights
stored in RRAM are unaffected due to its non-volatility.
III. PICNIC LLM INFERENCE ORCHESTRATION
The chiplets handle the LLMs in a layer-wise manner: each
chiplet stores an attention layer or a feed-forward layer. For
example, Llama 3.2-1B holds 16 decoders, where each decoder
comprises an attention layer and three feed-forward layers.
An end-to-end partitioning, mapping, and scheduling scheme
orchestrates the processing of each layer, ensuring balanced
network traffic and utilization of PEs.
Fig. 6. Spatial mapping of the weight matrices in an attention layer within a
chiplet of PICNIC (with respect to K-Q-V-O Channels)
1) Partitioning: In each layer, both static and dynamic data
are partitioned to meet the capacity limit of the PE crossbar
arrays and local scratchpads. Partitioning is applied along
both row and column dimensions of the matrices. Partitioning
static weight matrices, WQ, WK, WV, and WO ∈RD×D
incurs extra collective communications for partitioned input
broadcast and partial output reduction along the embedding
dimensions D. Partitioning the intermediate data, Q, K, V
∈RS×D, and S ∈RS×S, involves both embedding dimen-
sions and the sequence length S, which relates its temporal
scheduling to the attention mechanism, e.g., softmax activation
and KV cache.
2) Mapping: The partitioned WQ/WK/WV/WO are spa-
tially mapped to the PE crossbar arrays and the partitioned
Q/K/V/S are mapped into the distributed scratchpad. For
mapping on PE crossbar arrays, each matrix is heuristically
constrained which to be mapped in a column-wise rectangular
region and optimize the mapping by tweaking three factors:
intra-matrix shape, inter-matrix shape, and row-column order.
The optimized mapping scheme adopted in PICNIC is illus-
trated in Fig. 6. For mapping on scratchpads, the intermediate
matrix is stored in the scratchpads within the region of its
weight matrix, i.e., Q is stored in the scratchpads of the
router-PE pairs where WQ has been pre-placed, which enables
output reduction in the vicinity.
3) Scheduling: Scheduling handles the temporal dataflow
across the PE array and IPCN.
FlashAttention:
A
kernel-fused
attention
mechanism,
FlashAttention [18] is adopted in this work. FlashAttention
spawns a two-level nested loop computing flow. The inner loop
is partially unrolled and executed in parallel to fully utilize the
DMAC resources in IPCN.
KV cache: The K/V vectors corresponding to the tokens
generated in the decode phase are appended to the scratchpads
pre-allocated to K/V. The K/V vectors are cyclically stored
in the different pre-allocated scratchpads, which enables a
balanced utilization of the distributed scratchpads regardless
of the length of the sequence being processed.
Collective communication: The reduction and broadcast


--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 7. Overview of System Modeling and Evaluation
TABLE I
PICNIC SYSTEM PARAMETER
System Level
Bit-width
64
Frequency
1 GHz
Tile Level
IPCN Dimension
32×32
Softmax CU #
1024
Macro Level (per unit Router-PE pair)
PE Array Size
256×256
non-weighted MAC #
16
Scratchpad Size
32 KB
I/O Ports #
7
FIFO Size (each)
256 B
TSV Dimension
32×2
are determined by the spanning tree algorithm, where the data
traffic is balanced and non-congestive due to the regular and
aligned mapping.
IV. SYSTEM MODELING AND EVALUATION
The PICNIC LLM inference accelerator is evaluated via
hardware-software co-verification as shown in Fig. 7. The
digital hardware of the system was developed and verified
using Verilog HDL. Hardware Synthesis and Place & Route
(P&R) were performed using Synopsys Design Compiler and
Cadence Innovus respectively. The power and area of the
scratchpad memory macro are obtained using CACTI [19].
Other hardware blocks are modeled and emulated in software
using mathematical models. For LLM workload mapping and
hardware scheduling, a mapping scheme with fine-grained
model partitioning, heuristically optimized spatial mapping
and temporal scheduling was developed. Inference emulation
and benchmarking are performed using an instruction-level
cycle-accurate simulator via the IPCN API.
RRAM non-idealities are addressed through a combination
of software technique, such as noise-resilient neural network
training for conductance relaxation [13], and hardware solu-
tions described in Section II-A. Consequently, this aspect is
not the primary focus of this work.
A. Performance Evaluation
The performance of PICNIC is evaluated on LLMs as shown
in Table II. The average system power increases with the
model size because more chiplets are activated to accom-
modate the model weights. Concurrently, the throughput of
the system reduces as more data movement and computations
occur within the 2D-mesh, leading to higher overall latency.
Thus, the energy efficiency (expressed in tokens/J) decreases
exponentially.
TABLE II
BENCHMARK OF LLM INFERENCE FOR PICNIC
Model
Context Length
Throughput
Average
Efficiency
(Input/Output)
(tokens/s)
Power (W)
(tokens/J)
Llama 3.2 – 1B*
512/512
1503.8
4.0520
371.1
1024/1024
969.2
4.0513
239.2
2048/2048
566.4
4.0507
139.8
Llama 3 – 8B*
512/512
386.5
28.4018
13.6
1024/1024
309.8
28.4015
10.9
2048/2048
221.9
28.4010
7.8
Llama 2 – 13B*
512/512
228.9
52.3014
4.4
1024/1024
192.4
52.3012
3.7
2048/2048
146.2
52.3009
2.8
*Power and Efficiency without chiplet clustering and power-gating
Fig. 8. Comparisons of System Power and Energy Efficiency with and without
Chiplet Clustering and Power Gating Scheme
For various context lengths using the same model, the
average power consumed by the system reduces slightly with
increasing context length. This is due to the reduction in rate
of C2C communications, which is discussed in Section IV-C.
Table III shows the performance and energy efficiency
comparisons of PICNIC to other platforms with various archi-
tectures. The evaluations are based on Llama-8B (1024/1024,
batch size 1) with Nvidia H100 as baseline. PICNIC achieves
superior energy efficiency as it eliminates weights transfer,
along with minimal dynamic data transfer between compute
unit and main memory during inference. The former is due
to weights storage and SMAC operations in non-volatile IMC
PE and the latter with IPCN coupled with efficient hardware
scheduling as well as the efficient KV caching via scratchpad
memory next to the PE. In contrast, GPUs like A100 and H100
have high utilization of ALU-main memory communications
for both dynamic data and weights, which incur high power
and latency.
B. System Scalability and Chiplet Clustering
With the chiplet clustering scheme shown in Fig. 5, only
one cluster is fully activated while for all other clusters, only
the scratchpad modules stay active for context window KV
caching. Fig. 8 shows the system power and energy efficiency
improvements after implementing the chiplet clustering and
power gating scheme (CCPG). As much as 80% power is saved
for Llama-8B, leading to 57× energy efficiency improvement
over Nvidia H100 with similar throughput. The results indicate
that the larger the model size, i.e. higher number of compute-
tile chiplets, the greater the reduction of system power by
CCPG. This is due to the higher ratio of chiplets that can
be put to sleep mode. Under CCPG, the system power scales


--- Page 6 ---
TABLE III
COMPARISON WITH OTHER PLATFORMS
Platform
This Work
TransPIM [20]
Cambricon-LLM [21]
NV A100
NV H100
Apple M4-Max
Cerebras-2 [22]
Architecture
SiPh Chiplets based
Hybrid PIM-NMC
Chiplets based NPU-
Multi-core
SoC-NPU
Wafer-Scale
IPCN & A-IMC
in HBM
NAND Flash PIM
GPU
Engine
Throughput* (tokens/s)
309.83
270
36.34
78.36
274.26
69.77
1800
Average Power (W)
†5.6
40
36.3
200
280
80
15000
Energy efficiency (tokens/J)
55.38
6.8
1
0.39
0.98
0.87
0.12
Speedupˆ
1.13×
0.98×
0.13×
0.29×
1×
0.25×
6.57×
Efficiency Improvementˆ
†57×
6.94×
1.1×
0.4×
1×
0.89×
0.13×
*Evaluations based on Llama-8B; ˆNvidia H100 as Baseline; †with CCPG
Fig. 9. Average Power of C2C Data Transfer for Different Models and Context
Lengths (Electrical vs Optical Interconnects)
Fig. 10. C2C Data Transfer Distribution Over Time (Llama 3.2-1B)
at O(log n); thus, PICNIC is highly scalable to accommodate
larger LLMs.
C. Chip-to-chip (C2C) Communication
The average power of C2C data transfer during LLM
inference is affected by both model size and context length
as illustrated in Fig. 9. As the context length or model size
increases, more computations are performed within the 2D-
mesh within a chiplet, which cause higher computational
latency, especially during the LLM decode phase. Thus, the
average C2C data transfer rate reduces because C2C commu-
nication occurs only after the computations in the 2D-mesh are
completed. As illustrated in Fig. 10, C2C data transfer occurs
during certain time periods; apart from that, data movement
and computations occur within IPCN and PEs of individual
chiplet.
TABLE IV
POWER & AREA BREAKDOWN OF PICNIC MACROS (UNIT)
Macro
Power (uW)
Breakdown
Area (mm2)
Breakdown
IMC PE [13]
120
46.3%
0.1442
78.3%
Scratchpad
42
16.2%
0.013
7.1%
Router
97
37.5%
0.025
13.5%
TSVs
-
-
0.002
1.1%
Total
259
100%
0.1842
100%
(IPCN-PE)
Softmax
5.31
-
0.041
-
#Technology node: 7 nm | Area per Compute Tile Chiplet: 189.6 mm2
D. Power and Area Breakdown
The power and area breakdown of our PICNIC macro are
shown in Table IV. Each pair of IPCN router-and-PE consumes
259 uW of power at an area of 0.1842 mm2. The non-volatile
RRAM PE consumes most of the area and power as it stores
the model weights and also performs weighted-MAC (SMAC)
within the same macro. The power consumption of a router is
comparable to that of the RRAM PE as it performs both data
communication and in-network computing at the same time.
V. CONCLUSION
The PICNIC LLM inference accelerator with 3D IC chiplet
design, consisting of Inter-PE Computational Network (IPCN)
and non-volatile RRAM in-memory computing PE, inter-
connected via silicon photonics and coupled with efficient
hardware scheduling scheme is shown to have superior per-
formance and energy efficiency as compared to GPUs. It
achieves 3.95× speedup and 30× efficiency improvement over
the Nvidia A100 in Llama-8B inference (309 tokens/s and 10.9
tokens/J respectively) before CCPG. Furthermore, the imple-
mentation of CCPG on PICNIC reduces the system power
further by 80%, achieving 57× energy efficiency improvement
over Nvidia H100 at similar throughput. As CCPG plays an
increasingly pivotal role in scaling to larger models, PICNIC
is a highly scalable architecture designed to operate within
stringent power constraints. By ensuring sub-linear power
scaling, PICNIC effectively mitigates communication bottle-
necks through efficient compute-memory-network integration
and compute resources orchestration.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ivanov, N. Dryden, T. Ben-Nun, S. Li, and T. Hoefler, “Data
movement is all you need: A case study on optimizing transformers,”


--- Page 7 ---
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 3, pp. 711–732,
2021.
[2] P. G. Recasens, F. Agullo, Y. Zhu, C. Wang, E. K. Lee, O. Tardieu,
J. Torres, and J. L. Berral, “Mind the memory gap: Unveiling gpu bot-
tlenecks in large-batch llm inference,” in IEEE International Conference
on Cloud Computing, 2025.
[3] M. W¨ursch, D. P. David, and A. Mermoud, Monitoring Emerging Trends
in LLM Research.
Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2024, pp. 153–
161.
[4] Y. Ding and T. Shi, “Sustainable LLM serving: Environmental implica-
tions, challenges, and opportunities : Invited paper,” in 2024 IEEE 15th
International Green and Sustainable Computing Conference (IGSC),
2024, pp. 37–38.
[5] Y. Wang, Z. Zou, and L. Zheng, “Design framework for SRAM-
based computing-in-memory edge CNN accelerators,” in 2021 IEEE
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2021, pp.
1–5.
[6] D. Kimovski, N. Saurabh, M. Jansen, A. Aral, A. Al-Dulaimy, A. B.
Bondi, A. Galletta, A. V. Papadopoulos, A. Iosup, and R. Prodan,
“Beyond von neumann in the computing continuum: Architectures,
applications, and future directions,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 28,
no. 3, pp. 6–16, 2024.
[7] Y. Wang and X. Fong, “Benchmarking DNN mapping methods for the
in-memory computing accelerators,” IEEE Journal on Emerging and
Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 1040–1051,
2023.
[8] Y. Wang, Y. J. Chong, and X. Fong, “LEAP: LLM inference on
scalable PIM-NoC architecture with balanced dataflow and fine-grained
parallelism,” in 2025 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer
Aided Design (ICCAD), 2025, pp. 1–9.
[9] Y. Feng and K. Ma, “Chiplet actuary: a quantitative cost model
and multi-chiplet architecture exploration,” in Proceedings of the 59th
ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference, ser. DAC ’22.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 121–126.
[10] S. Wang and E. Ipek, “Reducing data movement energy via online data
clustering and encoding,” in 2016 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International
Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–13.
[11] S. Pasricha and M. Nikdast, “A survey of silicon photonics for energy-
efficient manycore computing,” IEEE Design & Test, vol. 37, no. 4, pp.
60–81, 2020.
[12] A. Shehabi, S. J. Smith, A. Hubbard, A. Newkirk, N. Lei, M. A. B.
Siddik, B. Holecek, J. Koomey, E. Masanet, and D. Sartor, “2024 united
states data center energy usage report,” Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, Berkeley, California, Tech. Rep. LBNL-2001637, 2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://climate.mit.edu/sites/default/files/2025-
02/lbnl-2024-united-states-data-center-energy-usage-report.pdf
[13] W. Wan, R. Kubendran, C. Schaefer, S. B. Eryilmaz, W. Zhang, D. Wu,
S. Deiss, P. Raina, H. Qian, B. Gao et al., “A compute-in-memory chip
based on resistive random-access memory,” Nature, vol. 608, no. 7923,
pp. 504–512, 2022.
[14] S. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Zhou, R. Li, S. Wang, K.-W. Paik, and P. He,
“Challenges and recent prospectives of 3d heterogeneous integration,”
e-Prime - Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy,
vol. 2, p. 100052, 2022.
[15] E. Li and A. X. Wang, “Theoretical analysis of energy efficiency and
bandwidth limit of silicon photonic modulators,” Journal of Lightwave
technology, vol. 37, no. 23, pp. 5801–5813, 2019.
[16] L. Ranno, J. X. B. Sia, K. P. Dao, and J. Hu, “Multi-material het-
erogeneous integration on a 3-d photonic-cmos platform,” Opt. Mater.
Express, vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 2711–2725, Oct 2023.
[17] S. Harb and W. R. Eisenstadt, “Impact of crosstalk on signal integrity
of tsvs in 3d integrated circuits,” Adv. Sci., Technol. Eng. Syst. J., vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 109–114, 2018.
[18] T. Dao, D. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. R´e, “FlashAttention: Fast
and memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 16 344–16 359, 2022.
[19] N. Muralimanohar, R. Balasubramonian, and N. Jouppi, “Optimizing
nuca organizations and wiring alternatives for large caches with CACTI
6.0,” in 40th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microar-
chitecture (MICRO 2007).
IEEE, 2007, pp. 3–14.
[20] M. Zhou, W. Xu, J. Kang, and T. Rosing, “Transpim: A memory-
based acceleration via software-hardware co-design for transformer,” in
2022 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), 2022, pp. 1071–1085.
[21] Z. Yu, S. Liang, T. Ma, Y. Cai, Z. Nan, D. Huang, X. Song, Y. Hao,
J. Zhang, T. Zhi, Y. Zhao, Z. Du, X. Hu, Q. Guo, and T. Chen,
“Cambricon-llm: A chiplet-based hybrid architecture for on-device in-
ference of 70b llm,” in 2024 57th IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO), 2024, pp. 1474–1488.
[22] C. Systems, “Cerebras launches the world’s fastest ai inference,”
August
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.cerebras.ai/press-
release/cerebras-launches-the-worlds-fastest-ai-inference
