--- Page 1 ---
FREESH: FAIR, RESOURCE- AND ENERGY-EFFICIENT SCHEDULING FOR
LLM SERVING ON HETEROGENEOUS GPUS
Xuan He * 1 Zequan Fang * 2 Jinzhao Lian * 3 Danny H.K. Tsang 1 Baosen Zhang 4 Yize Chen 5
ABSTRACT
The ever-increasing computation and energy demand for LLM and AI agents call for holistic and efficient
optimization of LLM serving systems. In practice, heterogeneous GPU clusters can be deployed in a geographically
distributed manner, while LLM load also observes diversity in terms of both query traffic and serving patterns.
LLM queries running on advanced GPUs during a high-emission hour at one location can lead to significantly
higher carbon footprints versus same queries running on mid-level GPUs at a low-emission time and location.
By observing LLM serving requirements and leveraging spatiotemporal computation flexibility, we consider the
joint routing and scheduling problem, and propose FREESH to cooperatively run a group of data centers while
minimizing user-specified carbon or energy objectives. FREESH identifies the optimal configurations of balanced
load serving by matching distinct GPU instance’s power-throughput characteristics with predictable LLM query
length and workloads. To ensure both latency and fairness requirements, FREESH identifies optimized parallelism
and query routing schedules together with dynamic GPU frequency scaling for power saving, and Least-Laxity-
First (LLF) serving strategy for query scheduling. During the 1-hour serving on production workloads, FREESH
reduces energy by 28.6% and emissions by 45.45% together with improvements in SLO attainment and fairness.
1
INTRODUCTION
Surging deployment of power-intensive LLM inference
workloads across worldwide data centers has raised con-
cerns over AI model’s energy and carbon footprint (Maji
et al., 2025; Lacoste et al., 2019; Luccioni et al., 2024). As
the energy needed for inference is set to surpass the already
massive quantity of energy used for AI training, inference
costs are also increasingly dominated by GPUs’ energy con-
sumption (Qiu et al., 2024a; Samsi et al., 2023). Cloud
service platforms and model providers now deploy a large
amount of model replicas across clusters of GPUs to meet
huge and stochastic LLM workloads (Zheng et al., 2023b;
Kwon et al., 2023). Although these deployments are ho-
mogeneous on the computing side, they can be powered in
quite heterogeneous ways. For example, a query served by
a GPU instance co-located with solar panels during a sunny
day leads to significantly lower carbon emissions compared
to those using power from fossil fuel generators (Lisa Li
et al., 2025). On top of spatiotemporal differences in en-
ergy production, there are significant variations in terms
of service-level objectives (SLOs), query lengths, arrival
*Equal contribution
1Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou), China 2Huazhong University of Sci-
ence and Technology, China 3Renmin University of China, China
4University of Washington, USA 5University of Alberta, Canada.
Correspondence to: Yize Chen <yize.chen@ualberta.ca>.
In Submission, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).
patterns and GPU instance configurations in each LLM serv-
ing tasks. Together, they make addressing the energy and
emission efficiency of LLM serving a non-trivial problem.
Most serving systems today are still managed using a
reservation-based allocation model for GPU provisioning
based on peak load. Further, systems either apply heuris-
tics to change GPU frequency (Wu et al., 2014; Tang et al.,
2019), or fix parallelism and scheduling strategies through-
out a large time window. Because of inherent stochas-
ticity, these strategies can lead to unbalanced workloads,
computationally- and power-inefficient GPU working states,
Head-Of-Line (HOL) blocking, and excessive energy con-
sumption. Data centers as a whole can serve as assets in
the grid (Wierman et al., 2014) by responding to emission
and price signals (e.g., demand response) and optimizing
operations accordingly (Colangelo et al., 2025), although
they still operate independently. Given the unique inference
characteristics and stringent request-level constraints such
as latency and throughput, jointly optimizing routing and
scheduling across multiple GPU clusters has the potential
to increase the efficiency and sustainability of large LLM
services (Kakolyris et al., 2024; 2025).
In this work, we tackle the dual problems of emission- and
resource-efficient joint LLM routing-scheduling for a group
of distributed and heterogeneous GPU servers. This method
allows us to take advantage of distributed renewable gener-
ation, which could otherwise be curtailed because of tem-
arXiv:2511.00807v2  [cs.DC]  5 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
poral and spatial mismatches with computing demand or
power transmission limits (Li et al., 2024; Alizadeh & Jadid,
2015). In addition, most of current LLM services adopt
First-Come-First-Serve (FCFS) scheduling strategy (Kwon
et al., 2023). But it can cause HOL blocking and fairness
issues (Sheng et al., 2024; Fu et al., 2024), and is also obliv-
ious to time-varying electricity prices and carbon emission
intensities. Therefore, we explicitly account for the hetero-
geneity in locational emission rate, GPU model’s power
consumption rate and service rate, locational and temporal
patterns of LLM traffic, and propose a cross-layer, multi-
timescale solution. We first characterize the interplay be-
tween control knobs including LLM request type partition,
GPU frequency, Tensor Parallelism (TP), scheduling pri-
ority, and LLM serving’s performance in terms of SLO,
energy/carbon emissions, and fairness. Several recent stud-
ies have looked at the tradeoff between LLM inference’s
energy efficiency and throughput (Stojkovic et al., 2025b;
Kakolyris et al., 2024), and have concluded that lowering
TP parallelism and GPU frequency would lead to more
energy-efficient operation without significant degradation
in performance (Patel et al., 2024a). Our work generalizes
this analysis across multiple locations and time horizons
and control knobs, and proposes a holistic framework to
incorporate both slow-timescale optimization on geograph-
ically distributed server configurations, and fast-timescale
DVFS adaptation and laxity-based workload scheduling in
response to instantaneous workload traffic.
In the upper level of FREESH, based on predicted incom-
ing workloads and nodal carbon intensity, a tractable mixed
integer program (MILP) problem is formulated to account
for emission or energy consumption objectives subject to
GPU instance availability and SLOs, which guides model
parallelism, load partition, and scaling instance numbers.
FREESH also achieves load balancing across geographi-
cally distributed GPU instances by dynamically partitioning
query types based on incoming traffic. At lower level, ob-
serving the fast-changing states of arriving requests and
inspired by congestion control in networking research (Mo
et al., 1999; Qiu et al., 2024a), we propose an adaptive mul-
tiplicative increase, additive decrease (MIAD) frequency
scaling scheme to dynamically optimize GPU’s power pro-
files, which achieves satisfiable throughput and minimal
power consumption simultaneously. We prove that MIAD
converges to the optimal solution in term of efficiency and
fairness. Furthermore, utilizing a lightweight query type
forecasting model, we can quantify each incoming query’s
urgency level, and propose a novel LLF scheme, which
explicitly prioritizes the most urgent query to balance fair-
ness and performance under scaled GPU frequency. To-
gether, this multi-layered architecture collaboratively man-
ages these competing objectives for efficient LLM serving in
a flexible manner. Evaluations across diverse emission and
production workloads demonstrates that FREESH achieves
a superior trade-off among the competing objectives of cost,
SLO, and fairness consistently, especially substantial emis-
sion (45.45%) and energy (28.6%) reduction are recorded.
FREESH is open sourced for evaluation and benchmarking1.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
Opportunities in LLM Load and Cluster Routing
Opportunity 1: Emission reduction from variability in
carbon intensity and workload. Carbon intensity varies
both temporally and spatially because of the dynamic na-
ture of electricity grids and their access to renewable energy
sources (RES). This indicates that emissions and energy
associated with each token are not distributed equally. In-
tuitively, serving large LLM queries from GPU clusters in
regions with lower carbon intensity can significantly reduce
emissions. This variability allows for the efficient use of
low-carbon electricity by shifting computational loads to
optimal regions (Radovanovi´c et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2011),
which can be achieved through two main strategies: either
by activating more servers in low-carbon areas or by routing
time-varying query workloads to those regions. Ultimately,
a promising approach is to use an optimization model to
dynamically select the best locations, while utilizing fine-
grained frequency scaling to precisely control GPU power.
Figure 1. Spatiotemporal routing of LLM load for carbon and en-
ergy reduction. Locational marginal emission timeseries for these
two data centers are distinctive, giving opportunities for coordinat-
ing GPU clusters adaptive to incoming workload characteristics.
Opportunity 2: Energy saving from the adaptive re-
quest partition and work mode configuration.
(Sto-
jkovic et al., 2025b) proposes to divide clusters into multiple
1https://github.com/AndrewFangZequan/LLM_
Serving_FREESH


--- Page 3 ---
Figure 2. Resource utilization improved by request partition.
Figure 3. Power-latency optimal trade-off reached at the marked
point. Two GPU models are profiled as an illustration.
instance pools, where each pool is dedicated to a specific
request type. As illustrated in Fig. 2, this design reduces
resource allocation ”bubbles” compared to the traditional
single-pool architecture, where these bubbles indicate the
non-occupied or idled allocated GPUs. Notably, the way
requests are partitioned based on their input/output lengths
directly shapes the system’s workload pattern, especially
the throughput of each request type, which in turn dictates
the appropriate worker configuration to guarantee the SLO
attainment while optimizing the user-specified objective.
Compared to static partition adopted in the literature (Sto-
jkovic et al., 2025b), leveraging dynamic request partition-
ing enables sustained load balancing, a capability that can
significantly improve resource utilization and realize the
trade-off between multiple serving objectives, but has yet to
be explored in existing literature.
2.2
Opportunities in LLM Scheduling
Opportunity 3: Power-Latency tradeoff via frequency
scaling.
Under the optimal GPU instance configurations
for specialized request type and load partitioning, we can
exploit the GPU frequency-throughput characteristics for
each instance to further adjust GPU frequency for power
minimization through DVFS in a dynamical approach (Yu
et al., 2025; Kakolyris et al., 2024), which is adaptable
to real-time LLM workload. More interestingly, such a
problem draws a connection to the broader challenge of
fair resource allocation among constrained workloads (Low
et al., 2002; Qiu et al., 2024a).
Figure 4. Toy example illustrates three requests R0, R1, and R2
arriving sequentially at t = 0,1, and 2, each requiring 10, 2, and 1
tokens, respectively, with a throughput of 1 token per second and
scheduling policy update every second. In FCFS, R0 occupies the
worker entirely, causing head-of-line blocking for R1 and R2. In
contrast, LLF dynamically prioritizes requests with smaller laxity
values, allowing more urgent requests to proceed earlier. As a
result, LLF achieves lower average latency, lower TTFT, and better
fairness across concurrent requests compared with FCFS.
Opportunity 4: Fairness-Latency tradeoff via Request
Laxity.
Achieving both LLM serving performance and
fairness in a power-efficient way is challenging (Sheng
et al., 2024; Srivatsa et al., 2025; Qiu et al., 2024b). While
LLM serving is non-deterministic, we identify the server-
side and query-side heterogeneity: i). inference server in-
stances are varying over geographical locations and power
profiles; ii). LLM workloads are highly diverse in their
energy-performance profiles. By including a lightweight
prediction model, we can define and quantify the laxity (Sec.
3.3) to represent each query’s urgency, and integrate the
LLF scheme with queries routed to each power-efficient
TP instance. LLF avoids HOL blocking commonly seen in
FCFS policy. Fig. 4 illustrates an example with queue up-
dated every 1 second, where given predicted request output
length, LLF ensures smaller TTFT and improved fairness
compared to Shortest-Remaining-Time-First (SRTF).
3
FREESH DESIGN
In our proposed framework, we consider the setup of mul-
tiple model replicas which can be served on multiple GPU
clusters in a distributed manner. We now consider all GPU
instances are used to serve single AI/LLM model, while our
MILP formulation and energy saving strategies can easily
generalize to multiple LLM models with varying types of
tasks (Jiang et al., 2025).
3.1
Pool-Level Cost-Aware Optimization
The slow-timescale, pool-level decision is to identify the
optimal cluster configuration to minimize operational car-
bon or the total electricity energy while satisfying SLO and
cluster hardware constraints. Consider a group of servers
with known location n ∈N and GPU type c ∈C. S, R, M
are the known sets of request partition s and the correspond-
ing request type r, work mode m, which can be specified


--- Page 4 ---
Figure 5. Workflow of proposed FREESH for LLM serving. Here, a three-level approach is developed enabling joint optimization of
emission, energy, and SLOs objectives. First, an integer programming (IP) model dynamically assigns GPUs from different locations to
virtual pools every 30 minutes, with each pool tailored to a specific request category based on time-varying emission rates, performance
profiles, and traffic forecasts. Incoming requests are then classified, routed to a specific queue, and scheduled for serving by a LLF
algorithm that prioritizes fairness. During response generation, an MIAD algorithm dynamically adjusts the GPU’s clock frequency every
second to balance the trade-off between energy consumption and SLO performance.
by a LLM service operator. Together, these introduce the
control Knob 1 to Knob 4 for LLM routing and scheduling
(see Table 1). The operational carbon associated with LLM
serving is proportional to power consumption ˜Ps,r,m and
carbon intensity or cost λn(t). In this work, we propose
to use locational marginal emission (LME) rate for λn(t),
which reflects the marginal contribution of emissions by
serving GPU load at location n. Note λn(t) can be smaller
than 0 due to grid conditions (Chen et al., 2024a). And
both historical and forecasted LME can be fetched from
power grid system operators (PJM, 2024; Wang et al., 2014).
Define I := N × S × R × M, i = (n, s, r, m) ∈I.
For an index i ∈I, let n(i), s(i), r(i), m(i) denote the
corresponding components.
Also define index-subsets
Ir := { i ∈I : r(i) = r },
In := { i ∈I : n(i) =
n },
Is := { i ∈I : s(i) = s }. We introduce compact
parameter notation ˜Pi := ˜Ps,r,m, ¯Li := ¯Ls,r,m, and Gm,c
kept as-is (applied to m(i) when needed). Then the opti-
mization of xi can be formulated as an integer program (IP):
min
xi∈N
X
t∈T
X
i∈I
λn(i)(t) ˜Pi xi ∆t
(1a)
s.t.
X
i∈Ir
xi ¯Li ≥α ˜Lr,t
∀r ∈R, ∀t ∈T ,
(1b)
X
i∈In
xi Gm(i),c ≤
¯Gn,c
∀n ∈N, ∀c ∈C,
(1c)
X
i∈Is
xi ≤qs
X
i∈I
xi
∀s ∈S,
(1d)
xi SLOs(i),r(i),m(i) ≤IN+(xi)SLOr(i)
∀i ∈I,
(1e)
X
s∈S
qs = 1,
qs ∈{0, 1}, ∀s.
(1f)
where equation (1a) aims to minimize the carbon emissions
or cost for the upcoming episode. The variable xn,s,r,m
denotes the number of workers stationed at location n, as-
signed to request type r under the partition way s, and
Table 1. Knobs in IP-based Heterogeneous GPUs Allocation.
Knob
Sign
Examples
1.Worker Location n ∈N
N = {n1 : Tokyo, n2 : Beijing}
2.Request Partition s ∈S S = {s1 : {short : (0, 500], long : [500, ∞]},
s2 = {short : [0, 200], long : (200, ∞]}}
3.Request Type
r ∈Rs
Rs1 = {r1 : short, r2 : long}
4.Worker Mode m ∈M
M = {m1 : TP1, m2 : TP2, m3 : TP4}
operating under work mode m. ˜Ps,r,m corresponds to the
operating power consumption for workers configured under
Config{s, r, m}. Gm,c indicates the number of GPUs of
type c required for work mode m; for example, a worker
operating under the mode ˆm = (Prefill-TP2-[c=A100]-
Decode-TP4-[c=A6000]) would have G ˆm,A100 = 2 as-
signed for prefill phase and G ˆm,A6000 = 4 assigned for
decoding phase (Zhong et al., 2024), where “TP2” indicates
2 GPUs are used as 1 Tensor Parallelism instance. Ls,r,m
represents the maximum number of requests the arriving
rate less than service rate achieved at the highest frequency,
while ˜Ls,r,t denotes the predicted throughput for request
type r at time t. The parameter α controls the risk level
associated with potential throughput underestimation. Gn,c
signifies the number of available GPUs of type c at loca-
tion n, with updates occurring in each epoch. qs denotes
whether or not one partition configuration is selected. Fi-
nally, SLOs,r,m denotes the measured average latency for
Config{s, r, m}, and SLOr represents the latency tolerance
for request type r (also subject to epoch-wise updates).
We note that such a formulation equation 1 is tractable with
computation time recorded in Section 4.4. Moreover, while
we profile and assume GPU working at highest frequency to
set the constraint Ls,r,m given request type, request partition,
and work mode, this helps set an upper limit, and we further
reduce emissions or enery costs using techniques described
in Section 3.2.


--- Page 5 ---
3.2
GPU-Level Energy-Efficient Control
Knob 5: MIAD-based Frequency Scaling. Built upon
modern GPU DVFS capabilities, in real-time query serving,
to set each TP instance’s running frequency, we propose an
adaptive frequency scaling mechanism based on the multi-
plicative increase, additive decrease (MIAD) principle (Mo
et al., 1999).The rationale is to capture and adapt the dy-
namic nature of real-time service requests in a fast-timescale,
while circumventing the need for cumbersome operational
data collection/fitting and complex operating point search.
At each timestep for the LLM request i, denote the token
generation throughput it receives as yi, with an associated
utility function Ui(yi). The power consumption of the GPU
is a function of its operating frequency, P(f) (See Fig. 3
and Fig. 14 in Appendix), while the maximum throughput
r(f) is another function of GPU frequency. Then to decide
optimal GPU frequency, we can formulate the following util-
ity maximization problem subject to service rate constraints
and GPU frequency limits f, f:
max
yi≥0, f≤f≤f
X
i
Ui(yi)−βP(f)
s.t.
X
i
yi ≤r(f) : γ. (2)
where β is a cost coefficient and γ is the dual variable as-
sociated with the constraint, which represents the marginal
value of increasing the token generation rate. Let [·]+ and
[·][min,max] denote the projection operator to nonnegative
scalar and box interval, respectively. The following Proposi-
tion guides our frequency scaling update:
Proposition 1. For the utility maximization problem equa-
tion 2, with concave, continuously differentiable Ui(xi) and
convex, continuously differentiable P(f), the following con-
dition holds for the optimal GPU frequency f ∗:
P ′(f ∗) = γ
β r′(f ∗);
(3)
Implementing the following primal-dual update rule will
converge to the global optimum f ∗with given stepsize
kx, kf, kr:
y(t+1)
i
=
h
y(t)
i
+ kx
 U ′
i(y(t)
i ) −γ(t) i
+,
i = 1, . . . , N,
(4a)
f (t+1) =
h
f (t) + kf
 −βP ′(f (t)) + γ(t)r′(f (t))
 i
[f, f],
(4b)
γ(t+1) =
h
γ(t) + kγ
 N
X
i=1
y(t)
i
−r(f (t))
 i
+.
(4c)
See Proof in Appendix B.1 and (Wang et al., 2006; Low
et al., 2002).
Essentially, f should increase when the
marginal benefit of higher generation rate γr′(f) exceeds
the marginal cost of increased power consumption βP ′(f).
A discrete-time, distributed algorithm can be further derived
as follows given predefined sequential serving of query i:
Multiplicative Increase (MI): f(t + 1) = min(Mf(t), f), (5a)
Additive Decrease (AD): f(t + 1) = max(f(t) −δ, f).
(5b)
The Multiplicative Increase rule is applied when the sys-
tem is under high load or congestion, thus FREESH scales
frequency up rapidly to meet SLO requirements. Conversely,
the Additive Decrease rule is applied when the system has
excess compute, gradually lowering the frequency by a fixed
amount (δ) to conserve power. This adaptive, closed-loop
approach ensures the system consistently operates close to
the optimal settings, dynamically balancing LLM serving
performance with energy efficiency.
3.3
Request-Level Real-Time Fair Scheduling
Knob 6: LLF-based Queuing. As above levels are request-
and client-agnostic, we propose LLF scheme to schedule
LLM requests which promote both fairness and efficiency
at the same time. FREESH determines the priority of each
request by dynamically calculating its “laxity” (ℓ), a metric
that quantifies the urgency of a task. The laxity representa-
tion better represents request’s priority compared to FCFS
or SRTF. For a request i arriving at time ti,arrival, its laxity
ℓi(t) at timestamp t is defined as:
ℓi(t) = (ti,arrival + Wi) −t −Ti,remain.
(6)
In this formula, Ti,remain represents the predicted remain-
ing processing time needed for request i (See prediction
model details in D.5), while (ti,arrival + Wi) constitutes the
request’s internal deadline. The scheduling window Wi
is dynamically calculated based on the request’s desired
latency, Lat. Specifically, the client-side scheduling win-
dow is set to Wi = αLLF × Lat with αLLF a tunable
parameter for adjusting window size, which serves as a
relatively stringent internal time limit. Lat represents the
theoretical execution duration of a request assuming no
queuing delay for current GPU instance, and is calculated
as Lat = (Ntokens × TTBT) + TTTFT, where Ntokens is the
total number of predicted output tokens, TTBT is the Time-
Between-Tokens, and TTTFT is the Time-To-First-Token.
TTBT and TTTFT are profiled based on current GPU con-
figurations. A request type forecasting model is applied
to determine expected output length Ntokens based on input
tokens (Qiu et al., 2024b; Fu et al., 2024). It is essential
to distinguish the strict internal scheduling window from
the more lenient server-side Service Level Objective (SLO),
which is set to 5 × Lat in this paper(Stojkovic et al., 2025b).
At each timestep t, for every arrived and unfinished request
we update ℓi(t) by equation 6 with minor computation costs.
Then, the LLF algorithm dispatches the requests with the
smallest laxity values to the available workers. Our im-
plementation is preemptive: if a newly arrived or updated
request gets a strictly smaller ℓthan a running one, we may
preempt the latter and reassign service to the former.


--- Page 6 ---
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this Section, our experiments are designed to answer fol-
lowing research questions: 1). Comparative performance.
Can FREESH reduce carbon emissions with competitive
energy efficiency and SLO attainment? 2). Controller con-
tribution. What is the individual contribution of each control
knob in FREESH to improving the overall performance of
LLM serving? 3). Robustness analysis. How does FREESH
perform under various serving conditions?
4.1
Evaluation Setup
Implementation.
We instantiate the FREESH framework
using a combination of established techniques and custom-
built tools (detailed in the Appendix). It utilizes vLLM
(Kwon et al., 2023) as the inference engine for LLM serv-
ing and leverages the PuLP library (PuLP, 2024) to model
and apply Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2024) to
solve IP optimization problems. Traffic prediction is han-
dled by an LSTM model, while the nvidia-smi tool is used
to capture power and energy characteristics and for imple-
menting the frequency scaling. For request classification,
we trained a BERT model. The router, the LLF queue, and
the communication interfaces between the different mod-
ules are all implemented in Python. This modular design
allows FREESH to seamlessly integrate state-of-the-art or
user-specified techniques.
Resources.
The experiments leverage the Llama3-70b
model (AI@Meta, 2024) deployed on worker modes TP2,
TP4, and TP8 on A100 or H100 GPUs with several datasets,
including: (1) spatiotemporal carbon intensity profiles from
PJM (PJM Interconnection, L.L.C., 2025) (2) prompts and
responses for request generation and classification from
LMSys-Chat-1M (Zheng et al., 2023a) and (3) conversa-
tion traces for workload prediction and online service traffic
(Stojkovic et al., 2025b). We design two distinct partitioning
sets of varying partition values to classify the requests into
four types, respectively, denoted by Rs = {r1 : SS, r2 :
SL, r3 : LS, r4 : LL} 2, where SS indicates a request with
Short input and Short output (See Table 4 in Appendix).
Metrics.
FREESH aims to achieve a trade-off between
energy, environmental effects, and SLO attainment. To
quantify these, our environmental metrics include energy
consumption and carbon emissions. For evaluating SLOs,
we employ Time-to-First-Token (TTFT), Time-Between-
Token (TBT), Violation Rate, and Jain Fairness (Jain et al.,
1984). (See Table 7 in Appendix for metric thresholds)
2Our method is flexible with the set of partitions, and is scalable
to more request types for finer-grained classification and partition.
Testbeds.
To establish our testbeds, we assume three dis-
tinct locations, each characterized by a different carbon
intensity. The geographically distributed servers are con-
figured as follows: 4 A100s and 4 H100s at location 1, 12
A100s and 2 H100s at location 2, and 8 A100s at location
3. Then, we selected two consecutive episodes (Timeslot
24 and 25) from the whole 48 episodes of 1-day pool-level
optimization shown in Fig. 9 to demonstrate results. These
episodes are denoted as E1 and E2, respectively, with each
comprising 6 time steps, representing 30 minutes. Further-
more, the workload level and spatiotemporal carbon intensi-
ties differ between E1 and E2, while all other parameters
remain identical, providing a just comparative basis.
Baselines.
Initially, we conduct 1-day simulations and
compare our FREESH with the MinEnergy minimizing
energy consumption at pool-level. For fast-timescale opera-
tion performance, we compared with Baseline which is
without the request classifier nor any of the proposed con-
trol knobs. To demonstrate the impact of individual control
knob: request partition, work mode shifting, frequency scal-
ing, and LLF scheduling, we conduct shorter, 1-hour exper-
iments as ablation studies involving w/o MultiParti,
w/o TPchange, w/o MIAD and w/o LLF where ’w/o’
means the implementation of FREESH without the corre-
sponding knob. We also compare the proposed LLF with
the classic queuing strategies of Early-Deadline-First (EDF),
Shortest-Remaining-Time-First (SRTF) and First-Come-
First-Serving (FCFS).
4.2
Performance Analysis
Energy and Emission.
Compared to Baseline, our
FREESH achieves substantial reductions by leveraging
request-type information and efficient scheduling:
an
28.60% (1863.78 Wh) energy reduction and a 45.45% (1.78
kg) emission reduction under real emission and workload
scenarios. This is due to the looh-ahead GPU cluster provi-
sioning, adaptive DVFS, and energy-efficient request par-
titioning. Fig. 6(a) indicates that all optimization knobs
except LLF contributed positively to these results. This
suggests that LLF’s benefit is limited under the traffic condi-
tions of episodes E1 and E2, while LLF is more beneficial
for LLM serving fairness.
SLO and Fairness.
As detailed in Fig. 6 (a) and Fig. 6
(b), FREESH delivers notable latency improvements across
multiple metrics compared to Baseline. The E2E latency
sees reductions in the mean (8.20%), P50 (16.41%), and
P90 (9.07%), though the P99 latency exhibited a marginal
0.34% increase. TTFT shows stronger gains, particularly at
P50 (18.86%) and P99 (22.77%). Similarly, TBT is reduced
significantly, with the P50 and P99 demonstrating reductions
of 21.98% and 13.25%, respectively. Given the absence of


--- Page 7 ---
Figure 6. Performance comparison on a. (Left) 7 metrics with control knobs variations; and b. (Right) under varying percentiles.
Table 2. Sensitivity of LLF to workload level compared to FCFS. Shaded entries denote higher performances.
Metrics
Energy (Wh)
Emission (kg)
SLO Vio. Rate
Mean Latency (s)
Mean TTFT (ms)
Mean TBT (ms)
Jain Fairness
LLF
4651.81
2.14
0.02
12.85
175.53
75.79
0.65
FCFS
4550.15 (-2.18%)
2.09 (-2.37%)
0.01 (-60.05%)
12.28 (-4.41%)
172.17 (-1.91%)
74.33 (-1.93%)
0.66 (+0.70%)
LLF-2xQPS
4653.26 (-9.35%)
2.15 (-9.40%)
0.35(-70.47%)
109.55(-62.77%)
335.28
77.46
0.65(+4.84%)
FCFS-2xQPS
5133.22
2.38
0.94
370.98
310.80 (-7.30%)
76.07 (-1.79%)
0.62
Figure 7. Sensitivity of LLF performance to TP mode changes.
congestion, all configurations maintained an acceptable and
comparable level of fairness and SLO violation rate, with
FREESH ultimately performs best.
Cost and Performance Trade-off.
As shown in Fig. 6 (a),
the individual optimization knobs within FREESH present
distinct performance effects (gain and debuff). The strate-
gic coordination of these knobs is the primary mechanism
enabling the integrated FREESH system to outperform the
Baseline across all metrics. Furthermore, while the LLF
knob provides a congestion mitigation capability intended
for high-load scenarios, its strategic inclusion ensures sys-
tem robustness (Verified in Section 4.4). This coordinated
design demonstrates FREESH’s effectiveness in achieving
a superior balance among the competing objectives of cost,
SLO, and fairness in LLM service.
4.3
Ablation Studies
Request partition.
When fixed to a non-optimal request
partitioning, the system’s resource allocation, optimized by
model 1, can be altered to include higher-capacity configu-
rations (e.g., from TP1-A100 to TP4-H100/TP2-A100). As
shown in Fig. 6, this change to fixed partitioning causes
visible, more idle resource, leading to higher energy con-
sumption (+33.32%) and increased emissions (+42.26%)
due to over-provisioning. While the excess hardware ca-
pacity can improve mean, P50, P90 and P99 TBT (-24.70%
to -38.14%), the non-optimal request partition causes an
imbalanced combination of short and long requests, which
manifests as a sharp increase in P90 (+28.60%) and P99
(+87.67%) E2E latency, and P99 (+43.86%) TTFT, indicat-
ing the presence of HOL congestion for certain requests.
This observation demonstrates that a poor partition can
perform worse than Baseline, overriding the benefits
of sophisticated hardware configuration optimization and
confirms that optimal request partitioning is essential for
achieving load balance and improving SLO attainment.
TP mode changes.
When the TP mode remains fixed
to be the optimal for episode E1, when the workload
is transitioning to E2, a degradation is observed across
both SLO and efficiency metrics. Energy consumption in-
creases by 2.66% and carbon emission by 0.40%. E2E la-
tency metrics show consistent degradation. TTFT increases
across key percentiles: mean (+8.11%), P50 (+4.21%),
and P99 (+14.70%), with a minimal decrease at P90
(−0.44%). Similarly, TBT rises for most of percentiles:


--- Page 8 ---
Figure 8. The sensitivity of Cost and Performance metrics to workload level (Top) and Bert accuracy (Bottom).
mean (+4.02%), P50 (+6.11%), and P99 (+4.71%), with
a negligible decrease at P90 (−0.13%). Despite these in-
creases, the mean, P50, and P95 SLO violation rates remain
low, ranging from 1.4% to 3.7%. This suggests that the
workload in E2, even under the suboptimal TP mode, oper-
ates below the critical resource saturation point.
Given that other knobs inherently manage global resource al-
location, their interface with multi-GPU setups is straightfor-
ward. In contrast, LLF is a purely per-request policy, which
poses a potential challenge for scaling its effectiveness. To
validate its multi-GPU performance, we simulate its behav-
ior with TP mode changes. Fig. 7 shows that among general
inference speedups achieved by scaling resources, LLF con-
sistently maintains the highest Jain Fairness for long-output
sequences. This confirms the LLF’s reliability and sustained
effectiveness across diverse resource pools.
MIAD-based frequency scaling.
Without the MIAD
mechanism, the scheduling in FREESH defaults to aggres-
sively pursuing latency, resulting in performance metrics
reaching their best-observed levels at a significant cost to
efficiency. The absence of MIAD scaling is evidenced by
substantial improvements across all latency and SLO met-
rics: TTFT shows reductions up to −54.88% (P99), TBT
is reduced by up to −56.65% (P99), and overall E2E la-
tency is significantly reduced (e.g., P50: −36.73%). This
aggressive scheduling directly translates to a minimal SLO
violation rate ( −71.16%) and a slight change in Jain Fair-
ness (−0.15%). However, this peak performance is achieved
because the system is forced into a worst-case provisioning
strategy, maintaining the highest frequency to maintain the
SLO attainment. Consequently, efficiency metrics suffer
considerably: energy consumption increases by 38.81% and
carbon emission by 39.61%. This stark trade-off highlights
that the core function of MIAD-based frequency scaling
is indispensable for avoiding unnecessary idle power con-
sumption and achieving cost-effective LLM service.
LLF-based scheduling.
As shown in Fig. 6 and Table 2,
the removal of LLF scheduling improves across several met-
rics when operating under a normal workload level without
significant congestion. This counter-intuitive degradation
is attributed to the inherent design of LLF: operating un-
der a normal workload, the scheduler’s aggressive focus on
realizing the preemptive mechanism and meeting a strict
client-side serving time window introduces unnecessary
overhead. Since preemptive actions are easily triggered
even without actual congestion, the extra time consumed by
request scheduling logic hurts SLO attainment and increases
energy and emission, demonstrating that LLF’s benefit is
more significant under high-contention scenarios (Sec 4.4).
4.4
Sensitivity Analysis
Workload Level.
To verify the effectiveness of the LLF
mechanism and demonstrate its response to potential real-
time workload fluctuations, we configured a testbed at
2xQPS (Busy) while keeping other configurations un-
changed. As shown in Table 2, LLF-Busy achieves per-
forms better than FCFS-Busy across most critical metrics,
validating LLF’s ability to manage high contention. LLF’s
advanced request prioritization logic results in a significant
mitigation of resource contention and queuing delays: mean
E2E latency is lowered by 70.47% compared to FCFS-Busy
along with the SLO violation rate is reduced by 62.77%,
showcasing LLF’s robust stability under high load. Further,
LLF-busy achieves an energy consumption reduction of
9.40% and a carbon emission reduction of 9.35% compared
to FCFS-Busy. The consistent improvements across effi-
ciency, SLO, and Jain Fairness (which improves by 4.84%)
confirm that LLF’s preemptive scheduling is essential for
achieving reliable and cost-effective LLM service under


--- Page 9 ---
Figure 9. TP mode variation across heterogeneous GPUs across 1-day traffic for 4 request types.
Figure 10. Sensitivity to pool-level system parameters.
high-contention traffic.
To demonstrate the sensitivity of FREESH with respect
to workload level, we further configured a testbed with
0.5xQPS (Idle) to test the performance of FREESH encoun-
tering the more idle workload. As shown in Fig. 8 (Top),
the system effectively adapts its energy footprint based on
demand: energy consumption and carbon emission decrease
by about 7% in the Idle scenario. In contrast, under the Busy
scenario, these metrics only increase by about 1%. This ef-
fective scaling is attributed to the MIAD mechanism, which
maximizes efficiency across diverse workload levels. While
Jain Fairness remains stable across all workload levels, SLO
metrics deteriorate more in the Busy scenario. Although the
LLF mechanism can mitigate request bursts by prioritizing
urgent tasks, the benefits are likely offset by the internal
FCFS scheduler within the vLLM.
Classifier Accuracy.
The incoming workload pattern is
determined by our BERT request predictor and affecting
FREESH decisions, making it necessary to check the sen-
sitivity to prediction accuracy, which is illustrated in Fig.
8 (Bottom). Both energy consumption and energy emis-
sion show relative stability, fluctuating only within a nar-
row ±5% band across all accuracy levels. This confirms
that FREESH’s adaptive component maintains resource effi-
ciency even with moderate prediction errors. Jain Fairness
also demonstrates high stability, remaining within the ±5%
band. However, SLO metrics exhibit notable volatility. TBT
shows a substantial maximum fluctuation, ranging from
−22.8% to +17.3%, and E2E latency is constrained be-
tween −10.4% and +36.2%. This volatility is mirrored by
the SLO violation rate, which exhibits the largest fluctu-
ation, spanning from −38.7% to a maximum of +57.2%.
The strong performance under 100% accuracy case confirms
that precise request prediction is critical for reliable SLO.
System Parameter.
All scheduling decisions within our
framework are intrinsically linked to the optimal resource
configuration derived from the pool-level IP solution equa-
tion 1. While this solution depends on various system pa-
rameters, we zoom in those with most frequent fluctuation:
request traffic prediction, GPU capacity, and carbon inten-
sity. As shown in Fig. 9, the selection of Partition 2 causes
the GPU allocation strategy closely tracking the workload’s
traffic fluctuations. This tight coupling confirms the high
sensitivity and adaptive capacity of the GPU resource allo-
cation within FREESH to the request traffic prediction. Fig.
10 demonstrates that both request traffic and GPU capacity
are critical factors influencing the efficiency and feasibility
of FREESH. The system becomes infeasible when faced
with a GPU capacity shortage combined with busy traffic.
Feasibility is restored by either enlarging the GPU capacity
or decreasing the traffic load, allowing FREESH to achieve
significant carbon reduction compared to MinEnergy. In
most scenarios, FREESH achieves substantial carbon re-
duction with only a marginal energy increase compared
to MinEnergy. However, a notable divergence occurs
at timeslot 1: the presence of negative carbon intensity,
as shown in Figure 1, fundamentally alters the optimiza-
tion landscape, causing the scheduling decisions made by
MinEnergy and FREESH to differ significantly and result-
ing in a large variance in both carbon emission and energy
consumption.
System Scale.
The solution complexity of the optimiza-
tion model 1 is contingent upon the system scale, while
MIAD and LLF adds negligible computations. We evaluated
various systems by combining different numbers of pool-


--- Page 10 ---
Figure 11. Solution time across pool-level IP model scale.
level control knobs, where the solution space dimension is
defined by |N| × |S| × |R| × |M|, varying the number of
knobs within the set {1, 5, 10, 20}. Figure 11 indicates that
the solution time is not primarily determined by the Total
GPU Capacity. Instead, it mainly depends on the IP model’s
complexity, specifically the combination of control knobs.
This decoupling suggests a crucial practical implication: it
is feasible to use a relatively small IP model to configure
considerable GPUs. Furthermore, the model demonstrates
high efficiency, with all observed solution times remaining
less than 60 seconds, which is practical for slow-timescale
optimization. Even for the largest test case, where the total
GPU Capacity reaches 38,500, the number of constraints
is approximately 643,401, and the number of variables is
around 160,000, the solution time remains only 19.36 sec-
onds. This rapid process confirms the practicality of solving
the IP model online to realize configuration optimization.
5
RELATED WORK
LLM Serving Various design objectives of LLM serving
have been discussed in the literature. For instance, (Li et al.,
2023b) considers the operator placement strategies for la-
tency reduction. (Ye et al., 2025) develops FlashInfer to
tackle KV-cache storage heterogeneity using block-sparse
format and composable formats to optimize memory access
and reduce redundancy. It also proposes the load-balanced
scheduling algorithm. Vidur models the performance of
LLM operators via a combination of experimental profil-
ing and predictive modeling, and evaluates the inference
performance for different workloads by estimating SLO
metrics (Agrawal et al., 2024a). An MILP is formulated in
(Mei et al., 2024) to select a pipeline of GPU instances to
place all layers of the LLM, while ours focus on routing and
scheduling optimization.
In the pre-LLM serving schemes,
such as Clipper
(Crankshaw et al., 2017) and Rafiki (Wang et al., 2018) ap-
ply the practical Additive-Increase-Multiplicative-Decrease
(AIMD) algorithm to adjust the inference batch size. While
µ-Serve demonstrates the benefits of GPU frequency scaling
in power saving for model serving (Qiu et al., 2024a), which
also inspires us to extend multiplicative-increase additive-
decrease strategy on cluster-level frequency with theoretical
justifications. More interestingly, we show the promises of
not only reducing power but also total energy consumption
or emissions associated with LLM serving.
Research in LLM scheduling also have highlighted the po-
tential of improving SLO attainment and fairness. Fast-
Serve adopts a multi-level feedback queue to improve the
average job completion time, while the non-deterministic
model executions still introduce service variability (Wu
et al., 2023). Various strategies such as learning to rank the
shortest job (Fu et al., 2024), speculative SRTF scheduler
with a light proxy output length prediction model (Qiu et al.,
2024b), virtual token counter for fairness scheduling (Sheng
et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2025) have been proposed to optimize
the queued requests. Observing the varying computation
needs of prefill and decoding phases, research also proposes
caching and serving schemes tailored for each phase (Sri-
vatsa et al., 2025; Patel et al., 2024b; Agrawal et al., 2024b).
While past research do not exploit temporal and spatial
flexibility jointly (Lindberg et al., 2022; Stojkovic et al.,
2025b), or rely on either optimization-based approaches,
which are not tractable in real-time operation (Breukelman
et al., 2024), or suboptimal heuristics as they do not take
into account future LLM traffic or emission signals (Duan
et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025).
LLM’s Energy and Environmental Impacts Classical
works centered around improving power and energy effi-
ciency of data centers through power capping (Li et al.,
2020), scheduling (Berral et al., 2010), and load balanc-
ing (Liu et al., 2011). With the disruptive increase on LLM
inference load and intensive power density, unseen chal-
lenges arise over the carbon and energy profiles for LLM
queries and AI data centers (Maji et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025).
Recent studies also identified the power and energy availabil-
ity may be the future bottleneck of LLM deployments (Li
et al., 2024; Stojkovic et al., 2025a; Review, 2025). Solu-
tions have been proposed in terms of co-planning for future
data centers and power infrastructures to reduce associated
carbon footprints (Lin & Chien, 2023; Ferris & Philpott,
2025). Recent works show the promise of carbon reductions
by geographically shifting data center loads to low-emission-
rate regions (Lindberg et al., 2020; Chien et al., 2022). In
Clover, a carbon-friendly ML inference service runtime sys-
tem is proposed which balances performance, accuracy, and
carbon emissions through mixed-quality models and GPU
resource partitioning, where simulated annealing is applied
evolutionarily in graph-based search space (Li et al., 2023a).
Previous research look into the cost, power and energy ef-
ficiency of LLM serving systems (Li et al., 2025; Jiang
et al., 2025; Sukprasert et al., 2024). DynamoLLM pio-


--- Page 11 ---
neers in reconfiguring inference clusters to optimize for
energy and cost of LLM serving under the service’s perfor-
mance SLOs (Stojkovic et al., 2025b). DynamoLLM along
with a few research identify the energy-saving DVFS and
TP configuration mainly based on the discretized search
space of energy-GPU configuration table (Kakolyris et al.,
2024; 2025), which can lead to suboptimal solutions. More-
over, the dynamic and autoregressive token generation pro-
cess makes it challenging to precisely pre-allocate compu-
tational resources for incoming inference requests, while
DynamoLLM does not consider cross-instance coordina-
tion or emission impacts. SpotHedge proposes to spread
spot replicas across clouds based on costs (Mao et al.,
2025), while our work is novel in considering cross-region
emission/energy-guided serving optimization compatible
with fair and efficient LLM scheduling.
6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper identifies the joint computation and energy chal-
lenges of serving LLM workloads across geographically dis-
tributed instances. We present FREESH, a hierarchical and
coordinated routing and scheduling scheme by fully lever-
aging the heterogeneity of locational carbon emission rate,
LLM workloads and GPU instances’ energy-performance
characteristics. FREESH provides a novel spatiotemporal
coordination framework for energy-efficient cross-region
LLM serving, and it demonstrates very competitive results
through tractable GPU instance optimization, adaptive fre-
quency scaling, and LLF scheduling policy. In the future,
we will consider more diverse LLM serving tasks and fine-
grained partition and GPU configuration for achieving im-
proved energy and emission savings.
REFERENCES
Agrawal, A., Kedia, N., Mohan, J., Panwar, A., Kwatra, N.,
Gulavani, B. S., Ramjee, R., and Tumanov, A. Vidur:
A large-scale simulation framework for llm inference.
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, 6:351–
366, 2024a.
Agrawal, A., Kedia, N., Panwar, A., Mohan, J., Kwatra,
N., Gulavani, B., Tumanov, A., and Ramjee, R. Taming
{Throughput-Latency} tradeoff in {LLM} inference with
{Sarathi-Serve}. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operat-
ing Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pp.
117–134, 2024b.
AI@Meta.
Llama 3 model card.
2024.
URL
https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/
blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md.
Alizadeh, B. and Jadid, S. A dynamic model for coordina-
tion of generation and transmission expansion planning
in power systems. International Journal of Electrical
Power & Energy Systems, 65:408–418, 2015.
Berral, J. L., Goiri, ´I., Nou, R., Juli`a, F., Guitart, J., Gavald`a,
R., and Torres, J. Towards energy-aware scheduling in
data centers using machine learning. In Proceedings
of the 1st International Conference on energy-Efficient
Computing and Networking, pp. 215–224, 2010.
Boyd, S. P. and Vandenberghe, L. Convex optimization.
Cambridge university press, 2004.
Breukelman, E., Hall, S., Belgioioso, G., and D¨orfler, F.
Carbon-aware computing in a network of data centers: A
hierarchical game-theoretic approach. In 2024 European
Control Conference (ECC), pp. 798–803. IEEE, 2024.
Cao, S., Wang, Y., Mao, Z., Hsu, P.-L., Yin, L., Xia, T.,
Li, D., Liu, S., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Y., et al. Locality-
aware fair scheduling in llm serving.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.14312, 2025.
Chen, Y., Deka, D., and Shi, Y. Contributions of individual
generators to nodal carbon emissions. In Proceedings of
the 15th ACM International Conference on Future and
Sustainable Energy Systems, pp. 415–421, 2024a.
Chen, Y., Xie, Y., Dang, X., Huang, B., Wu, C., and Jiao, D.
Spatiotemporal prediction of carbon emissions using a
hybrid deep learning model considering temporal and spa-
tial correlations. Environmental Modelling & Software,
172:105937, 2024b. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2023.105937.
Chien, A. A., Zhang, C., and Lin, L. Beyond pue: Flex-
ible datacenters empowering the cloud to decarbonize.
USENIX Hot Carbon, 2022.
Colangelo, P., Coskun, A. K., Megrue, J., Roberts, C., Sen-
gupta, S., Sivaram, V., Tiao, E., Vijaykar, A., Williams,
C., Wilson, D. C., et al. Turning ai data centers into grid-
interactive assets: Results from a field demonstration
in phoenix, arizona. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00909,
2025.
Crankshaw, D., Wang, X., Zhou, G., Franklin, M. J., Gonza-
lez, J. E., and Stoica, I. Clipper: A {Low-Latency} online
prediction serving system. In 14th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
17), pp. 613–627, 2017.
Duan, J., Lu, R., Duanmu, H., Li, X., Zhang, X., Lin, D.,
Stoica, I., and Zhang, H. Muxserve: Flexible spatial-
temporal multiplexing for multiple llm serving. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.02015, 2024.
Ferris, M. C. and Philpott, A. B. Optimizing green energy
systems. INFORMS Journal on Optimization, 2025.


--- Page 12 ---
Fu, Y., Zhu, S., Su, R., Qiao, A., Stoica, I., and Zhang, H.
Efficient llm scheduling by learning to rank. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:59006–
59029, 2024.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference
Manual, 2024. URL https://www.gurobi.com.
Jain, R. K., Chiu, D.-M. W., Hawe, W. R., et al. A quan-
titative measure of fairness and discrimination. Eastern
Research Laboratory, Digital Equipment Corporation,
Hudson, MA, 21(1):2022–2023, 1984.
Jiang, Y., Fu, F., Yao, X., He, G., Miao, X., Klimovic, A.,
Cui, B., Yuan, B., and Yoneki, E. Demystifying cost-
efficiency in llm serving over heterogeneous gpus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.00722, 2025.
Kakolyris, A. K., Masouros, D., Xydis, S., and Soudris,
D. Slo-aware gpu dvfs for energy-efficient llm inference
serving. IEEE Computer Architecture Letters, 23(2):150–
153, 2024.
Kakolyris, A. K., Masouros, D., Vavaroutsos, P., Xydis, S.,
and Soudris, D. throttll’em: Predictive gpu throttling
for energy efficient llm inference serving. In 2025 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), pp. 1363–1378. IEEE, 2025.
Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu,
C. H., Gonzalez, J., Zhang, H., and Stoica, I. Efficient
memory management for large language model serving
with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th sym-
posium on operating systems principles, pp. 611–626,
2023.
Lacoste, A., Luccioni, A., Schmidt, V., and Dandres, T.
Quantifying the carbon emissions of machine learning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700, 2019.
Li, B., Samsi, S., Gadepally, V., and Tiwari, D. Clover: To-
ward sustainable ai with carbon-aware machine learning
inference service. In Proceedings of the International
Conference for High Performance Computing, Network-
ing, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–15, 2023a.
Li, S., Wang, X., Zhang, X., Kontorinis, V., Kodakara, S.,
Lo, D., and Ranganathan, P. Thunderbolt:{Throughput-
Optimized},{Quality-of-Service-Aware} power capping
at scale. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20), pp. 1241–
1255, 2020.
Li, Y., Mughees, M., Chen, Y., and Li, Y. R. The unseen
ai disruptions for power grids: Llm-induced transients.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11416, 2024.
Li, Y., Hu, Z., Choukse, E., Fonseca, R., Suh, G. E., and
Gupta, U. Ecoserve: Designing carbon-aware ai inference
systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.05043, 2025.
Li, Z., Zheng, L., Zhong, Y., Liu, V., Sheng, Y., Jin, X.,
Huang, Y., Chen, Z., Zhang, H., Gonzalez, J. E., et al.
{AlpaServe}: Statistical multiplexing with model paral-
lelism for deep learning serving. In 17th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 23), pp. 663–679, 2023b.
Lin, L. and Chien, A. A. Adapting datacenter capacity for
greener datacenters and grid. In Proceedings of the 14th
ACM International Conference on Future Energy Systems,
pp. 200–213, 2023.
Lindberg, J., Lesieutre, B. C., and Roald, L. The envi-
ronmental potential of hyper-scale data centers: Using
locational marginal co 2 emissions to guide geographical
load shifting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03379, 2020.
Lindberg, J., Lesieutre, B. C., and Roald, L. A. Using geo-
graphic load shifting to reduce carbon emissions. Electric
Power Systems Research, 212:108586, 2022.
Lisa Li, Y., Han, L., Suh, G. E., Delimitrou, C., Kazhamiaka,
F., Choukse, E., Fonseca, R., Yu, L., Mace, J., and Gupta,
U. Fair, practical, and efficient carbon accounting for llm
serving. ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation
Review, 53(2):99–103, 2025.
Liu, Z., Lin, M., Wierman, A., Low, S. H., and Andrew, L. L.
Greening geographical load balancing. ACM SIGMET-
RICS Performance Evaluation Review, 39(1):193–204,
2011.
Low, S. H., Peterson, L. L., and Wang, L. Understanding
tcp vegas: a duality model. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
49(2):207–235, 2002.
Luccioni, S., Jernite, Y., and Strubell, E. Power hungry
processing: Watts driving the cost of ai deployment? In
Proceedings of the 2024 ACM conference on fairness,
accountability, and transparency, pp. 85–99, 2024.
Maji, D., Hanafy, W. A., Wu, L., Irwin, D., Shenoy, P.,
and Sitaraman, R. K. Data centers carbon emissions
at crossroads: An empirical study. ACM SIGENERGY
Energy Informatics Review, 5(2):48–55, 2025.
Mao, Z., Xia, T., Wu, Z., Chiang, W.-L., Griggs, T., Bhard-
waj, R., Yang, Z., Shenker, S., and Stoica, I. Skyserve:
Serving ai models across regions and clouds with spot
instances. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European
Conference on Computer Systems, pp. 159–175, 2025.
Mei, Y., Zhuang, Y., Miao, X., Yang, J., Jia, Z., and Vinayak,
R. Helix: Distributed serving of large language models


--- Page 13 ---
via max-flow on heterogeneous gpus.
Parameters, 4
(A100s):H100s, 2024.
Mo, J., La, R. J., Anantharam, V., and Walrand, J. Anal-
ysis and comparison of tcp reno and vegas. In IEEE
INFOCOM’99. Conference on Computer Communica-
tions. Proceedings. Eighteenth Annual Joint Conference
of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies.
The Future is Now (Cat. No. 99CH36320), volume 3, pp.
1556–1563. IEEE, 1999.
Patel, P., Choukse, E., Zhang, C., Goiri, ´I., Warrier, B., Ma-
halingam, N., and Bianchini, R. Characterizing power
management opportunities for llms in the cloud. In Pro-
ceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems, Volume 3, pp. 207–222, 2024a.
Patel, P., Choukse, E., Zhang, C., Shah, A., Goiri, ´I., Maleki,
S., and Bianchini, R. Splitwise: Efficient generative llm
inference using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architec-
ture (ISCA), pp. 118–132. IEEE, 2024b.
PJM.
“five
minute
marginal
emission
rates”.
https://dataminer2.pjm.com/feed/
fivemin_marginal_emissions/definition,
2024.
PJM Interconnection, L.L.C.
Five Minute Marginal
Emission Rates.
https://dataminer2.pjm.
com/feed/fivemin_marginal_emissions,
2025. Data feed from PJM Data Miner 2. Accessed on
September 23, 2025.
PuLP, P. Optimization with pulp, 2024. URL https:
//coin-or.github.io/pulp/.
Qiu, H., Mao, W., Patke, A., Cui, S., Jha, S., Wang,
C., Franke, H., Kalbarczyk, Z., Bas¸ar, T., and Iyer,
R. K. Power-aware deep learning model serving with
{µ-Serve}. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Confer-
ence (USENIX ATC 24), pp. 75–93, 2024a.
Qiu, H., Mao, W., Patke, A., Cui, S., Jha, S., Wang,
C., Franke, H., Kalbarczyk, Z. T., Bas¸ar, T., and Iyer,
R. K.
Efficient interactive llm serving with proxy
model-based sequence length prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.08509, 2024b.
Radovanovi´c, A. et al. Carbon-aware computing for dat-
acenters. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 38(2):
1270–1280, 2022.
Review,
M.
T.
“ai
and
our
energy
future”.
https://www.technologyreview.com/
supertopic/ai-energy-package/, 2025.
Samsi, S., Zhao, D., McDonald, J., Li, B., Michaleas, A.,
Jones, M., Bergeron, W., Kepner, J., Tiwari, D., and
Gadepally, V. From words to watts: Benchmarking the
energy costs of large language model inference. In 2023
IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference
(HPEC), pp. 1–9. IEEE, 2023.
Sheng, Y., Cao, S., Li, D., Zhu, B., Li, Z., Zhuo, D., Gonza-
lez, J. E., and Stoica, I. Fairness in serving large language
models. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pp. 965–988,
2024.
Srivatsa, V., He, Z., Abhyankar, R., Li, D., and Zhang, Y.
Preble: Efficient distributed prompt scheduling for llm
serving. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
Stojkovic, J., Zhang, C., Goiri, ´I., Choukse, E., Qiu, H., Fon-
seca, R., Torrellas, J., and Bianchini, R. Tapas: Thermal-
and power-aware scheduling for llm inference in cloud
platforms. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, pp. 1266–
1281, 2025a.
Stojkovic, J., Zhang, C., Goiri, ´I., Torrellas, J., and Choukse,
E. Dynamollm: Designing llm inference clusters for
performance and energy efficiency. In 2025 IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on High Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA), pp. 1348–1362. IEEE, 2025b.
Sukprasert, T., Souza, A., Bashir, N., Irwin, D., and Shenoy,
P. On the limitations of carbon-aware temporal and spatial
workload shifting in the cloud. In Proceedings of the
Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems,
pp. 924–941, 2024.
Tang, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, Q., and Chu, X. The impact of
gpu dvfs on the energy and performance of deep learning:
An empirical study. In Proceedings of the Tenth ACM
International Conference on Future Energy Systems, pp.
315–325, 2019.
Wang, W., Wang, S., Gao, J., Zhang, M., Chen, G., Ng, T. K.,
and Ooi, B. C. Rafiki: Machine learning as an analytics
service system. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.06087, 2018.
Wang, W.-H., Palaniswami, M., and Low, S. H. Application-
oriented flow control: fundamentals, algorithms and fair-
ness. IEEE/ACM Transactions On Networking, 14(6):
1282–1291, 2006.
Wang, Y., Wang, C., Miller, C., McElmurry, S., Miller, S.,
and Rogers, M. Locational marginal emissions: Analysis
of pollutant emission reduction through spatial manage-
ment of load distribution. Applied energy, 119:141–150,
2014.


--- Page 14 ---
Wierman, A., Liu, Z., Liu, I., and Mohsenian-Rad, H. Op-
portunities and challenges for data center demand re-
sponse. In International Green Computing Conference,
pp. 1–10. IEEE, 2014.
Wright, S. J. Primal-dual interior-point methods. SIAM,
1997.
Wu, B., Zhong, Y., Zhang, Z., Liu, S., Liu, F., Sun, Y.,
Huang, G., Liu, X., and Jin, X. Fast distributed infer-
ence serving for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05920, 2023.
Wu, C.-M., Chang, R.-S., and Chan, H.-Y. A green energy-
efficient scheduling algorithm using the dvfs technique
for cloud datacenters. Future Generation Computer Sys-
tems, 37:141–147, 2014.
Ye, Z., Chen, L., Lai, R., Lin, W., Zhang, Y., Wang, S., Chen,
T., Kasikci, B., Grover, V., Krishnamurthy, A., et al. Flash-
infer: Efficient and customizable attention engine for
llm inference serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.01005,
2025.
Yu, J., Taneja, A., Lin, J., and Zhang, M.
Voltanallm:
Feedback-driven frequency control and state-space rout-
ing for energy-efficient llm serving.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.04827, 2025.
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Li, T., Zhuang, S., Wu,
Z., Zhuang, Y., Li, Z., Lin, Z., Xing, E. P., Gonzalez, J. E.,
Stoica, I., and Zhang, H. Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale
real-world llm conversation dataset, 2023a.
Zheng, L., Yin, L., Xie, Z., Huang, J., Sun, C., Yu, C.,
Cao, S., Kozyrakis, C., Stoica, I., Gonzalez, J. E., et al.
Efficiently programming large language models using
sglang. 2023b.
Zhong, Y., Liu, S., Chen, J., Hu, J., Zhu, Y., Liu, X., Jin, X.,
and Zhang, H. {DistServe}: Disaggregating prefill and
decoding for goodput-optimized large language model
serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Sys-
tems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24), pp. 193–210,
2024.


--- Page 15 ---
A
POOL-LEVEL DETAILS
A.1
Overall Energy Optimal VS Emission Optimal
The pool-level optimization in FREESH aims for emission
optimality, which it typically equates with energy optimality,
assuming this sufficiently reduces carbon emissions. How-
ever, our simulations on a 24-hour, open-source production
trace demonstrate a critical limitation of this approach. By
explicitly modeling spatiotemporal variations in carbon in-
tensity, our FREESH (Eq. 1) achieves a 13.07% reduction
in carbon emissions at the cost of a minor 1.18% increase in
energy consumption compared to MinEnergy as demon-
strated in Fig. 12. The MinEnergy formulation only
minimizes the total energy used for serving LLM without
considering emission intensity associated with electricity.
This finding underscores that a purely energy-optimal ap-
proach to LLM serving can be myopic, failing to achieve a
global carbon optimum by overlooking crucial geographical
and temporal factors associated with locational emission
rates.
A.2
Carbon Signal Tracing
From Fig. 5, we can see that the IP model’s location se-
lections are time-varying, with different decisions made for
energy-optimal and emission-optimal operations. Location
2 is consistently chosen due to its sufficient GPU capacity.
However, FREESH can still identify and select the period
with the lowest carbon intensity, such as during time slots
230-240. While during timeslots 0-4 as shown in Table 3,
FREESH can adjust the request partition to deploy more
workers at location 2 to trace the negative carbon intensity,
which brings 207 % emission reduction. This demonstrates
that FREESH effectively tracks carbon intensity and identi-
fies the most carbon-efficient location for LLM services.
Table 3. Partition Decision within timeslots 0-4 in Fig. 13
Set
w/o Part: {P. 1} →
FREESH: {P. 1, P. 2}
Emission
0.41 kg
-0.44 kg (↓207%)
Allocation loc2: SS-m1, SL-m1, loc1: SL-m4, loc2:SS-m1,
LL-m1, loc3:LL-m2
LS-m2*2, l3:LL-m3
A.3
Request Partition
In this paper, we apply the following two discrete partition
ways listed in Table 4, and the pool-level optimization (Eq.
1) optimizes for the optimal request partition set. In practice,
any feasible partitions could be applied in FREESH.
Specifically, Partition 1 is determined empirically: we first
exclude the most extreme 2.5% of samples from both ends
of the request distribution, and then use the median token
length within the remaining 95% range as the threshold
for distinguishing short and long requests. This approach
reflects an observation-based heuristic division that captures
the majority of typical workloads. In contrast, Partition 2
adopts a simpler, statistically grounded method using the
50th percentile (median) of token length as the boundary,
representing a balanced partition between short and long
requests.
Table 4. Request classification according to token length.
Input
Output
Type
Short (S)
Long (L)
Short (S)
Long (L)
Partition 1
[0, 184)
[184, 4096]
[0, 444)
[444, 4096]
Partition 2
[0, 25)
[25, 4096]
[0, 232)
[232, 4096]
B
GPU-LEVEL DETAILS
B.1
Theoretical Analysis for MIAD
In our frequency scaling algorithm, we dynamically adjust
each TP instance’s frequency to maximize utility received
by each request i with received service rate yi, minimize
the power consumption P(f), while subject to the GPU
instance’s performance limit r(f). Though we only take
f as the control knob in this algorithm, it well generalizes
to scenarios where multiple queries are considered with
distributed serving rate yi. Here we present the proof of
Proposition 1 as follows,
Proof. The Lagrangian of equation 2 is as follows:
L(y, f, r) =
X
i
Ui(yi) −βP(f) + γ(r(f) −
X
i
yi).
(7a)
Given strictly concave and continuously differentiable util-
ity functions Ui(yi), i = 1, ..., N and convex, continuously
differentiable P(f), equation 2 is a concave optimization
problem. The KKT conditions for original utility maximiza-
tion problem equation 2 are as follows:
∂L
∂yi
= U ′
i(xi) −γ = 0, U ′
i(y∗
i ) = γ, y∗
i = U ′−1
i (γ) (8a)
∂L
∂f = −βP ′(f) + γr′(f ∗) = 0, P ′(f ∗) = γ
β r′(f ∗),
(8b)
X
i
yi ≤r(f),
(8c)
yi ≥0,
(8d)
f ≤f ≤f,
(8e)
γ ≥0,
(8f)
γ(r(f) −
X
i
(yi)) = 0.
(8g)
Based on standard duality theory (Boyd & Vandenberghe,
2004), if there exists f and y strictly satisfying the constraint,


--- Page 16 ---
Figure 12. Overall energy consumption and carbon emission across 1-day pool-level optimization.
Figure 13. Location variation response to the spatiotemporal carbon intensity.
there is zero duality gap, thus primal global optimum can
be recovered from the dual optimum. Following the primal-
dual update rule equation 4, it is guaranteed to converge to
the global optimum (Wright, 1997).
In the practical implementation, we favor lowered frequency
as long as SLO can be met to reduce power consumption.
However, when γr′(f) ≥βP ′(f), we increase f, which
can be concluded as the dynamic GPU frequency scaling
principle equation 5. Also in practice, the assumption that
Ui(xi) is a concave function and P(f) is a convex func-
tion are mild, considering candidate utility function for log-
utility, and the fitted linear frequency-power curve shown in
Fig. 14.
B.2
Frequency and Power Variation in MIAD
In practice, we note that setting the GPU frequency (e.g., via
nvidia-smi) incurs non-negligible overheads. Figure 15 pro-
vides a comprehensive comparison of system performance
with and without the MIAD frequency scaling algorithm
across all four request types. As shown in all four subplots,
the baseline (w/o MIAD) maintains a static, high GPU fre-
quency, consistently operating near the A100’s peak of 1410
MHz. This static high-frequency operation results in a per-
sistently high total power consumption for the dual-card
Figure 14. Frequency-Power curve across GPU types
setup, which remains stable at over 700W, irrespective of
the actual workload.
In sharp contrast, FREESH, powered by the MIAD algo-
rithm, exhibits highly dynamic behavior. The GPU fre-
quency is actively adjusted based on real-time load, oscil-
lating between the minimum floor of approximately 300
MHz during idle periods and the peak of 1410 MHz when
high performance is required. Consequently, the power


--- Page 17 ---
consumption also dynamically scales, fluctuating between
approximately 200W and 650W. This demonstrates MIAD’s
core benefit: it achieves significant energy savings when
the load is low, while still scaling up to provide maximum
performance when the load surges.
The precise mechanics of this adjustment are illustrated
in Figure 16, which now presents four fine-grained, one-
minute snapshots of the MIAD algorithm in action. These
zoomed-in views jointly demonstrate the two core principles
of MIAD: Multiplicative Increase (MI) and Additive De-
crease (AD), and, more importantly, they show that MIAD
can closely track rapid changes in traffic.
Specifically, Figure 16(a) shows a mostly idle period where
a short burst of requests suddenly arrives. When the burst
starts, MIAD immediately performs a multiplicative in-
crease to raise the GPU frequency to a high level, and then,
after the burst subsides, it slowly and additively decreases
the frequency back to the minimum, reflecting the MI–AD
policy.
Figure 16(b) captures the opposite case: the system is under
a relatively busy period, but there is a short idle window.
MIAD senses the reduced load and gradually reduces the fre-
quency in an additive, stepwise manner, while still keeping
the system ready to ramp up again once the load returns.
Figure 16(c) depicts a continuously busy interval. In this
case, MIAD keeps the frequency at a high level with only
small oscillations, showing that the controller can sustain
performance when the workload remains high.
Finally, Figure 16(d) illustrates a long, very-idle period.
Here the frequency stays near the minimum most of the
time, and only when sporadic requests arrive does MIAD
issue short, spike-like multiplicative increases; after each
request is served, the frequency quickly falls back to the
minimum. Taken together, these four scenarios show that
MIAD can effectively sense and track traffic dynamics.
C
REQUEST-LEVEL DETAILS
C.1
LLF Implementation
To facilitate reproducibility and further analysis, this Section
presents the complete implementation of the LLF scheduling
algorithm. The algorithm has been introduced in the main
text as the core LLM scheduling strategy. Algorithm 1 below
illustrates the detailed LLF scheduling procedure within the
simulation framework.
Algorithm 1 Least Laxity First Scheduling Scheme
1: Inputs:
set
of
requests
{i}
with
(ti,arrival, Ti,remain, Wi); tick size ∆t
2: for t = 0, ∆t, 2∆t, . . . until all requests finish do
3:
Let A(t) = {i | ti,arrival ≤t, Ti,remain > 0}
{active requests}
4:
for each i ∈A(t) do
5:
update laxity ℓi(t) using equation 6
6:
end for
7:
Sort A(t) by increasing ℓi(t)
8:
Assign available workers to requests with smallest
ℓi(t)
9:
Execute each selected request for ∆t
10:
Update remaining time Ti,remain ←Ti,remain −∆t
11: end for
C.2
Fairness Metric for Requests
To evaluate the fairness achieved under the LLF schedul-
ing policy, requests of the same workload type are divided
into K disjoint client groups according to their output to-
ken counts using quartile-based partitioning. Let K = 4
denote the number of clients, and let Ck denote the set of
requests belonging to client k. For each request i ∈Ck,
a fairness evaluation window Wi is defined consistently
with the scheduling window as Wi = αLLF × Lat, where
αLLF = 1.4 in our experiments. Let finishi,t denote the
completion time of its t-th token. The number of tokens that
finish within the fairness window is given by
xi =
X
t
1{finishi,t −ti,arrival ≤Wi},
where 1{·} denotes the indicator function, which equals 1 if
the condition inside the braces is true and 0 otherwise. The
total number of timely-served tokens for client k is
Xk =
X
i∈Ck
xi.
Finally, the fairness metric across all clients is quantified
using the Jain Fairness Index:
Jain Fairness =
PK
k=1 Xk
2
K × PK
k=1 X2
k
,
(9)
which ranges from 0 (completely unfair) to 1 (perfectly
fair). This metric measures whether each client receives a
comparable share of timely-served tokens within its fairness
window.
The excellent fairness of the preemptive LLF scheduling
algorithm stems from its dynamic priority mechanism based
on laxity, a metric that integrates a request’s remaining


--- Page 18 ---
a SS (short–short)
b SL (short–long)
c LS (long–short)
d LL (long–long)
Figure 15. Frequency and power comparison of the MIAD algorithm across four request types. The comparison shown is for Llama3-70B,
using data from workers running on 2x A100 80GB SXM GPUs. Subplots (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the GPU frequency and power
consumption for FREESH (with MIAD) versus the baseline (w/o MIAD) under SS (short–short), SL (short–long), LS (long–short), and
LL (long–long) request types, respectively.
workload with its deadline urgency. This design prevents
long tasks from being continuously starved by short ones, as
the priority of a long task naturally increases as its deadline
approaches. As a result, the scheduler effectively balances
the service experience across different clients by proac-
tively reallocating computational resources to the most time-
sensitive tasks, thereby avoiding systemic bias towards any
single class of requests.
In addition to fairness, the timeliness of LLF scheduling is
assessed through the server-side SLO violation rate, defined
as follows. A server-side SLO violation occurs if a request
finishes after the violation window windowi = βLLF ×Lat
with βLLF =5; the empirical violation rate is the fraction of
requests violating this condition:
Violation Rate =
1
N
N
X
i=1
1{ ti,finish −ti,arrival > windowi, } .
(10)
where ti,finish denote the completion time of request i.
C.3
The Calculation of Toy Example
Figure 4 illustrates three requests, R0, R1, and R2, which
arrive sequentially at t = 0, t = 1, and t = 2, respectively.
Their output lengths are 10, 2, and 1 tokens, while the sys-
tem throughput is fixed at 1 token/s. The scheduling policy
updates every second, meaning that only one token can be
produced per time slot. The average latency is measured as
the completion time minus the arrival time per token.
The metrics reported in Figure 4 are defined as follows.
Latency (s/token). For each request Ri, the average per-
token latency is defined as
Latency(Ri) = ti,finish −ti,arrival
Ntokens(Ri)
.
This per-token normalization enables comparison across
requests with different output lengths.
For the three scheduling policies—FCFS, SRTF, and LLF—
the token generation timelines follow the sequences shown
in Figure 4. By substituting each request’s arrival time,
first-token time, and completion time into the above two
formulas, the corresponding latency and TTFT values pre-
sented in the figure can be directly obtained.
For example, under LLF scheduling, the latency of R1 is
calculated as follows: it finishes at the 4th second and arrives
at the 1st second, so Latency(R1) = 4−1
2
= 1.5.


--- Page 19 ---
a Idle period with a short busy burst.
b Busy period with a short idle segment.
c Continuously busy interval.
d Long idle period with sporadic requests.
Figure 16. A zoomed-in view of the MIAD frequency scaling mechanism, corresponding to the 4th–5th minute interval of Figure 15(a),
under four typical traffic patterns: (a) mostly idle →short busy burst, (b) mostly busy →short idle period, (c) continuously busy, and (d)
continuously idle with sporadic requests. These cases together highlight how MIAD applies multiplicative increase to react immediately
to SLO violations or rising load, and additive decrease to steadily return to the energy-efficient operating point.
C.4
Performance Comparison
The experiment uses the four scheduling algorithms (FCFS,
SRTF, EDF, LLF). Under the standard configuration with 8
GPUs, 100 requests are sent to the LLM with a concurrency
level of 20.
The experiment sweeps the QPS (Queries per second) rate
across {5, 10, 15, 20, 25} queries/s. For each QPS rate, four
metrics are recorded: violation rate (Violation%), average
time-to-first-token (Avg TTFT), fairness (Jain Fairness), and
average maximum waiting time (Avg MaxWaitingTime).
Avg MaxWaitingTime is defined as the average, over all re-
quests, of each request’s maximum waiting duration, where
the per-request value is the larger of (i) the delay from arrival
to the first token and (ii) the longest interval between two
consecutive token completions.As shown in Figure 17 and
Table 5, the curves of the four algorithms under different
workloads follow the same set of metrics and allow a direct
visual comparison.
Across all four algorithms (FCFS, SRTF, EDF, LLF), LLF
consistently achieves a superior latency–fairness balance.
The results show the following patterns:
(1) Long-output workloads. LLF exhibits clear advantages:
its Avg TTFT and Avg MaxWaitingTime are significantly
lower than those of other algorithms, indicating that LLF
effectively prioritizes time-critical tasks under heavy load,
alleviating queue buildup and improving responsiveness. In
contrast, FCFS tends to experience head-of-line blocking as
QPS increases, leading to higher violation rates.
(2) Short-output workloads. When responses are short, all
algorithms achieve similar Avg TTFT and Avg MaxWaiting-
Time, as short tasks dominate total latency and scheduling
has limited influence.
(3) Fairness. In short-output scenarios, Jain Fairness values
across algorithms are nearly identical. However, in long-
output scenarios, LLF attains noticeably higher fairness,
reflecting a more balanced allocation of compute resources.
C.5
Time Window Selection
In the simulation environment, two key parameters are intro-
duced: αLLF and βLLF . The parameter αLLF controls the
fairness evaluation window (representing the client-side la-
tency tolerance), while βLLF controls the violation window
(representing the operator-side latency tolerance).
Following the configuration used in DynamoLLM (Sto-
jkovic et al., 2025b), βLLF is fixed at 5, representing the
upper-bound latency window tolerated by the system op-
erator under the worst-case condition. However, clients
typically expect response times within a much smaller
time window than this upper bound. Therefore, for the
client-side fairness window, we conduct experiments with


--- Page 20 ---
Figure 17. Different metrics under varying QPS rate.
αLLF ∈[1.4, 1.6]. The results show that within this range,
LLF achieves the best balance between fairness and latency,
and thus αLLF is finally fixed at 1.4 as the default exper-
imental setting. As shown in Figure 18, when αLLF is
selected as 1.4, both Average TTFT and Jain Fairness per-
form well.
D
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
D.1
Time Overheads
We evaluated the time overheads introduced by the compo-
nents of the FREESH controller to validate its efficiency in
real-time decision-making. A detailed breakdown of these
overheads is presented in Table 6.
It is important to emphasize that all latency measurements
were obtained under our specific experimental configuration
and system scale. These results are notably affected by
both the hardware configuration of the controller node (e.g.,
CPU model) and the scale of the optimization problem, as
illustrated in Figure 11.
For slow-timescale (pool-level) overheads, the primary cost
arises from the optimization solver. Depending on the prob-
lem scale, the solver’s runtime ranged from 0.08 s to 19.36 s.
In the table, we conservatively report this as < 60 s. Since
this computation is executed only once every 30 minutes
(1800 s) and runs asynchronously, its impact on real-time
serving is negligible.
For fast-timescale (request-level) overheads, all components


--- Page 21 ---
Figure 18. Comparison of α, β parameters on LLF performance with varying request type (SS, SL, LS, LL). The selection of αLLF = 1.4
and βLLF = 5 achieves the optimal performance.


--- Page 22 ---
Table 5. The sensitivity of queuing method’s SLO Performance to workload level with varying request types.
SS
SL
LS
LL
EDF
SRTF
FCFS
LLF
EDF
SRTF
FCFS
LLF
EDF
SRTF
FCFS
LLF
EDF
SRTF
FCFS
LLF
QPS=5
Violation % (↓)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
8.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
7.0
0.0
TTFT (s)(↓)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.9
13.9
22.9
9.0
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
12.4
10.9
19.2
8.5
Jain Fair.(↑)
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.9
0.7
0.7
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.7
1.0
0.9
0.6
0.9
MaxWaiting (s) (↓)
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
17.9
17.0
22.9
9.9
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
14.1
13.4
19.2
9.4
QPS=15
Violation % (↓)
0.0
0.0
11.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
18.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
29.0
3.0
0.0
0.0
22.0
0.0
TTFT (s) (↓)
0.7
0.7
1.7
0.7
19.6
19.4
28.1
4.8
1.5
1.4
3.9
1.3
14.9
14.9
27.9
7.5
Jain Fair.(↑)
0.7
0.7
0.4
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.7
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
1.0
MaxWaiting (s) (↓)
0.9
0.9
1.7
0.9
22.6
22.5
28.1
6.6
1.7
1.7
3.9
1.6
19.1
19.1
27.9
9.8
QPS=25
Violation % (↓)
0.0
0.0
16.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
15.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
28.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
20.0
0.0
TTFT (s) (↓)
1.4
1.4
2.5
1.3
21.6
21.5
29.5
6.9
2.1
2.1
3.7
1.7
17.7
17.8
29.1
7.8
Jain Fair.(↑)
0.8
0.8
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.8
0.6
1.0
0.8
0.8
0.5
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.6
1.0
MaxWaiting (s) (↓)
1.5
1.5
2.5
1.5
23.0
23.0
29.5
8.5
2.2
2.2
3.7
1.8
20.4
20.4
29.1
9.7
Table 6. Time Overheads of the FREESH Controller.
Component
Frequency
Avg. Time
1. Slow-Timescale Overheads
Traffic Forecast (LSTM)
Every 30 mins
45.2 ms
Emission Forecast
Every 5 mins
< 100 ms
MILP Solving
Every 30 mins
< 60 s
TP Switching (Actuation)
On config change
35.4 ms
2. Fast-Timescale Overheads
Request Classification (BERT)
Per request
16 ms
LLF Calculation
Per schedule tick
5 ms
Frequency Control (MIAD)
Every 1 s
< 20 ms
operate on the millisecond scale, including request classifica-
tion (16 ms), LLF queue calculation (5 ms), and frequency
control (< 20 ms). These real-time processing costs are
negligible compared to the end-to-end LLM inference la-
tency, which typically ranges from a few seconds to tens
of seconds, confirming that the FREESH framework oper-
ates efficiently without introducing noticeable performance
bottlenecks.
D.2
SLO Thresholds
As referenced in Section D.7, the MIAD frequency scaling
mechanism relies on a set of latency-based thresholds to
detect real-time congestion. These thresholds, detailed in
Table 7, are defined per request type to trigger the multi-
plicative frequency increase of the MIAD controller.
Table 7. SLO Thresholds for MIAD Congestion Control.
Request Type
TBT (ms)
TTFT (ms)
E2E Latency (s)
SS
150
300
7
SL
150
300
27
LS
150
600
10
LL
150
600
30
The thresholds are calibrated based on the distinct perfor-
mance characteristics of each request class:
• Time-Between-Token (TBT): A uniform threshold of
150 ms is applied across all request types. This metric
is primarily sensitive to the token generation (decode)
phase, which has similar performance expectations
regardless of the initial prompt.
• TTFT: The TTFT threshold is dependent on the input
prompt length. Requests with short inputs (SS and
SL) use a tighter threshold of 300 ms, while requests
with long inputs (LS and LL) are given a more lenient
600 ms. This accounts for the additional processing
time (prefill phase) required for longer prompts before
token generation can begin.
• End-to-End (E2E) Latency: The E2E thresholds (7s,
27s, 10s, 30s) are derived from the average end-to-
end latencies empirically measured during real GPU
experiments for each respective request type. These
measured averages serve as the practical baselines for
the E2E latency thresholds, acting as a final backstop
to detect significant overall request slowdown.
D.3
LLM Traffic Forecast
In FREESH, the traffic prediction module is designed to
forecast the incoming traffic into four distinct service request
types: SS, SL, LS, and LL. To achieve this objective, we
have developed a prediction framework based on the Long-
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) model. The methodology
consists of the following stages:
For model training, we selected a public Azure dataset and
extracted one week of complete conversation logs as our
training data. First, we processed the data into a time series
format: by establishing a fundamental time window of 5


--- Page 23 ---
seconds, we counted the number of incoming requests for
each type within that window to form a single data point.
We used an LSTM network to capture the temporal depen-
dencies of the request traffic. The model takes a sequence
of continuous data points from a past period as input and
predicts the request arrivals at each time point within the
next 30 minutes.
The model outputs the forecast results for the subsequent 30
minutes (which correspond to 360 data points of 5-second
intervals). The 30-minute horizon is then divided into 6 con-
secutive 5-minute intervals, and we calculate the maximum
QPS for each interval. The specific calculation involves
identifying the 5-second data point with the highest request
volume within each 5-minute interval and dividing its re-
quest count by 5 to obtain the peak QPS for that interval.
Ultimately, we use this peak QPS as the core predictive
indicator for the traffic intensity of each request type over
the next half-hour.
D.4
Emission Forecast
Accurately forecasting the real-time carbon emissions of
geographically distributed Large Language Model (LLM)
serving clusters is critical for achieving sustainable com-
puting and enabling dynamic load balancing. This task is
highly challenging as it constitutes a complex spatiotem-
poral forecasting problem: emissions are not only dynamic
over time but are also influenced by the spatial location of
different data center nodes (e.g., local grid carbon intensity)
and their interactions.(Chen et al., 2024b)
We employ a hybrid deep learning model that integrates a
Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) and a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) (Chen et al., 2024b). When applied to
LLM cluster forecasting, time-series data from each data
center, such as GPU utilization and request load, is first
fed into a GRU network to capture its intrinsic temporal
evolution. Subsequently, all data centers are structured as a
geographical graph, upon which the GCN operates to learn
and integrate the spatial correlations between nodes, such as
how the low carbon intensity of one node might influence
global workload distribution and total emissions.
This spatiotemporal hybrid model achieved a coefficient of
determination (R²) exceeding 0.95 in its original monthly
data predictions, significantly outperforming models that
consider only a single dimension. Its architecture is well-
suited for high-frequency, dynamic data, thereby providing
an advanced and validated technical framework for achiev-
ing high-precision, spatiotemporal five-minute-level carbon
emission predictions for LLM clusters.
D.5
Request Classifier
To support efficient request scheduling in our system, we
train a request classifier that jointly (i) predicts the expected
output length of a request (measured in tokens) and (ii)
produces a binary label indicating short vs. long responses
based on the predicted length. Training data are drawn from
the LMSYS-CHAT-1M dataset (Zheng et al., 2023a), where
we take the first turn of user–assistant interaction prompts
at temperature 0 and submit them to LLAMA-3-70B. We
collect 50K request–response pairs, each containing the user
prompt, the model reply, and the corresponding token counts
for both prompt and answer.
We find that a lightweight model can predict the LLM type
well given the input query. Building on the insight of Fu
et al. (2024) that pretrained encoders such as BERT can be
adapted to predict response lengths, we design our classi-
fier to accommodate requests with a maximum length of
4,096 tokens in our dataset. Since XLM-RoBERTa can
process at most 512 tokens per input, directly encoding
such long contexts is infeasible. To address this, we par-
tition each request into 512-token chunks, encode each
chunk with XLM-RoBERTa, and aggregate the chunk em-
beddings using a bidirectional LSTM. The aggregated rep-
resentation is then passed to a regression head that predicts
log(output tokens + 1); we exponentiate at inference to re-
cover the expected output length. Finally, we derive the
binary label by thresholding the predicted length at 444 to-
kens, a cutoff selected from the empirical distribution of
response sizes in our corpus.
Table 8. Configuration and hyperparameters of request classifier.
Component / Parameter Setting
Encoder backbone
XLM-RoBERTa (base)
Max request length
4096 tokens
Chunk size
512 tokens
Aggregator
BiLSTM (Hidden size = 384)
Output head
Linear regressor on aggregated state
Long/short threshold
444 tokens
Optimizer
AdamW (Learning rate 2 × 10−5)
Batch size
16
Epochs
5
Training samples
50,000
We optimize the regression objective with mean squared
error (MSE) on the logarithmic targets using AdamW with
a linear warmup schedule. Evaluation reports mean abso-
lute error (MAE) on token-length prediction and standard
classification metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, F1) for
the long/short decision. We select the best checkpoint by
validation accuracy. This design yields both fine-grained
length estimates for capacity planning and robust binary
decisions for practical scheduling and routing.


--- Page 24 ---
Figure 19. Comparison between LSTM-predicted and actual request traffic across different types.
Table 9. Performance of the request classifier on testing datasets.
Accuracy
F1
Precision Recall
Regression
MAE (tokens)
Value 0.8715 0.7909 0.7602 0.8243
110.01
D.6
Router and Worker
In our implementation, the Router is responsible for receiv-
ing, classifying, and dispatching requests. Once a request is
received from the client, the Router first extracts the com-
plete prompt from the request body and computes the num-
ber of input tokens using the Llama 3 tokenizer. It then in-
vokes an asynchronously wrapped BERT-based predictor to
estimate the number of output tokens, where asynchronous
execution prevents blocking of the event loop. Based on the
input and predicted output token counts, the Router cate-
gorizes each request into one of four types: short-prompt–
long-response, short-prompt–short-response, long-prompt–
short-response, and long-prompt–long-response. After clas-
sification, the Router leverages pre-configured performance
parameters associated with each type to estimate the end-
to-end latency and determine the appropriate scheduling
strategy.
The Router operates in two distinct modes. In Direct mode,
requests are dispatched strictly in order of arrival, effectively
implementing a FCFS policy, without any further urgency-
based prioritization. In LLF mode, by contrast, each re-
quest is assigned a task ID and placed into a laxity-based
scheduling queue. The Router’s dispatcher continuously
selects requests from the queue according to their urgency
and forwards them to the appropriate worker. Regardless of
the mode, worker selection follows a weighted round-robin
strategy within the pool of available workers of the corre-
sponding request type, and requests are forwarded to vLLM
service instances through an OpenAI-compatible API. Upon
task completion, the Router records metrics such as end-to-
end latency, satisfaction of service-level objectives (SLOs),
and the actual number of output tokens, which are later used
for fairness and performance analysis.
On the worker side, a vLLM service instance can regis-
ter itself with the Router after initialization. Registration
is performed through a management interface, where the
worker provides its IP address, port, supported request type,
and scheduling weight.
The Router verifies the health
of the worker before admitting it into the corresponding
worker pool. The weight parameter directly affects the
weighted round-robin policy, determining the proportion
of requests assigned to the worker and thereby enabling
resource-aware distribution of load across heterogeneous
instances. Through this cooperative process, the Router and
workers jointly establish a complete workflow that spans re-
quest reception, token-based classification, scheduling and
dispatching, and result logging.
D.7
MIAD-based Frequency Scaling
We implement the MIAD strategy to dynamically adjust
GPU frequency for the vLLM serving engine (Kwon et al.,
2023), allowing it to adapt to varying workload conditions.
To determine the optimal parameters for the MIAD con-


--- Page 25 ---
troller, specifically the MI factor M and the AD step δ,
we conducted a parameter tuning study. The experiment
was initially conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 (40GB)
GPU running the Llama3-8B model, and the frequency is
kept the same a single across TP cluster. We simulated a
20-minute workload composed exclusively of short-prompt,
short-answer (SS) requests.
We evaluated five configurations: MIAD (1.5, 10), MIAD
(1.5, 100), MIAD (2.0, 10), MIAD (2.0, 100), and Fixed
GPU frequency. For brevity, each MIAD configuration is
denoted by its MI factor and AD step (in MHz). The Fixed
baseline keeps the GPU frequency constant at its maximum
value of 1410 MHz, which is the standard practice for LLM
serving systems.
a MIAD (MI=1.5, AD=10)
b MIAD (MI=1.5, AD=100)
c MIAD (MI=2.0, AD=10)
d MIAD (MI=2.0, AD=100)
Figure 20. Frequency variation over 20 minutes for the four MIAD
configurations under the SS workload.
The results are presented in Table 10. The Fixed baseline,
while offering the best latency (e.g., 20.62 ms TBT p50) and
the lowest violation rate (0.11%), incurred a prohibitively
high energy cost (83.917 Wh). We therefore focused on
identifying the best trade-off among the MIAD configura-
tions.
Among these, MIAD (1.5, 100) achieved the lowest energy
consumption (38.571 Wh), but at the expense of higher
latencies and a higher violation rate (0.49%). In contrast,
MIAD (2.0, 10) delivered the best latency and lowest viola-
tion rate (0.31%) within the MIAD group, though with the
highest energy consumption (45.351 Wh).
Overall, MIAD (2.0, 100) provided the most balanced trade-
off. Its energy consumption (40.401 Wh) was only slightly
higher than the most efficient variant, while the violation
rate (0.34%) was considerably lower and the latency metrics
remained moderate and acceptable. Based on the results of
this parameter tuning study, we fix the MIAD parameters to
(MI = 2.0, AD = 100) and integrate the controller into the
full FREESH serving system. The following analysis evalu-
ates its effectiveness in large-scale, heterogeneous serving
environments.
As shown in Figure 15, the MIAD mechanism significantly
reduces GPU frequency and power consumption compared
to the baseline, while Figure 16 provides a zoomed-in
view that illustrates the fine-grained adjustment of GPU
frequency in response to congestion events.
The specific latency-based thresholds used to trigger this
mechanism (i.e., to define a ”violation”) are detailed by re-
quest type in Section D.2, Table 7. This parameter selection
is aligned with the algorithmic formulation in Eq. equa-
tion 5 and is designed to balance SLO compliance with
energy efficiency, avoiding excessive frequency oscillations.
It is worth noting that the MIAD strategy in FRESSH
is closely related to µ-Serve (Qiu et al., 2024a). While
FREESH and µ-Serve differ fundamentally in both the ab-
straction level and optimization objectives of frequency
scaling. The core contribution of µ-Serve lies in identi-
fying the heterogeneity of operator-level sensitivity to GPU
frequency in LLM inference. Through offline profiling,
µ-Serve co-designs operator partitioning and placement on
homogeneous clusters, assigning frequency-insensitive (e.g.,
memory-bound) operators to specific GPUs. This enables
the MIAD controller to substantially reduce power con-
sumption without violating SLOs—a form of micro-level
(operator-level) optimization.
In contrast, FREESH addresses and adapts to a more com-
prehensive, marco-level, carbon-aware scheduling problem
across heterogeneous and geographically distributed GPU
clusters, where operator-level analysis and deployment are
impractical. Our MIAD mechanism therefore operates not
on operator sensitivity but as a lightweight, request-level
feedback controller driven by latency-based SLO thresholds
(as defined in Section D.2). We also draw connections to re-
source allocation and utility maximization problem, thereby


--- Page 26 ---
Table 10. MIAD Parameter Tuning Metrics
a E2E and TTFT latency metrics
Experiment
E2E p50 (ms)
E2E p90 (ms)
E2E p99 (ms)
TTFT p50 (ms)
TTFT p90 (ms)
TTFT p99 (ms)
MIAD (1.5, 10)
2866.98
5050.61
6008.65
64.26
127.43
173.39
MIAD (1.5, 100)
4151.74
5999.28
7290.99
93.64
169.15
195.64
MIAD (2.0, 10)
2497.30
4448.84
5640.99
53.97
105.68
154.71
MIAD (2.0, 100)
3424.21
5520.42
6510.17
77.48
159.10
197.39
Fixed
1520.67
1987.36
2414.20
33.76
40.47
44.52
b TBT, energy and violation metrics
Experiment
TBT p50 (ms)
TBT p90 (ms)
TBT p99 (ms)
Energy (Wh)
Violation Rate
MIAD (1.5, 10)
39.84
78.85
106.93
42.426
0.33%
MIAD (1.5, 100)
56.27
103.03
122.68
38.571
0.49%
MIAD (2.0, 10)
33.33
66.97
95.55
45.351
0.31%
MIAD (2.0, 100)
46.89
97.60
120.10
40.401
0.34%
Fixed
20.62
24.96
28.19
83.917
0.11%
theoretically showing the global convergence to optimal fre-
quency f ∗via MIAD. The macro design also allows MIAD
to be efficiently decoupled and also coordinated with other
layers of the framework—namely, the slow-timescale pool-
level carbon-aware routing and the real-time request-level
LLF scheduling—jointly balancing carbon footprint, energy
efficiency, and service fairness at scale.
