--- Page 1 ---
MultiVic: A Time-Predictable RISC-V
Multi-Core Processor Optimized for Neural
Network Inference ⋆
Maximilian Kirschner1,2, Konstantin Dudzik1,2, Ben Krusekamp1,2, and Jürgen
Becker1,2
1 FZI Research Center for Information Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
2 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
{kirschner, dudzik, krusekamp, juergen.becker}@fzi.de
Abstract. Real-time systems, particularly those used in domains like
automated driving, are increasingly adopting neural networks. From this
trend arises the need for high-performance hardware exhibiting pre-
dictable timing behavior. While state-of-the-art real-time hardware often
suffers from limited memory and compute resources, modern AI acceler-
ators typically lack the crucial predictability due to memory interference.
We present a new hardware architecture to bridge this gap between per-
formance and predictability. The architecture features a multi-core vec-
tor processor with predictable cores, each equipped with local scratchpad
memories. A central management core orchestrates access to shared ex-
ternal memory following a statically determined schedule.
To evaluate the proposed hardware architecture, we analyze different
variants of our parameterized design. We compare these variants to a
baseline architecture consisting of a single-core vector processor with
large vector registers. We find that configurations with a larger number
of smaller cores achieve better performance due to increased effective
memory bandwidth and higher clock frequencies. Crucially for real-time
systems, execution time fluctuation remains very low, demonstrating the
platform’s time predictability.
Keywords: Real-Time · Time-Predictability · Hardware Architecture ·
RISC-V · Multi-core · Vector Processor · Machine Learning · CNN
1
Introduction
Neural networks are being used in an increasing number of real-time systems,
especially in automotive or aviation applications. This results in demanding re-
quirements for the processing hardware used. On one hand, powerful and highly
parallel computing units and large amounts of fast memory are required to exe-
cute typical deep neural networks. On the other hand, it is necessary to provide
⋆This work was supported by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology
and Space (BMFTR) within the project "MANNHEIM-CeCaS," funding number
16ME0818.
arXiv:2511.05321v2  [cs.AR]  25 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
M. Kirschner et al.
guarantees for the time behavior of the execution. The hardware must therefore
have time-predictable properties.
Current processor and accelerator platforms each lack one of these features.
GPUs and modern accelerator architectures offer high performance, but are not
time-predictable due to their execution model and interference in shared mem-
ory [8,9]. Multi-core systems developed for real-time applications typically rely
on time-division multiple access (TDMA) on the system bus or Network on
Chip (NoC) to avoid memory interference [7]. But, this limits the usable mem-
ory bandwidth. Vector processors are a promising approach to increase the com-
pute performance of real-time systems without compromising predictability [13].
However, their scalability in terms of vector length and width of the comput-
ing units is limited, necessitating the use of multiple processors for typical ML
inference applications.
The main contribution of this work is therefore a novel multi-core archi-
tecture optimized for time-predictable neural network inference. We present the
parameterized architecture concept, implementation details and a extensive eval-
uation of different processor configurations. The implementation of the hardware
architecture, usable on FPGAs, will be provided as open source.
The remainder of this work is structured as follows: Section 2 gives a brief
overview over the related work in the field of time-predictable processors and em-
bedded machine learning acceleration. Our novel multi-core architecture is then
presented in Section 3, with a discussion about design considerations regarding
performance and time-predictability. Section 4 shows details about the hardware
implementation, explains the deployment of software on the platform and de-
scribes the benchmark implementation. In Section 5 various configurations of
the presented architecture are evaluated and compared regarding performance
and resource consumption against baseline hardware with a single-core vector
processor. We also describe potential improvements that can be derived from
the evaluation results. Section 6 concludes and summarizes the contributions
and findings.
2
Related Work
Accelerating neural networks (NNs) often involves domain-specific accelerators,
which offer high efficiency but lack flexibility, requiring extensive redesign for
new models. Our approach, in contrast, utilizes a programmable general-purpose
architecture capable of executing arbitrary models.
RISC-V vector processors are popular for embedded machine learning ac-
celeration due to their efficient parallelism. While examples like Spatz [12] and
Ara2 [11] exist, they can introduce timing anomalies that complicate worst-case
execution time (WCET) analysis. Our architecture incorporates the Vicuna vec-
tor co-processor [13], which is specifically designed to be free of such anomalies,
enabling precise timing analysis crucial for real-time systems.
Multi-core clusters are another common approach for NN acceleration in
embedded systems, exemplified by platforms like Kalray MPPA-256 [2], Mr. Wolf


--- Page 3 ---
Time-Predictable RISC-V Multi-core Processor for Neural Network Inference
3
[14], and MemPool [15]. These platforms typically use shared memory for data
exchange, but this often leads to unpredictable memory interference, making
them unsuitable for hard real-time applications.
However, there are also multi-core platforms designed with a focus on pre-
dictability. These platforms implement the concept of Precision Timed (PRET)
Machines [3]. The platforms use time-division multiple access (TDMA) and dis-
tributed memories to avoid interference. The Merasa processor [10] uses TDMA
on the bus for this purpose. Other platforms utilize TDMA NoCs. Examples
include the T-CREST platform [17], parMERASA [18] and InterPRET [5].
However, many PRET architectures struggle with efficient external memory
integration and management, limiting their performance for data-intensive NNs.
Furthermore, TDMA memory arbitration restricts each core’s access to available
memory bandwidth. Our approach, however, relies on explicitly scheduled data
transfers to local memories, which allows for independent, concurrent execution
and increases effective memory bandwidth.
In addition, we incorporate a management core with a DMA for central
orchestration, executing the data transfers as scheduled at compile time. This
is feasible for the execution of classic feed-forward neural networks due to the
deterministic data flow.
In [6] we proposed the concept of a heterogeneous multi-core system with a
dedicated management core and specialized worker cores for neural network ac-
celeration in real-time systems. This work builds upon said concept by providing
a detailed hardware implementation and evaluation of different configurations.
3
Proposed Hardware Architecture
In order to design a predictable processor capable of executing practically rel-
evant machine learning applications, several requirements need to be fulfilled.
Efficient inference of neural networks, especially convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), necessitates a high degree of parallelization and large memory capaci-
ties. Additionally, the architecture should offer general-purpose compute capa-
bilities to be flexible regarding supported layer types and network architectures.
When designing for predictable execution, one of the most important require-
ments is freedom from interference in the memory subsystem. We therefore place
particular focus on this.
In state-of-the-art accelerator systems, many-core architectures and vector
processors are dominant approaches, offering the necessary degree of paralleliza-
tion. In this work, we propose a multi-core vector processor that integrates both
concepts, thereby providing two dimensions of parallelization. A key feature of
the concept is the predictable execution of each core on its own local scratchpad
memories. These are split into an instruction and a data memory. Each core
can only access its local scratchpad memories. The absence of shared resources,
such as global memories or peripherals, that could be accessed by multiple cores,
guarantees freedom from interference by design.


--- Page 4 ---
4
M. Kirschner et al.
The execution of neural networks requires communication between cores.
A dedicated management core coordinates memory transactions between the
scratchpads, while also enabling communication to a global DRAM, which is
employed for storing weights and intermediate activations. To offload copy op-
erations from the management core, a DMA peripheral is utilized. Dual-port
SRAMs are used for the scratchpads to enable simultaneous access of the worker
core and management core without interference.
Figure 1 shows an overview of the architecture. It can be seen, that each
crossbar has only one host and multiple devices attached. This means that only
one component, the management core or the DMA (which is controlled by the
management core) can initiate data transfers. This guarantees freedom from
interference.
I-SPM
D-SPM
I-SPM
D-SPM
I-SPM
D-SPM
I-SPM
D-SPM
Main Crossbar
I-SPM
D-SPM
Peripheral Crossbar
DMA
Timer
Management Core
DRAM Memory
D
H
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
D
H
UART
D
Worker Core
Vector Unit
Worker Core
Vector Unit
Worker Core
Vector Unit
Worker Core
Vector Unit
Fig. 1: The proposed multi-core processor architecture, here with four cores
However, this kind of central orchestration comes with scheduling challenges.
But given the deterministic data flow of the targeted neural networks, the
scheduling can be solved statically at compile time. This results in a limita-
tion for the supported neural networks: The data flow must be deterministic
and must not depend on the input data to enable scheduling of memory trans-
actions at compile time. This is not a problem for standard CNNs. However, if
dynamic CNNs are to be used or sparsity is to be exploited, additional assump-
tions must be made during scheduling. Initial approaches for the scheduling of
computations and memory transactions are described in [6].
3.1
Discussion
The hardware architecture delivers compute resources with two dimensions of
parallelism and extensive memory connectivity, essential for neural network ex-
ecution. This design enables efficient utilization of compute units and memory
bandwidth through effective compile-time scheduling.
Each worker core is implemented as a full-fledged RISC-V vector processor,
offering significant flexibility. This design not only facilitates efficient convolution


--- Page 5 ---
Time-Predictable RISC-V Multi-core Processor for Neural Network Inference
5
computations but also enables the mapping of diverse layer types onto the worker
cores. This ensures that performance is not limited by the management core.
The architecture inherently maintains time-predictability. A cornerstone of
this predictability is timing compositionality, a property present when the hard-
ware architecture is free from timing anomalies. As established by [4], timing
compositionality permits a safe decomposition of timing analysis into individ-
ual components. This allows for the derivation of a global Worst-Case Execution
Time (WCET) based on localized worst-case behavior. [13] further demonstrates
this property for the Vicuna co-processor when integrated with the in-order
pipeline of the Ibex core.
Consequently, each vector core within the presented architecture is pre-
dictable when operating independently. This independence is rigorously guar-
anteed because each core operates exclusively on its own dedicated memory,
eliminating shared resources and inter-core interference. While the management
core can access the scratchpads of other cores, these accesses do not introduce
interference. This is because the utilized SRAMs feature two independent ports
and consistently respond within a single clock cycle.
The only potential factor influencing a vector core’s local execution time is
the timely availability of required data in its data scratchpad. However, given
the management core’s static schedule, both data availability and computation
start times are predictable at compile time. The DRAM is the sole component
introducing timing variability into the system due to its variable memory access
times. Therefore, a worst-case model for the DRAM must be assumed and in-
tegrated into the static schedule calculation. This ensures that DRAM accesses
never exceed their allocated duration within the schedule.
4
Implementation
4.1
Hardware Design
The architecture is implemented in SystemVerilog for evaluation on an FPGA.
The source code is published under a permissive open-source license3. All cores
in the system are based on the Ibex [16] RISC-V core, with the Vicuna [13] vector
co-processor attached in the worker cores. The interconnects are based on the
TileLink Uncached-Lightweight standard, implemented using the OpenTitan [1]
TileLink generator. For the DMA, a modified version of the OpenTitan DMA is
utilized. The 4.5 GB DDR4 memory, which is available on the FPGA board, is
employed as the main memory, in conjunction with the Xilinx memory controller.
We can configure the implementation using several parameters to create and
test various processor setups. The Vicuna core itself has multiple options for its
vector pipeline, most notably the vector register size and compute unit width.
For our multi-core implementation, the number of cores isn’t fixed, allowing us
to generate different versions. We can also configure the size of the scratchpads.
In the subsequent section we compare configurations using a few large cores and
memories against those with many smaller cores and memories.
3 https://github.com/MultiVic


--- Page 6 ---
6
M. Kirschner et al.
4.2
Deployment
In future work, we plan to develop an MLIR-based compiler flow for our hard-
ware architecture, which will enable the deployment of entire neural networks
on the platform, as described in [6]. This compiler will automate the mapping of
computations to the cores and the scheduling of DMA transfers. However, this
development is outside the scope of this paper. To evaluate the hardware, we
manually implement the fundamental mechanisms for the loading of instructions
and data to the scratchpads. On top of this a matrix multiplication benchmark
is implemented.
It is important to note that the local memories have different addresses from
the perspective of the worker cores compared to the global view of the man-
agement core and DMA. To facilitate the development of our benchmarks, we
created code generation scripts. These scripts compile the programs for each
individual core and generate a linker script that links the object files into sep-
arate segments within a single large binary. This binary is first loaded into the
memory of the management core. From there, it is distributed to the instruction
scratchpads of the worker cores.
To execute a given schedule, the management core has access to a timer for
time-triggered schedules. Additionally, the management core can retrieve the
status of the worker cores. For this purpose, a dedicated area is reserved in each
worker core’s data scratchpad for the exchange of status and control information.
On the worker cores, a minimal runtime environment is executed. This runtime
sets a status bit to indicate whether an execution is in progress and, when a
new execution is to be started, jumps to the provided function pointer. After
the function completes, the program returns to the runtime. The management
core can see if an execution is currently in progress and pass function pointers
to indicate the next function to be executed.
4.3
Matrix Multiplication Benchmark
Convolutions and fully connected layers are the most common and computation-
ally intensive layer types in CNNs. These layer types are usually implemented
using matrix multiplictaions. To evaluate the performance of our multi-core ar-
chitecture with distributed memories, we therefore implement a matrix multipli-
cation benchmark. The calculations are distributed to the available cores. Runs
are always started when previous computations have been completed. In this
way, the maximum throughput can be determined. For more complex programs
such as entire networks, time-triggered execution is preferable to facilitate timing
analyses.
In the matmul benchmark, the computation A · B = C is performed. In our
implementation, the matrices are square, with A, B, C ∈RN×N and N = 1024.
To distribute the computations across the worker cores, matrix B is partitioned
into blocks of width B. These blocks are then distributed to the data scratch-
pads of the worker cores, where they remain for as long as possible to minimize
memory transfers to the main memory.


--- Page 7 ---
Time-Predictable RISC-V Multi-core Processor for Neural Network Inference
7
Iteratively, the rows of A are loaded and processed on all cores. This process
generates fragments of the rows of C, which are subsequently written back to
the main memory. To leverage the vector units, within an inner loop, the rows
of A and the columns of B are decomposed into vectors with a length equal to
the vector register size. This enables vectorized execution of the multiplications
and vectorized accumulation of the products to calculate individual elements of
C.
5
Evaluation
The evaluation aims to investigate the performance of the platform in comparison
to a single vector processor. The research question we try to answer is, if a time-
predictable multi-core architecture has a higher performance than a single large
predictable vector processor, despite the overhead of explicit data movement
between the cores. It also seeks to determine the configuration that achieves
optimal performance. Furthermore, the study will examine the scalability of the
architecture and the limitations of scalability.
To facilitate a comparison with a single-core platform, we define a baseline
architecture as a reference, depicted in Figure 3. This baseline consists of a single
Ibex core integrated with a Vicuna vector co-processor, connected to a 64 KiB
instruction scratchpad and a 1 MiB data scratchpad. Additionally, this core has
access to the same peripherals as the multi-core system, including DMA with
an interface to the DDR4 main memory. For the Vicuna co-processor itself, we
utilize the Fast configuration as described in the original paper by Platzer and
Puschner [13], with details provided in Table 1.
Table 1: Baseline System Configurations with Maximum Achievable Clock Fre-
quencies
Configuration Vector Register Width Multiplier Width Fmax (VCU128)
Small
128
32
179 MHz
Medium
512
128
177 MHz
Fast
2048
1024
149 MHz
The evaluation explores four distinct configurations of the multi-core archi-
tecture, as summarized in Table 2. These configurations primarily differ in the
number of worker cores. The size of the vector unit within the worker cores
is inversely scaled with the core count. For example, the dual-core variant fea-
tures half the vector register length and half the width of the multiplication unit
compared to the Fast configuration.


--- Page 8 ---
8
M. Kirschner et al.
I-SPM
64 KiB
D-SPM
1 MiB
TileLink Crossbar
DMA
DDR4 Memory
4.5 GB
UART
H
D
D
D
Ibex
Vicuna
Timer
D
Fig. 2: Baseline architecture with a single core and similar peripherals
The data scratchpad size is also scaled inversely proportional to the number
of cores. While the baseline hardware is equipped with a 1 MiB data scratchpad,
the multi-core variants have 512 KiB, 256 KiB, 128 KiB, and 64 KiB, per core re-
spectively. The instruction scratchpad size for the worker cores remains constant
at 16 KiB. The instruction and data scratchpads for the management core are
consistently 64 KiB each.
Table 2: Configuration Variants of the Multi-core System Used in Evaluation
Configuration # Worker Cores Vector Register Width Multiplier Width Data SPM Size Fmax (VCU128)
Dual
2
1024
512
512 KiB
168 MHz
Quad
4
512
256
256 KiB
169 MHz
Octa
8
256
128
128 KiB
168 MHz
Hexadeca
16
128
64
64 KiB
118 MHz
5.1
Performance
Compared to a single-core vector processor, the multi-core architecture possesses
a higher total bandwidth to the fast scratchpad memory. Each core features its
own dedicated connection to the SRAM. Figure 3 presents a roofline plot illus-
trating the theoretical performance for the individual configurations. The multi-
core variants achieve the same computational performance as the Fast configu-
ration but effectively shift the memory boundary. Consequently, the multi-core
architecture particularly benefits data-intensive algorithms exhibiting high data
reuse, thus minimizing the requirement for DMA transfers.
The multi-core architecture utilizing smaller vector processors offers a further
advantage compared to a single large vector processor: its design has shorter crit-
ical paths, enabling the achievement of higher clock frequencies. To evaluate this,
the maximum achievable clock frequencies on the VCU128 Virtex Ultrascale+
FPGA board are iteratively determined using Xilinx Vivado. For this process,
the clock constraints are progressively tightened in each synthesis run based on


--- Page 9 ---
Time-Predictable RISC-V Multi-core Processor for Neural Network Inference
9
Baseline-Small
Baseline-Medium
Baseline-Fast
Dual
Quad
Octa
Hexadeca
Performannce (OP/cycle)
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
Arithmetic Intensity (OP/byte)
0,25 0,5
1
2
4
8
16
32
64 128 256 512
Fig. 3: Roofline plot comparing theoretical performance
the worst negative slack reported in the preceding run. This iterative tighten-
ing continues until Vivado is unable to achieve timing closure. The determined
maximum frequencies are presented in Table 1 and Table 2.
It can be observed that the multi-core variants can achieve significantly higher
clock frequencies than the Fast configuration, which is comparable in theoreti-
cal performance. However, congestion in the FPGA routers emerges at 16 cores,
primarily due to the necessity of routing connections from 34 scratchpads (16
worker cores + management core) to the DMA. This congestion leads to a no-
table decrease in the achievable clock frequency, thus marking a limitation in
scalability at this point.
Matrix Multiplication To evaluate the performance of the hardware platform,
the matmul benchmark was executed 100 times on each of the configuration
variants. The hardware was operated at a clock frequency of 100 MHz, and
execution time was measured in clock cycles using the timer peripheral.
The measurement results are presented in Figure 4. The left bar plot shows
the median execution time for each configuration, while the right bar plot dis-
plays the standard deviation of the execution times for each configuration. It can
be observed that the median execution times decrease with an increasing num-
ber of cores. This is attributed to the increased memory bandwidth associated
with a higher core count. The parallelism can be effectively exploited, allow-
ing multiple worker cores to simultaneously load their vector registers. However,
performance does not scale indefinitely. The improvement in execution times be-
tween 8 and 16 cores is only minimal. Here, the duration of the DMA transfers
and the calculations in shorter vector registers outweigh the gained scratchpad
bandwidth.
The variability of the execution times is very low relative to the median
execution time. These fluctuations come from the fluctuating access times of
the DDR4 memory. The variability increases with the number of cores. This
is because the matrix is broken down into smaller and smaller blocks. This
increases the number of DDR4 accesses, which in turn increases the execution
time variability.


--- Page 10 ---
10
M. Kirschner et al.
In summary, the Octa configuration is optimal for the matmul benchmark.
In median the Octa configuration needs 728 548 804 cycles @ 168 MHz ≈4.33 s,
while the Hexadeca configuration needs 548 343 601 cycles @ 118 MHz ≈4.65 s.
The Octa configuration additionally delivers a very low execution time variance.
Baseline-Fast
Dual
Quad
Octa
Hexadeca
Clock Cycles
0
500M
1G
2G
2,5G
3G
Median Execution Time
Baseline-Fast
Dual
Quad
Octa
Hexadeca
Clock Cycles
0
50
100
150
200
3000
3200
3400
3600
3800
4000
Standard Deviation
Fig. 4: Median execution time and standard deviation on the matmul benchmark
5.2
Resource Consumption
In addition to the raw performance, the FPGA resource utilization of the differ-
ent configurations is evaluated. For this purpose, the values reported by Xilinx
Vivado during the synthesis run at the maximum achievable clock frequency are
used. Figure 5a illustrates the utilized look-up tables, flip-flops, block RAM, and
DSP cells, for the different configurations.
We observe that the overall resource consumption increases with the num-
ber of cores. This is primarily because each additional core adds an instruction
scratchpad and the complete logic of an Ibex core. However, by reducing the size
of the vector units and data scratchpads, we still observe good scalability. The
count of DSP cells, in particular, indicates that employing many small vector
processors does not require significantly more logic than using a few large ones.
To better assess the scalability of the architecture, the resource consumption
of individual system components is also considered. This detailed resource con-
sumption is depicted in Figure 5b for the Dual configuration. It can be observed
that the management core, with its local memories and peripherals, accounts
for only a very small portion of the total used chip area. The largest portion
is attributed to the worker cores with their memories and, to some extent, the
DDR4 memory controller. Specifically, the worker cores and their scratchpads
are the dominant consumers of DSP and BRAM cells.


--- Page 11 ---
Time-Predictable RISC-V Multi-core Processor for Neural Network Inference
11
0
50k
100k
150k
200k
250k
LUT
0
25k
50k
75k
100k
125k
150k
175k
FF
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
DSP
Baseline-Fast
Dual
Quad
Octa
Hexadeca
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
BRAM
(a) Comparison of different architecture
variants
0
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
120k
LUT
0
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
FF
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
DSP
DDR4 Interface
Management Core
Scratchpads MC
DMA
UART
Timer
xBar Main
xBar Peripherals
Vector Core 0
Scratchpads VC0
Vector Core 1
Scratchpads VC1
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
BRAM
(b) Components in a dual core system
Fig. 5: FPGA resource consumption on VCU128
6
Conclusion
High-performance hardware providing real-time guarantees is required for real-
time systems employing neural networks. For this application scenario, we have
developed and implemented a multi-core vector processor, that is be published
under a open-source license. This processor utilizes local memories, allowing the
processor cores to operate independently, and a central management core with
DMA which orchestrates the data transfers between local memories and a main
memory following a static schedule.
The evaluation shows that the multi-core architecture provides a performance
increase compared to a single large vector processor despite the communication
overhead between local memories. At the same time, time-predictability is main-
tained, as the architecture prevents memory interference by design.
Furthermore, the multi-core platforms achieve higher clock frequencies due
to shorter critical paths, yielding an additional performance benefit. However,
scalability limits are encountered at 16 cores due to congestion in the FPGA
routers.
While the multi-core platform requires slightly more FPGA resources com-
pared to the single-core baseline, it nonetheless demonstrates good scalability in
terms of resource utilization.
References
1. lowRISC contributors: Opentitan: Open source silicon root of trust (rot), https:
//opentitan.org/
2. De Dinechin, B.D., Ayrignac, R., Beaucamps, P.E., Couvert, P., Ganne, B., et al.:
A clustered manycore processor architecture for embedded and accelerated appli-
cations. In: 2013 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC)
(2013)
3. Edwards, S.A., Lee, E.A.: The case for the precision timed (pret) machine. In:
Proceedings of the 44th annual Design Automation Conference (2007)


--- Page 12 ---
12
M. Kirschner et al.
4. Hahn, S., Reineke, J., Wilhelm, R.: Towards compositionality in execution time
analysis: definition and challenges. SIGBED Rev. 12(1) (2015)
5. Jellum, E.R., Lin, S., Donovan, P., Jerad, C., Wang, E., et al.: Interpret: A time-
predictable multicore processor. In: Proceedings of Cyber-Physical Systems and
Internet of Things Week 2023 (2023)
6. Kirschner, M., Dudzik, K., Becker, J.: Work-in-progress: Real-time neural network
inference on a custom risc-v multicore vector processor. In: 2024 IEEE Real-Time
Systems Symposium (RTSS) (2024)
7. Lugo, T., Lozano, S., Fernández, J., Carretero, J.: A Survey of Techniques for
Reducing Interference in Real-Time Applications on Multicore Platforms. IEEE
Access 10, 21853–21882 (Feb 2022)
8. Masola, A., Capodieci, N., Rouxel, B., Franchini, G., Cavicchioli, R.: Machine
learning techniques for understanding and predicting memory interference in cpu-
gpu embedded systems. In: 2023 IEEE 29th International Conference on Embedded
and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA) (2023)
9. Mattheeuws, M., Forsberg, B., Kurth, A., Benini, L.: Analyzing memory interfer-
ence of fpga accelerators on multicore hosts in heterogeneous reconfigurable socs.
In: 2021 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE)
(2021)
10. Paolieri, M., Mische, J., Metzlaff, S., Gerdes, M., Quiñones, E., et al.: A hard real-
time capable multi-core smt processor. ACM Transactions on Embedded Comput-
ing Systems (TECS) 12(3) (2013)
11. Perotti, M., Cavalcante, M., Andri, R., Cavigelli, L., Benini, L.: Ara2: Exploring
single-and multi-core vector processing with an efficient rvv 1.0 compliant open-
source processor. IEEE Transactions on Computers (2024)
12. Perotti, M., Riedel, S., Cavalcante, M., Benini, L.: Spatz: Clustering compact
risc-v-based vector units to maximize computing efficiency. IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems (2025)
13. Platzer, M., Puschner, P.P.: Vicuna: A timing-predictable RISC-V vector coproces-
sor for scalable parallel computation. In: 33rd Euromicro Conference on Real-Time
Systems (ECRTS) (2021)
14. Pullini, A., Rossi, D., Loi, I., Tagliavini, G., Benini, L.: Mr. wolf: An energy-
precision scalable parallel ultra low power soc for iot edge processing. IEEE Journal
of Solid-State Circuits 54(7), 1970–1981 (2019)
15. Riedel, S., Cavalcante, M., Andri, R., Benini, L.: Mempool: A scalable manycore
architecture with a low-latency shared l1 memory. IEEE Transactions on Comput-
ers 72(12), 3561–3575 (2023)
16. Schiavone, P.D., et al.: Slow and steady wins the race? A comparison of ultra-
low-power RISC-V cores for internet-of-things applications. In: 27th International
Symposium on Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation, PAT-
MOS (2017)
17. Schoeberl, M., Abbaspour, S., Akesson, B., Audsley, N., Capasso, R., et al.: T-
crest: Time-predictable multi-core architecture for embedded systems. Journal of
Systems Architecture 61(9), 449–471 (2015)
18. Ungerer, T., Bradatsch, C., Frieb, M., Kluge, F., Mische, J., et al.: Parallelizing
industrial hard real-time applications for the parmerasa multicore. ACM Transac-
tions on Embedded Computing Systems (TECS) 15(3) (2016)
