--- Page 1 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication
Offloads
Suchita Pati
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
United States
suchita.pati@amd.com
Mahzabeen Islam
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
United States
mahzabeen.islam@amd.com
Shaizeen Aga
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
United States
shaizeen.aga@amd.com
Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
United States
mohamed1.ibrahim@amd.com
Abstract
Offloading machine learning (ML) communication collec-
tives to direct memory access (DMA) engines, available on
most state-of-art commercial GPUs, has emerged as an in-
teresting and low-cost solution to efficiently overlap com-
putation and communication in inference and training. Do-
ing so delivers superior concurrent performance by freeing
up all GPU cores for computation and also lowers inter-
ference in the memory sub-system (caches). While DMA
collectives show strong promise, prior works have only stud-
ied them in limited context (bandwidth-bound transfer sizes
only, performance-only).
To address this, we provide a comprehensive performance,
power/energy and synchronization costs analysis of offload-
ing ML communication collectives (all-gather, all-to-all) to
DMA engines on state-of-the-art AMD Instinct™MI300X
GPUs. Our analysis reveals that, compared to the state-of-
the-art RCCL communication collectives library, DMA col-
lectives are at-par or better for large sizes (10s of MB to GB)
in terms of both performance (16% better) and power (32%
better). However, they significantly lag for latency-bound
small sizes; 4.5× and 2.5× slower for all-gather and all-to-all,
respectively. We provide a detailed latency breakdown of
a DMA transfer and identify that DMA command sched-
uling and synchronization costs can limit DMA collective
performance. To tackle this, we harness existing DMA archi-
tecture innovations, hitherto untapped, to build optimized
DMA collectives and demonstrate their efficacy on real hard-
ware. Our optimized implementations considerably close the
performance gap for DMA collectives at smaller sizes (30%
slower and 20% faster all-gather and all-to-all, respectively)
and further improves performance (by 7%) and power sav-
ings at larger sizes (3-10%). Overall, this work represents a
significant step toward making DMA collectives suitable for
adoption in mainstream collective libraries.
1
Introduction
Scaling of ML models and their training datasets have driven
their efficacy and consequently have led to their widespread
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
DMA / CU Collective Time
Communication Collective Size
baseline
optimized
minimize #sDMAs & 
hide sDMA overheads 
(control, schedule & sync)
minimize 
#commands 
& hide sDMA
overheads
maximize 
#sDMAs
maximize #sDMAs & hide 
control, schedule 
overheads
3.2x speedup
Figure 1. Bridging the performance gap between DMA and
GPU compute-unit (CU)-based collectives from RCCL with
unique optimizations across the size spectrum.
adoption across variety of domains. This in turn has led
to ML training and inference to be often distributed over
multiple GPUs thus necessitating focused optimization of
inter-GPU communication costs. That is so as while slicing
work across GPUs helps parallelize ML computations, any
additional time added due to communication reduces the
effective parallelism [26].
To better tackle this tradeoff, ML algorithmic advance-
ments often aim to overlap ML communication (termed as
collectives) with concurrent computation (e.g., fully sharded
data parallelism, or FSDP, hides communication of one layer
with computations of another/other layer(s) [32]). There
have also been several efforts to improve communication
and compute overlap through their fine-grained interleav-
ing - communicating a tile of data as soon as the producer
generates it [11, 14, 15, 17, 21, 30, 31, 33].
Further, to do such overlap efficiently, prior works [24]
have looked at specialized communication accelerators so as
to lower interference to concurrent computation. An interest-
ing and low-cost solution in this regard is to harness existing
direct memory access (DMA) engines, available on most
state-of-art commercial GPUs, for ML collectives. Doing
so has been demonstrated to deliver superior computation-
communication concurrency by freeing up all GPU cores
1
arXiv:2511.06605v1  [cs.DC]  10 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
for computation and also lowers interference in the memory
sub-system (caches) [7].
While DMA collectives show strong promise, prior works
have only studied them in limited context (bandwidth-bound
transfer sizes only, performance-only). To address this, we
extend existing know-how of DMA collectives considerably
and provide the first comprehensive performance, power
(energy) and synchronization costs analysis for collectives
that harness existing DMA engines on the state-of-the-art
AMD Instinct™MI300X GPUs.
As shown in Figure 1, our analysis confirms the promise
DMA collectives hold: for large size transfers (10sMB to
GB), DMA collectives are at-par or deliver superior perfor-
mance to state-of-the-art communication collectives RCCL
library which harnesses GPU compute cores or units (CUs)
for communication. Not only this, DMA collectives also de-
liver power (energy) savings for this size range (32%). While
promising for such bandwidth-bound transfer sizes, our anal-
ysis shows that DMA collectives considerably lag behind
existing collectives libraries for latency-bound small-size
transfers (4.5× and 2.5× slower all-gather and all-to-all, re-
spectively). Note that, this size range is particularly rele-
vant for inference and is getting increasingly relevant as ML
frameworks increasingly rely on fine-grain computation and
communication overlap as discussed above.
To tease out the reasons for this performance gap, we
carefully instrument GPU software stack to provide a de-
tailed benchmarking of latency composition of a single DMA
transfer. Since a ML collective is comprised of multiple DMA
transfers, a detailed latency composition of a single DMA
transfer provides useful insights into optimizations neces-
sary for performant DMA collectives. This detailed bench-
marking demonstrates that DMA command scheduling and
synchronization times can be as high as 60% of the total
transfer time.
To tackle this performance gap, we next identify interest-
ing DMA architecture capabilities, hitherto untapped, that
help address the command scheduling and synchronization
costs associated with DMA transfers. Specifically, while ex-
isting DMA collectives harness only the vanilla copy DMA
command which copies data from single source address to
destination address, we harness two novel DMA commands
(broadcast and swap). As these commands express multiple
copy operations with single command, using them lowers
the total number of DMA commands necessary for a ML
collective and directly addresses DMA command scheduling
overheads. Second, while commercial GPUs employ multiple
DMA engines and using multiple engines for a single collec-
tive allows increased parallelism, it also leads to increased
synchronization costs. We observe here that, we can harness
the ability of DMA engines to efficiently overlap execution
of series of DMA transfers (back-to-back copy) to lower DMA
engines employed and thus lower synchronization costs. Fi-
nally, we also demonstrate the efficacy of prelaunch, that is,
All-Gather (AG)
All-to-All (AA)
Figure 2. ML collectives (left) All-gather (right) All-to-All.
scheduling of DMA commands off the critical path in closing
the performance gap of DMA collectives.
We build DMA collectives prototypes on real hardware
which harness the above DMA architecture capabilities. Us-
ing our prototypes for all-gather and all-to-all collectives,
we demonstrate that we can considerably close the perfor-
mance gap between DMA and CU collectives (from 4.5× and
2.5× slower to only 30% slower and 20% faster all-gather
and all-to-all, respectively) and deliver additional power sav-
ings as well (3-10%). Finally, we also study the implications
and resultant synchronization costs of integrating DMA col-
lectives in ML applications and study the impact of DMA
collectives in presence of producer-consumer dependencies
between DMA collectives and other GPU kernels. Our anal-
ysis demonstrates that DMA collectives can be successfully
incorporated along with other GPU kernels.
Overall, the key contributions of this work are as follows:
• Given the promise shown by DMAs to enable efficient
computation-communication overlap for ML, we pro-
vide a comprehensive performance, power (energy)
and synchronization costs analysis for DMA collec-
tives that harness existing DMA engines on GPUs.
• Our analysis demonstrates that DMA collectives are
promising from both performance and power perspec-
tive at large transfer sizes (10s MB to GB) but con-
siderably fall behind CU collectives for small transfer
sizes (4.5× and 2.5× slower all-gather and all-to-all).
• Next, via careful instrumentation of GPU software
stack, we identify that the reason for the above perfor-
mance gap is high DMA command scheduling and syn-
chronization times (up to 60% of total transfer time).
• To tackle this shortcoming of DMA collectives, we
harness existing DMA architecture innovations, hith-
erto untapped, to build optimized DMA collectives for
all-gather and all-to-all ML collectives.
• We demonstrate the efficacy of our optimized DMA
collectives on real hardware (AMD Instinct™MI300X
GPUs) and our evaluation shows that they deliver 3.2×
performance uplifts and 3-10% power savings.
Overall, we make significant strides in making DMA col-
lectives mainstream and enabling efficient computation and
communication overlap on commercial GPUs.
2


--- Page 3 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
Compute unit (CU)
Caches
DMA
NoC
HBM
Intra-node 
links
Data movement
GEMM
Communication 
Caches
DMA
NoC
HBM
GPU
GPU
Figure 3. Concurrent Compute with Communication (left)
using CUs (right) offloaded to sDMA engine.
2
ML Collectives and Need for Efficient
Offload
2.1
All-gather and All-to-all ML Collectives
As model sizes and inputs scale, efficiently slicing weight
(and/or activation) tensors across multiple GPUs and gath-
ering them as needed is crucial for both performance (par-
allelism) and functionality (memory capacity). This is com-
monly used in fully sharded data parallelism (FSDP) [32]
and sequence parallel (SP) [19]. Such aggregation of ten-
sors is achieved by an all-gather (AG) collective shown in
Figure 2(left), where each GPU starts with a sub-array and
receives the remaining sub-arrays from other GPUs. In other
words, each GPU sends its respective sub-array to all other
GPUs. Another commonly employed collective is all-to-all
(AA), wherein each GPU starts with a complete array but
exchanges sub-arrays with all other GPUs as shown in Fig-
ure 2(right). In other words, all participating GPUs collec-
tively perform a transpose operation. Mixture-of-expert (MoE)
models in an expert-parallel setup use AA; each GPU ex-
changes tokens with other GPUs based on the tokens’ expert
preference as determined by the routing layer [22].
Models also heavily use reduce-scatter (RS) collective to
reduce gradients from data-parallel model instances and to
aggregate partial dot-products in tensor parallelism [26]. RS
has a similar communication pattern as AA, except the sub-
arrays received from other GPUs are reduced (e.g., summed)
with the local sub-array. Since DMAs lack compute support,
not all of RS can be offloaded to DMAs. Thus, we focus in this
work on optimizing DMA offload of AG and AA collectives
and discuss possible optimizations for RS in Section 6.1.
2.2
Concurrent Compute and Collectives
To reduce communication overheads in distributed ML se-
tups and ensure high scaling efficiency, the collectives de-
scribed in Section 2.1 are often executed concurrently with
compute operations [13, 23, 32]. For instance, FSDP over-
laps the compute operation of one model layer with the AG
of weights from the next layer(s) in a coarse-grained man-
ner [32]. Similarly, Deepseek MoE overlaps compute and
communication across multiple independent instances [13].
In contrast, other mechanisms, such as SP and single-instance
MoE, lack independent compute-communication operations
MI300x Node
448 GB/s unidirectional BW
PCIe
xGMI
16 sDMAs
MI300x GPU
MI300x sDMA
broadcast
… atomic
8 Queues
sDMA commands
poll
copy
Figure 4. sDMA engines in AMD MI300X Infinity Platform.
preventing such coarse-grained overlaps. However, several
studies have proposed fine-grained overlap techniques, where
tiles or blocks of data generated by a producer kernel are im-
mediately communicated, rather than waiting for the kernel
to finish. Overall, overlapping compute and communication
is crucial for efficiently scaling ML models.
2.3
Resource Contention and Need for Offload
Common GPU implementations of these collectives from
state-of-the-art libraries such as RCCL [9, 12, 20] use GPU
compute units (CUs) to orchestrate the communication. While
these implementations are highly optimized for the collec-
tives’ isolated execution, they stand to achieve less than
ideal performance when overlapped with compute opera-
tions [7, 24]. This is due to interference in both compute
and memory subsystem resources as shown in Figure 3(left),
which slow down compute and/or collective operations. Of-
floading communication to other accelerators can help free
up compute and cache/memory resources for compute oper-
ations and reduce this contention [7, 24]. Prior work offload
communication which reduces its GPU compute and memory
requirements but propose a dedicated hardware accelerator
for it [24]. In this work, we focus on leveraging existing DMA
engines, available on most state-of-art commercial GPUs, to
offload these communication collectives and alleviate CU
and cache contention as shown in Figure 3(right).
2.4
DMAs in AMD Instinct™MI300x
State-of-the-art GPU systems have considerable DMA ca-
pabilities. As shown in Figure 4, an AMD MI300X Infinity
Platform has eight AMD Instinct™MI300X GPUs that ML
collectives are deployed across. Each GPU is fully connected
with all other GPUs using AMD Infinity Fabric™links, each
of which has a bi-directional bandwidth (BW) of 128 GB/s
(64GB/s unidirectional). Thus, each GPU can communicate
with all other GPUs with a total BW of 448GB/s.
Each GPU has eight accelerator complex dies (XCD) [28],
which are comprised of CUs. The XCDs are vertically stacked
over four I/O dies (IOD) [28, 29]. The IODs are comprised
of AMD Infinity Cache™, the memory interface to the on-
package HBM as well as 16 system-DMA (sDMA) engines.
As shown in Figure 4, each sDMA has access to all PCIe
Gen5 and xGMI links for both CPU-GPU and GPU-GPU com-
munication. Therefore, each sDMA can communicate with
3


--- Page 4 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
CPU
sDMA
ring 
doorbell 
create & 
enqueue 
command
execute 
copy 
execute 
signal reset 
signal 
set
…
poll on signal reset
schedule
copy
sync
control
fetch 
commands
Figure 5. Phases of an sDMA copy offload.
any other GPU in the node. A host (usually CPU) enqueues
commands to DMA queues (detailed in Section 3.2). sDMAs
support several commands [1, 8], some key ones include copy
to copy data from any source memory to any destination
memory location, broadcast command to copy data from one
source to two destinations, a swap command to swap data
at any two memory locations, an atomic command which
supports several 32b/64b atomic opcodes (used for signaling),
and a poll command that polls on a memory location for an
expected value. We discuss how these commands can help
design ML collectives in Section 4.
2.5
Need for Efficient Offload
While sDMAs have been shown to deliver superior computation-
communication concurrency by freeing up all GPU cores
and limiting memory sub-system interference (caches), they
have been studied only in limited contexts such as large
bandwidth-bound transfer sizes. And furthermore, the fo-
cus has largely been on their performance benefits and not
power/energy [7].
Our analysis confirms DMA collectives’ benefits at larger
sizes (10sMB to GB), where they are at-par or achieve supe-
rior performance to CU-based RCCL collectives. However,
we find that DMA collectives considerably lag behind CU-
based collectives for latency-bound small-size transfers; for
sizes <32MB, they are on average 4.5× and 2.5× slower (max-
imum 7× slower) for AG and AA, respectively. We show this
with the baseline (or pcpy detailed in Section 4.2.1) per-
formance in Figure 1 for AG. This size range is crucial for
ML inference (e.g., LLM decode) and has also become in-
creasingly relevant as ML frameworks employ fine-grain
computation and communication overlap, requiring commu-
nication at the granularity of small blocks/tiles generated by
kernels.
Thus optimizing DMA collectives for these sizes such
that they are at-par or better performing that their CU-
counterparts is crucial for their efficient offload and overlap.
3
DMA Offload Phases: Where Goes Time?
Narrowing the performance gap between CU and DMA-
based collectives at smaller sizes requires understanding
where time is spent with DMA offload. Therefore, as a first
step, we study the distinct phases of a single peer-to-peer
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512 1024 2048
% execution time
size (KB)
copy
control
schedule
sync
Figure 6. Latency breakdown of an sDMA copy.
DMA copy, which is the smallest unit of work applications
can offload to DMAs with HIP/HSA API calls.
3.1
DMA Offload Benchmarking Methodology
Since most of the DMA functionality is within AMD HIP run-
time (ROCr) [8] which handles several other tasks, we create
a microbenchmark emulating only its DMA offload behavior
(details in Section 3.2). As in ROCr, we use ROCt library
which provides user-level APIs to interact with the GPU
driver. This gives us low-level control on DMA functioning
such as using its timing capabilities (timestamp command) to
measure individual command latencies and build collectives
described in Sections 4.2.
3.2
Phases of a DMA Offload
Figure 5 illustrates phases of a sDMA offload for a peer-to-
peer copy, which is a fundamental primitive that we use to
implement most ML collectives. Like GPU’s compute work-
load / kernels, sDMA workload is also controlled by the CPU.
Therefore, when a user/application requests a sDMA trans-
fer from one (source) GPU to another GPU (destination),
the CPU creates and enqueues commands to a sDMA’s (of
either the source or destination GPU) ring buffer or queue
which resides in the system memory. We term this first step
as the control phase. The CPU then notifies the sDMA of
the work by ringing the doorbell which entails updating the
doorbell pointer to point to its write pointer on the queue. A
change in doorbell pointer wakes the sDMA controller which
then fetches commands from the ring buffer into its internal
buffers for processing. We call this CPU to sDMA handover
as the schedule phase. The sDMA then executes the peer-to-
peer copy command, which we call the copy phase; it decodes,
performs address translations, and generates reads/writes
from/to HBM memory of source/destination GPU, respec-
tively, for the copy. Finally, sDMAs use signals to synchronize
with the CPU, notifying it of the copy’s completion. There-
fore, a copy is usually followed by a signal update or sync
sDMA command (a system memory write or atomic) which
the CPU polls on. We term this signal command execution /
CPU notification as the sync phase.
4


--- Page 5 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
…
copy
sync
GPU-0
gpu-1
gpu-2
gpu-7
…
copy
sync
copy
sync
copy
sync
GPU-7
gpu-0
gpu-1
gpu-6
…
copy
sync
copy
sync
sdma-1 sdma-2
sdma-7
sdma-1 sdma-2
sdma-7
Figure 7. Parallel-copy based collective (pcpy).
3.3
DMA Offload Latency Breakdown
Figure 6 shows the latency breakdown of a single peer-to-
peer copy operation between two GPUs for a range of sizes
(4KB to 2MB). Intuitively, since the cost of the copy phase,
i.e., cost of local/remote reads/write, increases with transfer
size while the latencies of other phases remain constant, the
proportion of time spent on copy phase increases with size.
Furthermore, across all sizes, the phases can be ordered as
copy > schedule ∼sync >> control in terms of their runtime
contribution. However, the schedule and sync latencies are
a considerable portion of sDMA copy time. Overall, the non-
copy phases - control, schedule and sync - account for ∼60%
of the time at the smallest of sizes and are small (<20%) only
when copy sizes are >1MB.
ML collectives require multiple (i.e., 𝑛∗(𝑛−1) where 𝑛
is the number of devices) independent peer-to-peer trans-
fers (Figure 2). Offloading such ML collectives thus requires
the host to create several commands, schedule them on
queue(s)/sDMA(s) and synchronize with them. These con-
siderably scale the control, schedule and sync phases and
limit DMA collective performance for small-to-medium size
as shown by baseline in Figure 1. Thus, optimizing sDMA
collectives to minimize the non-copy phase time is key to
achieving superior performance at KB-MB sizes.
4
DMA Collective Design
As discussed in Section 3, communication using DMA intro-
duces overheads that can diminish the benefits of offloading
from compute units (CUs). These overheads are further am-
plified in the context of ML collectives, where a GPU must
communicate with all other GPUs. In this section, we first
identify the factors that contribute to these costs, and dis-
cuss strategies that can help mitigate and/or hide these costs.
We then use these to create optimized implementations for
allgather and alltoall DMA-based collectives.
4.1
Factors Impacting DMA Offload Costs
4.1.1
Count and Type of DMA Commands. As shown
in Figures 5 and 6, control and schedule phases consider-
ably affect execution times, contributing up to 10-40% of the
time for transfers up to 1MB. Control phase involves the
host creating and enqueueing commands into sDMA queues
…
broadcast
sync
gpu-1 gpu-2
gpu-7
…
copy
sync
broadcast
sync
gpu-6
…
copy
sync
GPU-0
GPU-7
sdma-1
sdma-4
sdma-1
sdma-2
sdma-4
broadcast
sync
gpu-3 gpu-4
sdma-2
broadcast
sync
gpu-1 gpu-2 gpu-3 gpu-4
Figure 8. Broadcast-based allgather (bcst).
in system memory, while schedule phase involve fetching
commands from these queues to the sDMA engine. Thus, to
minimize control and schedule time in ML collectives which
require many-to-many GPU communication, it is essential
to limit the number of sDMA commands issued.
sDMA engines in a AMD Instinct™MI300x support two
types of commands that combine the functionality of two
copy commands. The broadcast command specifies a single
source and two destination memory locations, allowing the
sDMA engine to perform a single read from the source and
write to two distinct memory locations, potentially across
different GPUs. This not only reduces redundant memory
reads, as discussed in Section 6.2, but also combines the
effects of two copy commands, thus reducing the control
time. Similarly, the swap command exchanges data between
two memory addresses with a single command, replacing
what would otherwise require two copies. This not only cuts
control costs in half but also performs the data exchange
in-place, avoiding the need for a temporary buffer to prevent
data overwriting and thereby saving memory capacity.
4.1.2
Number of DMA Engines. Engaging multiple sDMA
engines per GPU (Section 2.4), each handling a copy packet,
can potentially parallelize transfers from a given GPU. How-
ever, scheduling each operation to the individual sDMA en-
gines requires triggering the respective doorbell, which in-
clides updates to the sDMA pointer and memory barriers
to ensure proper ordering of pointer updates after queue
writes. Additionally, the number of synchronization com-
mands scales with the number of engines, as each engine
must synchronize with the host to signal task completion,
further increasing control costs. Therefore, designing effi-
cient DMA-based collectives across all transfer sizes requires
a careful balance between parallelizing transfers and manag-
ing these overheads.
Broadcast and swap commands, which consolidate two
transfer operations into a single command, reduce the num-
ber of DMA engines required by approximately half, thus
lowering the number of queue doorbell and synchronization
commands. Furthermore, sDMA engines in AMD Instinct™
MI300x can process multiple copy commands concurrently
when scheduled back-to-back to the same queue as long as
they are independent (no dependencies between their source
5


--- Page 6 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
…
swap
sync
GPU-0
gpu-1
gpu-2
gpu-3
swap
sync
swap
sync
swap
sync
GPU-7
gpu-0
gpu-1
gpu-3
…
swap
sync
swap
sync
sdma-1 sdma-2 sdma-3
sdma-1 sdma-2
sdma-4
Figure 9. Swap-based alltoall (swap).
and destination buffers), which can effectively achieve par-
allelism similar to using multiple sDMA engines. Despite
requiring multiple copy commands, scheduling them back-to-
back reduces the number of engines needed, helping reduce
the number of synchronization commands and thus the con-
trol phase time. In addition, it also require fewer scheduling
(doorbell) events and can reduce the schedule phase time.
Finding the optimal balance between the number of back-to-
back commands in a single engine and the number of parallel
engines is crucial for performance and may vary depending
on the transfer sizes being exercised by the collective.
4.1.3
Off-the-Critical Path Launch. Another critical fac-
tor that influences collective performance is whether the
commands can be scheduled in advance. By understanding
the communication requirements and buffers ahead of time,
it is possible to prepare the commands for execution and
trigger them later, effectively hiding the associated control
and scheduling phases. This approach allows only the exe-
cution of copy and synchronization commands to appear in
the critical path. sDMAs provide mechanisms, such as the
dependent or poll commands, to enable this optimization.
A poll command takes a memory location and an expected
value as input, and polls the memory location until it ob-
serves the expected value before retiring and allowing for
subsequent commands in the queue to execute. This com-
mand can be used for fine-grained synchronization or to
schedule copy operations (or other tasks) behind the poll.
With this approach, the sDMA packet creation, queuing, and
doorbell/fetching can occur off the critical path, ahead of
time. The host can then trigger the execution by setting the
poll’s memory location to the expected value.
4.2
DMA Collective Implementations
Using the factors and strategies described in Section 4.1, we
next design multiple optimized sDMA implementations for
allgather (AG) and alltoall (AA) collectives.
4.2.1
Parallel Copy-Based Collective ( pcpy / baseline).
Since ML collectives such as AG and AA require multiple
independent peer-to-peer transfers (i.e., 𝑛∗(𝑛−1) where
𝑛is the number of devices) and given each GPU supports
multiple sDMA engines which can be engaged in parallel
copy
sync
gpu-1
copy
…
gpu-7
…
copy
sync
gpu-0
copy
…
gpu-6
…
…
GPU-0
GPU-7
sdma-1
sdma-1
Figure 10. Back-to-back copy-based collective (b2b).
(Section 2.4), a simple implementation of the collective en-
tails each sDMA engine executing one independent copy as
shown in Figure 7. To notify its completion of the copy and
synchronize, each sDMA engine in addition also must exe-
cute a synchronization (sync) command which is an atomic
add to a system memory location polled by the host. The
collective is considered complete once the host observes
completion across all sDMAs. Thus with 𝑛devices, this im-
plementation uses 𝑛∗(𝑛−1) engines, each with a copy and
sync command. We term this implementation as ‘parallel
copy’ or pcpy collective and use this as the baseline for com-
parison with our optimized sDMA collective implementation.
Both AG and AA can use this implementation; in AG the
source memory location across all copies within a device
remains the same.
4.2.2
Broadcast-Based Allgather Collective (bcst). Since
the AG collective requires each GPU to transfer its entire
sub-array to every other GPU (Figure 2), it is well-positioned
to take advantage of the broadcast commands and reduce
the total number of sDMA commands and engines required
as described in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. Since the broadcast
commands support transfer data to a maximum of two des-
tinations, collective implementations require each GPU to
issue (𝑛−1)/2 broadcast commands if 𝑛(number of devices
involved) is odd or (𝑛−2)/2 broadcast and an additional copy
command if𝑛is even. As shown in Figure 8, this ∼halves both
the number of commands as well as the number of sDMA
engines required (and thus sync commands) as compared to
pcpy. We term this implementation as the bcst collective.
4.2.3
Swap-Based Alltoall Collective (swap). Unlike AG,
in AA, a GPU starts with a complete array and sends unique
data to each of the other GPUs as shown in Figure 2. Thus,
it cannot take advantage of the broadcast command. How-
ever, since the source buffers exchanged by each GPU pair
is unique, it can leverage the swap command and reduce the
total number of sDMA commands and engines required as
described in Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2. AG cannot use swaps
without requiring extra local memory-to-memory copies.
AA with swaps exactly halves the number of commands as
compared to pcpy as each of the two copies are replaced by
a single swap command. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 9,
to balance the number of commands and sDMA engines
6


--- Page 7 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
layer-1
layer-2
layer-n
gemm
collective
collective
…
…
gemm
GPU- 
sDMA
CPU
GPU
DMA launch
GEMM launch
DMA execute
GEMM execute
control, schedule cost is hidden
DMA poll
Figure 11. Leveraging deterministic communication pat-
terns in ML to prelaunch collectives.
used between all GPUs, each GPU only executes ∼half the
number of swaps it requires, while the others are issued by
the GPUs it requires the remaining swaps with. Note that
since the CPU host issues these commands and they are pro-
cessed in parallel by sDMA engines across all GPUs, there
is no performance advantage of balancing, but can limit the
power expended per GPU. We term this implementation as
the swap collective.
4.2.4
Back-to-back Copies-Based Collective (b2b). All
the peer-to-peer transfers in AG and AA are completely
independent and operate on distinct arrays and memory
buffers. Thus, both stand to benefit from concurrent process-
ing of back-to-back (b2b) copies on the same sDMA engine
described in Section 4.1.2 which can help reduce the number
of sDMA engines and therefore synchronizations commands.
While there are several implementations possible by sweep-
ing the number of back-to-back copies per engine and the
number of engines, we only consider implementations which
further reduce the total commands and engines as compared
to bcst and swap (it cannot be combined with bcst and
swap implementations). Thus, we implement AG and AA
collectives which use just one engine per device GPU, and
schedule all copies required per GPU in a back-to-back man-
ner as shown in Figure 10. As shown, this reduces the num-
ber of sync commands to only one per GPU. We term this
implementation as the b2b collective. We also considered
other intermediate implementations where multiple engines
per device are used with fewer b2b copies, but they provide
limited additional benefits.
4.2.5
Prelaunched Collectives (prelaunch_). ML mod-
els (e.g., LLMs) have multiple uniform layers, each of which
manifests as a sequence of GEMM and collective (and other
smaller elementwise, activation) operations as shown in Fig-
ure 11. Furthermore, ML frameworks usually pre-allocate
buffers and re-use them throughout the model’s execution.
Thus, this ahead-of-time information about the operator
sequence and memory addresses can be leveraged to sched-
ule collectives in advance and hide most of the control and
schedule phase as described in Section 4.1.3.
There are multiple implementations possible when pre-
launching; using a unique poll memory location for each
DMA engine or for each GPU (all DMA engines within the
K1
K2
gpu-0
Barrier 
bit
K1
K2
…
gpu-n
K1
K4
gpu-0
…
…
D1
…
D1
D1
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
D1
D2
D3
cpu
dma-0 dma-1
dma-n
…
cpu
Signal 
read/write
GEMM
Comm
Kernel
K_n
DMA
D_n
Figure 12. Producer GEMM to collective synchronization
with (left) CU-based and (right) DMA-based communication
GPU poll on same memory) or one poll location for the en-
tire collective. While more unique poll locations decrease
serialization if any on the memory reads from sDMAs, they
increase the cost of the CPU host’s signaling time - a process
atomically updates many memory location. For our evalu-
ation we consider a unique poll location per DMA engine
for all the four implementations discussed above to create
prelaunch_pcpy, prelaunch_bcst, prelaunch_swap and
prelaunch_b2b. Similar to the final synchronization, the
memory location for poll also resides in the system memory
and is updated by the CPU host to initiate the collective.
4.3
Additional Producer-Consumer Synchronization
in Applications
AG and AA collectives in ML applications are used for com-
municating different type of tensors and have different types
of dependencies with other operations based on the dis-
tributed technique deployed. In this section, we describe
additional synchronizations that may be necessary as DMA
collectives are integrated in end-to-end ML models.
4.3.1
Independent Collectives:
AG in FSDP gathers weights of layer(s) from multiple de-
vices in both forward (inference and training) and backward
pass (training only) of the model. During inference, these
weights remain unchanged and during training these weights
are updated in the previous iteration of the model, well ahead
of when are used. Furthermore, their AG is scheduled (usu-
ally for a layer or set of layers at a time) ahead-of-time and
on an independent stream as compared to the kernels which
consume them. Therefore, the synchronization required to
ensure the collectives complete before the consumer ker-
nel starts is usually not on the critical path. In such cases,
host-based trigger and synchronizations of DMA collectives
discussed thus far is sufficient.
4.3.2
Dependent Collectives:
There are other scenarios where collectives directly operate
on data produced by kernels (AA operates on activations
generated by MoE’s routing kernel) [22] or generate data
that are consumed by kernels immediately (AG gathers all
7


--- Page 8 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
0.68
0.67
0.67
0.68
0.72
0.72
0.74
0.66
0.65
0.60
0.67
0.74
0.99
1.23
1.43
1.44
1.31
1.21
1.17
1.14
1.12
1.11
1.11
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1k
2k
4k
8k
16k
32k
64k
128k
256k
512k
1m
2m
4m
8m
16m
32m
64m
128m
256m
512m
1g
2g
4g
Speedup vs RCCL
All-gather Size
prelaunch_b2b
prelaunch_bcst
prelaunch_pcpy
b2b
bcst
pcpy
Figure 13. Speedup of sDMA Allgather collective optimiza-
tions vs. RCCL
activations for layers in Sequence Parallelism) [19]. In such
scenarios, collectives require synchronization with these
producer/consumer kernels (e.g., GEMMs) and such synchro-
nizations are on the critical path.
As shown in Figure 12(left), CU-based collective kernels
achieve this implicitly by being scheduled before or after the
GEMM kernels on the same stream and by being processed
by the same engine (i.e., command processor). Kernel pack-
ets have a barrier bit which when set (default by the GPU
runtime) informs the scheduler to schedule a given kernel
only after all prior kernels on the same stream complete [3].
DMA commands on the other hand are processed by differ-
ent engines as compared to kernels and furthermore, some
collective implementations require multiple engines per GPU
(Sections 4.2.1- 4.2.3). Therefore, DMA collectives can require
explicit synchronization with GEMMs in end-to-end appli-
cations which can add additional overheads. We consider
existing mechanisms available for this kernel→DMA syn-
chronization. As shown in Figure 12(right) this synchroniza-
tion can be achieved with system memory-based signals and
the CPU host. The GEMM kernel’s stream executes a signal
write command (possible with a hipStreamWrite32/64 [4])
after the GEMM completes. The CPU host waiting on this
signal observes the write and issues another signal write
which enables a DMA poll. While kernels can directly trig-
ger DMA poll commands or poll on DMA sync commands,
this requires changes to GEMM kernels which is complex as
BLAS libraries contain several optimized implementations,
each tuned for a given size [5]. Nevertheless, we leave the
exploration of tighter synchronizations between kernels and
DMA operations to future work.
5
Evaluation
5.1
System Setup
We evaluate the DMA collective implementations on an AMD
MI300x Infinity Platform with eight AMD Instinct™MI300x
accelerators as described in Section 2.4. These implemen-
tations are also applicable for collectives with fewer GPUs
(discussed in Section 6.5). We implement these collectives
1.16
1.21
1.29
1.37
1.40
1.36
1.27
1.22
1.35
1.22
1.17
1.14
1.37
1.22
1.36
1.22
1.16
1.14
1.15
1.16
1.16
1.15
1.17
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1k
2k
4k
8k
16k
32k
64k
128k
256k
512k
1m
2m
4m
8m
16m
32m
64m
128m
256m
512m
1g
2g
4g
Speedup vs. RCCL 
All-to-all Size
prelaunch_b2b
prelaunch_swap
prelaunch_pcpy
b2b
swap
pcpy
Figure 14. Speedup of sDMA Alltoall collective optimiza-
tions vs. RCCL.
using the ROCt library which provides user-level APIs to cre-
ate DMA packets and interact with DMA engines through
the GPU driver. For CU-based collectives, we use AMD’s
state-of-the-art RCCL [9] library which has been tuned for
each message size. We adjust the appropriate environment
variables to scale the number of processes, enable perfor-
mant algorithms (MSCLL [12], MSCCL++ [25]) and enable
hipGraphs to ensure good performance. To evaluate syn-
chronization with producer kernels, we use GEMM kernels
from AMD’s state-of-the-art BLAS library rocBLAS [10]. To
evaluate power, we use an internal power-logging tool with
a sampling interval of one millisecond. Samples are captured
at different points during the collectives’ execution using
multiple runs and random delays, following the methodology
described in prior work [27].
5.2
Collectives and Sizes Studied
We design and evaluate collectives for a range of sizes that
collective libraries support. These include all-gather and all-
to-all ranging from 1KB to 4GB. The small (KB) message
sizes are important for ML inference scenarios, especially in
the LLM decode phases where LLMs operate on / generate
few tokens worth of activations at a time. The medium and
large (MB-GB) collective sizes are common in both training
and inference (prefill) and are required for communicating
weights and activations depending on the distributed setup.
5.3
Collective Performance
To evaluate our optimized DMA collectives, we compare
their performance with the baseline or pcpy DMA imple-
mentations from prior works. But since the goal of DMA
collectives is to provide an alternative to CU-based collec-
tives for concurrent compute and communication scenarios
(and free up CU and cache resources), we mainly focus on
how they perform as compared to their best CU-counterpart
from RCCL. Thus, in Figures 13 and 14 we plot the ratio of
CU to DMA collective execution times, or the speedup of
DMA collectives over CU-based ones. For both allgather (AG)
and alltoall (AA), we show pcpy, b2b, and their prelaunch_
8


--- Page 9 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
Table 1. Performant implementation for allgather collective.
Size range
Allgather Optimizations
1KB <= size <256KB
b2b, prelaunch
256KB <= size <1MB
bcst, prelaunch
1MB <= size <512MB
pcpy, prelaunch
>= 512MB
pcpy
variants. In addition, for AG we show bcst and AA we show
swap along with their prelaunch_ variants.
We show speedups of different variants stacked to depict
how each of the DMA optimizations help inch closer to CU-
based collective performance. For example, in Figure 13, the
stacked speed ups of pcpy and b2b show that b2b achieves
higher speedups than pcpy. However, note that, pcpy is not
required for b2b to achieve this speedup. We discuss each of
these DMA implementations in detail below:
5.3.1
pcpy or baseline. The AG and AA pcpy implemen-
tation outperforms CU-based collectives by 14% and 18%
geomean for sizes greater than 32MB. This is a result of
lower metadata with DMA transfers which improves net-
work BW efficiency. However, pcpy variants are 4.5× and
2.5× slower in the remaining, smaller sizes. This is because
of the additional non-copy phase times (control, schedule,
and sync in Section 3) from engaging several (56) DMA en-
gines that dominate execution at these sizes. While the sync
commands (e.g., atomics) execute in parallel, control and
schedule are serialized within a single CPU process. We dis-
cuss multi-process executions in Section 6.3.
5.3.2
bcst. As shown in Figure 13, bcst speeds up AG
collective by 1.7× geomean over pcpy for sizes up to 4MB,
narrowing the gap vs. CU-based RCCL from 4.5× to 3× for
sizes up to 32MB. This results from using ∼half the number of
commands and engines, as broadcast commands can transfer
to two different destinations (Section 4.2.2). As sizes increase
and the non-copy phases contribute less to end-to-end time,
bcst’s benefits decrease. At larger, bandwidth-bound sizes,
bcst does not provide additional benefits as the parallel
engines within each GPU in pcpy are able to saturate the
total network bandwidth of a single GPU. Overall, while
pcpy is sufficient for >32MB AG collective, bcst is required
for up to 4MB for improved performance.
5.3.3
swap. Similar to bcst, swap in Figure 14 speeds up
AA collective by 1.7× geomean over pcpy for sizes up to
4MB, and reduces the performance gap vs. RCCL from 2.5×
to 1.6× for sizes up to 32MB. Similar to bcst this results from
using half the number of commands and engines as each
swap command performs two copies worth transfers (Sec-
tion 4.2.2). Overall, while pcpy is sufficient for >32MB AA,
swap is required for up to 4MB for improved performance.
5.3.4
b2b. While bcst and swap help, there is still a consid-
erable 3× and 1.6× geomean performance gap between DMA
Table 2. Performant implementation for alltoall collective.
Size range
Alltoall Optimizations
1KB <= size <64KB
b2b, prelaunch
64KB <= size <4MB
swap, prelaunch
4MB <= size <1GB
pcpy, prelaunch
>= 1GB
pcpy
and RCCL collectives for AG and AA, respectively. Our DMA
implementation, b2b, with all copies from a GPU scheduled
back-to-back on a single DMA engine (Section 4.2.4) further
bridges this gap by speeding up AG collectives by 2.7× ge-
omean over pcpy and by 1.5× geomean over bcst for <1MB.
Similarly, for AA collectives b2b is 2.5× faster than pcpy and
1.4× faster than swap for <1MB. Using a single DMA engine
reduces non-copy times (fewer sync commands, fewer door-
bells) by ∼7× and ∼4× compared to pcpy and bcst/swap,
respectively, with negligible impact on copy times.
Bcst and swap however remain the superior choice for 1-
4MB AG and AA, providing 1.4× and 1.7× geomean speedups
over b2b. Similarly, pcpy remains performant at sizes >4MB.
This is because the increase in total copy time (from inter-
leaving and overlapping seven back-to-back copies) exceeds
the benefits from reduced non-copy times in b2b. This also
demonstrates that across the size spectrum evaluated, each
of these implementations benefit unique size ranges and thus
are important. Overall, as shown in Figures 13 and 14, in-
cluding b2b reduces performance gap vs. CU-based RCCL
from 3× and 1.6× to 2.3× and 1.3× geomean for sizes up to
32MB for AG and AA.
5.3.5
prelaunch_. Finally, we evaluate the impact of pre-
launching and hiding the non-copy costs (Section 4.2.5).
We show its impact on each of the variants; as an exam-
ple prelaunch_b2b has prelaunch applied on top of the b2b
implementation such that each DMA engine on the GPU
has a poll command followed by copy and sync. As shown
in Figures 13 and 14, pre-launching benefits the entire size
range. Intuitively, it has the highest impact on implemen-
tations which use more commands and DMA engines and
have longer non-copy phases; it speeds up pcpy by 1.9×, both
bcst and swap by 1.5×, and b2b by 1.2× geomean across the
size range. Despite the higher benefit with pcpy, prelaunched
b2b, bcst and swap still outperform prelaunch_pcpy at
sizes <1M for AG and < 4M for AA. prelaunch_pcpy, how-
ever, is required for improved performance at larger sizes;
it speedups up 1MB-256MB AG by 1.5× geomean and 4MB-
512MB AA by 1.3× over the best of pcpy, bcst and swap.
Overall, starting with a 4.5× and 2.5× geomean slowdown
compared to RCCL for <32MB AG and AA, respectively, our
optimized sDMA collectives bring down the slowdown to
30% geomean for AG and are 20% faster for AA. They also
achieve 20% speedup over RCCL in the larger, 32MB-1GB,
9


--- Page 10 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
16k
64k
256k
1m
4m
16m 64m 256m
1g
Normalized Total Power 
All-gather Size
RCCL
Best DMA
Figure 15. Total power consumed by best DMA vs CU
(RCCL) collectives
size range. We list the best-performing implementations for
different size ranges in Tables 1 and 2.
5.4
Collective Power
Offloading communication to DMAs and freeing up GPU
compute resources also stands to provide power savings. Fig-
ure 15 shows the total GPU power (including XCD, IOD and
HBM as detailed in Section 2.4) consumed by AG collective
and compares best-performing DMA-based implementation
with CU-based ones from RCCL. It shows that DMA collec-
tives consumes ∼32% less power than its CU counterpart for
larger, >=64MB sizes. This benefit is largely a result of no CU
activity and thus considerably (3.7×) less XCD power with
DMA collectives. DMA collectives also have smaller AID and
HBM power as they use peer-accessible buffers and avoid
additional local memory accesses to intermediate buffers
as in RCCL (more in Section 6.4). Since DMA AG is ∼20%
faster than RCCL at these sizes, this translates to energy
savings as well. The power benefit decreases at smaller sizes
as RCCL stresses both CUs and memory resources less at
these sizes. Nevertheless our optimized prelaunch_b2b col-
lectives helps limit power by using fewer engines (3-4% lesser
power) than prelaunch_pcpy at the 16-64KB range. Finally,
prelaunch_bcst also provides power savings (5-10%) due
to reduced memory traffic (broadcast reads once and writes
to two destinations) at >1MB sizes.
5.5
Producer-Consumer Synchronizations
We also evaluate the cost of additional synchronizations
DMA collectives require as discussed in Section 4.3. Figure 16
compares the execution times of producer→collective, where
the producer is a GEMM kernel generating data consumed
by the collective, which is either a RCCL or DMA-based
allgather (AG) operation. They require different types of
synchronizations as shown in Figure 12.
As shown, for AG size >4MB, the process with DMA still
achieves similar or better performance as compared to the
one with CU-based RCCL. For smaller sizes, the performance
reflects the differences in the standalone collective perfor-
mance shown in Figure 13. Thus, in-spite of requiring addi-
tional synchronization and coordination between multiple
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Runtime (normalized to
gemm→rccl→sync)
Square GEMM Dimension_All-gather Size
gemm->rccl->sync
gemm->sync->DMA-collective->sync
Figure 16. Producer GEMM→collective time with CU
(RCCL) vs DMA collective. gX_cY represents a square GEMM
with all dimension as X followed by a collective of size Y.
queues, performant DMA collective stand to achieve similar
performance in end-to-end applications while making CUs
available for other independent operations. Note that the
execution times presented capture time from start of the
GEMM kernel execution to when the CPU observes the final
signal in Figure 12. While the overhead of issuing multiple
DMA and signal write APIs is larger than RCCL kernels’,
this overhead typically occurs in the shadow of other opera-
tion executions in end-to-end applications or can be reduced
through the use of graph launches (e.g., HIP graphs [2]).
6
Opportunities and Future Work
6.1
Additional Collectives (Reduce-scatter)
Reduce-scatter (RS) collective requires both communication
and compute. Since DMAs lack compute support, prior works
have explored communication using DMAs and reduction
using CUs for RS [25]. While this still uses CUs, they are
required for a much shorter duration (only the final reduc-
tion). Furthermore, since these implementations are similar
to pcpy, their performance suffers at KB-MB range. Opti-
mizations presented in this paper can accelerate the com-
munication phase of RS in such hybrid mechanisms and can
help outperform CU-only collectives when overlapped.
6.2
Additional Memory Benefits
The optimized collectives bcst and swap have additional
memory benefits which can reduce memory interference
as compared to pcpy and CU-based collectives. Broadcast
commands read the source data once and send it to two
destination GPUs. This reduces redundant memory accesses.
Swap, on the other hand has similar reads and writes as
compared to pcpy and CU-based implementations. However,
swap enables in-place data exchanges whereas pcpy and CU-
based do not. The latter add memory capacity pressure by
either requiring out-of-place collectives with separate input
and output buffers, or by requiring intermediate buffers to
prevent overwriting of data during the exchange. The latter
would also involve additional local memory copies and thus
10


--- Page 11 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
higher memory interference with compute operations. Using
DMA swap commands helps avoid these.
6.3
Number of CPU Processes
While our DMA implementations use a single CPU process
to initiate collectives, employing multiple processes can help
parallelize and further reduce the non-copy time with mul-
tiple copies (Section 5.3.1). However, these processes can
become a bottleneck when nodes are shared among multiple
applications. The is compounded when using a single pro-
cess for each copy or engine; pcpy would require 𝑛× (𝑛−1)
processes (56 processes for an 8-GPU node). Nevertheless, a
balanced implementation that uses a single process per GPU
can further accelerate our DMA collectives.
6.4
Registered Memory Allocations
The DMA implementations discussed in this work use buffers
that are directly accessible by peers. In end-to-end appli-
cations, this necessitates that user or application buffers
possess similar capabilities. Collective libraries offer buffer
registration APIs to enable this [6] but when unavailable, col-
lectives rely on intermediate buffers and additional memory
copies to stage data in those buffers. Our DMA collectives can
be extended to support such intermediate buffers if needed.
Since our implementations utilize at most seven DMAs per
GPU, these memory copies can be pipelined and overlapped
with remote copies using the remaining spare DMA engines
(see Section 2.4). However, similar to CU-based implemen-
tations, this approach requires additional synchronization
between the local and remote copies.
6.5
Other Topologies and Scaling GPU count
While the DMA implementations in this work use a one-shot
(direct) approach and leverage the fully-connected topology,
ring-based implementations are important in other topolo-
gies. Ring algorithms also have the advantage of using smaller
intermediate buffers (if required as described in Section 6.4)
as they only communicate one chunk or sub-array at a time,
unlike in one-shot. While DMA collectives do not require
such intermediate buffers, they can nevertheless also use
ring implementations and provide similar performance at
larger sizes. Finally, while we use an eight-GPU node for our
evaluations, the optimizations are valid for other node sizes
as well. In fact they stand to provide larger benefits as GPU
count increases as non-copy phases scales with peers/copies.
6.6
Collective Libraries with DMA
Modern collective libraries incorporate various algorithms,
synchronization protocols, and additional features optimized
for different types of collectives, sizes, and topologies. We
envision that DMA usage should also be considered a key
tuning parameter for these libraries. The optimized DMA
implementations proposed in this work can be invoked when
overlap is necessary and/or can be selected to further en-
hance both performance and power efficiency, as demon-
strated in this work.
7
Related work
7.1
Communication Offload
Works which improve overlapped compute and communi-
cation performance usually offload communication to dedi-
cated accelerators on GPUs, requiring extensive hardware
support. Some use custom accelerators which frees up CUs
for concurrent compute and reduces memory interference by
buffering intermediate data [24]. Similarly, compute-capable
switches help offload reduction operations in collectives
(such as in allreduce) which helps limit traffic over network
links and memory sub-system [18]. Switch offloads, however,
still require CUs to orchestrate data movement and in-switch
commands. We consider offload but by leveraging existing
DMAs, requiring no hardware changes.
7.2
DMA Offload
Several works offload communication to DMAs. MSCCL++ [25]
initiates DMAs from GPU kernels (through proxy channel in
CPU) involving CUs, which in our work we prefer to reserve
only for compute operations. Furthermore, they implement
only the pcpy variant for collectives which along with addi-
tional indirection to initiate DMA copies can hurt KB-MB
sized collective performance. ConCCL [7] shows DMA’s po-
tential to accelerate concurrent compute, however, focuses
on large collectives. ARK [16] focuses on small-sized DMA
transfers but proposes a GPU thread-initiated DMA proto-
type which requires considerable software and hardware
changes. This work in contrast relies on existing software
stack and HW to build performant DMA collectives and,
unlike other works, evaluates both performance and power.
7.3
Fine-grained DMA Offload
Several works leverage DMAs for fine-grained compute-
communication overlap [14, 15, 33]. Some of these only re-
quire a GPU to perform a single peer-to-peer copy to an-
other GPU rather than a collective which is not performant
on an MI300x node as they under utilize its network band-
width [14, 15]. Others rely on pcpy-like variant which under
performs for KB-MB sizes [33]. Other works require hard-
ware modifications to initiate DMA transfers [21]. Neverthe-
less, insights from this work can benefit such fine-grained
mechanisms involving small-size transfers/collectives.
8
Conclusion
Mechanisms to effectively overlap and hide communication
are critical for distributed ML performance. This work fo-
cuses on efficiently offloading small-sized ML collectives to
existing DMA engines to reduce their resource interference
with compute when overlapped. We first provide an in-depth
11


--- Page 12 ---
Suchita Pati, Mahzabeen Islam, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim
latency breakdown of a DMA offload which guides our de-
sign of DMA collectives. Next, we leverage existing DMA
capabilities of an AMD Instinct™MI300X GPU to accelerate
DMA-based ML collectives. Starting with a baseline imple-
mentation which is 4.5× and 2.5× slower than RCCL for
<32MB sizes, we bridge this gap to only 30% slower and 20%
faster for allgather and alltoall, respectively. For larger sizes,
DMA collectives are ∼20% faster and also consume ∼32% less
power compared to compute-unit (CU)-based RCCL. These
performant DMA collectives further stand to enable efficient
computation and communication overlap and improve end-
to-end ML performance.
Acknowledgment
AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, AMD Instinct, AMD ROCm,
AMD Infinity Cache, AMD Infinity Fabric, and combina-
tions thereof are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices,
Inc. Other product names used in this publication are for
identification purposes only and may be trademarks of their
respective companies.
References
[1] 2014. DMA Packets. https://people.freedesktop.org/~agd5f/dma_
packets.txt.
[2] 2024. HIP Documentation. https://rocm.docs.amd.com/_/downloads/
HIP/en/docs-6.1.2/pdf/.
[3] 2024.
ROCR Documentation.
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/_/
downloads/ROCR-Runtime/en/master/pdf/.
[4] 2025. AMD ROCm documentation. https://rocm.docs.amd.com/en/
latest/.
[5] 2025.
Tensile Documentation.
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/_/
downloads/Tensile/en/latest/pdf/.
[6] 2025. User Buffer Registration. https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/
nccl/user-guide/docs/usage/bufferreg.html.
[7] Anirudha Agrawal, Shaizeen Aga, Suchita Pati, and Mahzabeen Islam.
2025. Optimizing ML Concurrent Computation and Communication
with GPU DMA Engines. arXiv:2412.14335 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/
abs/2412.14335
[8] AMD. [n. d.]. ROCm Runtime (ROCr) . https://github.com/ROCm/
ROCR-Runtime
[9] AMD. 2025. ROCm Communication Collectives Library (RCCL). https:
//github.com/ROCm/rccl
[10] AMD. 2025. ROCm/rocBLAS: Next generation BLAS implementation
for ROCm platform. https://github.com/ROCm/rocBLAS.
[11] Li-Wen Chang, Wenlei Bao, Qi Hou, Chengquan Jiang, Ningxin Zheng,
Yinmin Zhong, Xuanrun Zhang, Zuquan Song, Chengji Yao, Ziheng
Jiang, et al. 2024. Flux: Fast software-based communication overlap on
gpus through kernel fusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.06858 (2024).
[12] Meghan Cowan, Saeed Maleki, Madanlal Musuvathi, Olli Saarikivi,
and Yifan Xiong. 2023. Mscclang: Microsoft collective communication
language. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 2. 502–514.
[13] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao
Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang,
Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji,
Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting
Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang,
Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li,
Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei
Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong
Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin
Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang
Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan
Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian,
Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao
Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong
Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen,
S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing
Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang
Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun,
Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei
An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang,
X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan
Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen,
Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin
Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou,
Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q.
Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu,
Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui
Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying
He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma,
Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan
Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan Xiong,
Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu,
Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu,
Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang,
Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao,
Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia
Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng
Pan. 2025. DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report. arXiv:2412.19437 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437
[14] Ali Hassani, Michael Isaev, Nic McDonald, Jie Ren, Vijay Thakkar,
Haicheng Wu, and Humphrey Shi. 2024. Distributed GEMM.
[15] Horace He, Less Wright, Luca Wehrstedt, Tianyu Liu, Wan-
chao Liang. 2024.
Introducing Async Tensor Parallelism in
PyTorch.
"https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/distributed-w-torchtitan-
introducing-async-tensor-parallelism-in-pytorch/209487".
[16] Changho Hwang, KyoungSoo Park, Ran Shu, Xinyuan Qu, Peng Cheng,
and Yongqiang Xiong. 2023. {ARK}:{GPU-driven} Code Execution
for Distributed Deep Learning. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Net-
worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23). 87–101.
[17] Abhinav Jangda, Jun Huang, Guodong Liu, Amir Hossein Nodehi Sa-
bet, Saeed Maleki, Youshan Miao, Madanlal Musuvathi, Todd Mytkow-
icz, and Olli Saarikivi. 2022. Breaking the Computation and Commu-
nication Abstraction Barrier in Distributed Machine Learning Work-
loads. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-
tems (ASPLOS). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 402–416. doi:10.1145/3503222.3507778
[18] Benjamin Klenk, Nan Jiang, Greg Thorson, and Larry Dennison. 2020.
An In-Network Architecture for Accelerating Shared-Memory Multi-
processor Collectives. In ACM/IEEE 47th Annual International Sympo-
sium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, 996–1009.
[19] Vijay Anand Korthikanti, Jared Casper, Sangkug Lym, Lawrence
McAfee, Michael Andersch, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catan-
zaro. 2023. Reducing activation recomputation in large transformer
models. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 5 (2023), 341–
353.
[20] NVIDIA. [n. d.]. NCCL. https://github.com/NVIDIA/nccl
[21] Suchita Pati, Shaizeen Aga, Mahzabeen Islam, Nuwan Jayasena, and
Matthew D Sinclair. 2024. T3: Transparent Tracking & Triggering
for Fine-grained Overlap of Compute & Collectives. In Proceedings
12


--- Page 13 ---
DMA Collectives for Efficient ML Communication Offloads
of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2. 1146–1164.
[22] Samyam Rajbhandari, Conglong Li, Zhewei Yao, Minjia Zhang,
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jeff Rasley, and Yux-
iong He. 2022. Deepspeed-moe: Advancing mixture-of-experts infer-
ence and training to power next-generation ai scale. In International
conference on machine learning. PMLR, 18332–18346.
[23] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
2020. Zero: Memory optimizations toward training trillion param-
eter models. In SC20: International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. IEEE, 1–16.
[24] Saeed Rashidi, Matthew Denton, Srinivas Sridharan, Sudarshan Srini-
vasan, Amoghavarsha Suresh, Jade Nie, and Tushar Krishna. 2021. En-
abling Compute-Communication Overlap in Distributed Deep Learn-
ing Training Platforms. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, IEEE Press, Piscat-
away, NJ, USA, 540–553. doi:10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00049
[25] Aashaka Shah, Abhinav Jangda, Binyang Li, Caio Rocha, Changho
Hwang, Jithin Jose, Madan Musuvathi, Olli Saarikivi, Peng Cheng,
Qinghua Zhou, Roshan Dathathri, Saeed Maleki, and Ziyue Yang.
2025. MSCCL++: Rethinking GPU Communication Abstractions for
Cutting-edge AI Applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09014 (2025).
[26] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley,
Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Megatron-LM: Training
Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism.
CoRR abs/1909.08053 (2019), 9 pages. arXiv:1909.08053 [cs.CL] http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1909.08053
[27] Varsha Singhania, Shaizeen Aga, and Mohamed Assem Ibrahim. 2025.
FinGraV: Methodology for Fine-Grain GPU Power Visibility and In-
sights. In 2025 IEEE International Symposium on Performance Analysis
of Systems and Software (ISPASS). IEEE, 96–107.
[28] Alan Smith, Eric Chapman, Chintan Patel, Raja Swaminathan, John
Wuu, Tyrone Huang, Wonjun Jung, Alexander Kaganov, Hugh McIn-
tyre, and Ramon Mangaser. 2024. 11.1 AMD InstinctTM MI300 Series
Modular Chiplet Package – HPC and AI Accelerator for Exa-Class Sys-
tems. In 2024 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC),
Vol. 67. 490–492. doi:10.1109/ISSCC49657.2024.10454441
[29] Alan Smith, Gabriel H. Loh, John Wuu, Samuel Naffziger, Tyrone
Huang, Hugh McIntyre, Ramon Mangaser, Wonjun Jung, and Raja
Swaminathan. 2024. AMD Instinct™MI300X Accelerator: Packaging
and Architecture Co-Optimization. In 2024 IEEE Symposium on VLSI
Technology and Circuits (VLSI Technology and Circuits). 1–8. doi:10.
1109/VLSITECHNOLOGYANDCIR46783.2024.10631545
[30] Shibo Wang, Jinliang Wei, Amit Sabne, Andy Davis, Berkin Ilbeyi,
Blake Hechtman, Dehao Chen, Karthik Srinivasa Murthy, Marcello
Maggioni, Qiao Zhang, Sameer Kumar, Tongfei Guo, Yuanzhong Xu,
and Zongwei Zhou. 2022. Overlap Communication with Dependent
Computation via Decomposition in Large Deep Learning Models. In
Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume
1 (ASPLOS). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 93–106. doi:10.1145/3567955.3567959
[31] Shulai Zhang, Ningxin Zheng, Haibin Lin, Ziheng Jiang, Wen-
lei Bao, Chengquan Jiang, Qi Hou, Weihao Cui, Size Zheng, Li-
Wen Chang, Quan Chen, and Xin Liu. 2025. Comet: Fine-grained
Computation-communication Overlapping for Mixture-of-Experts.
arXiv:2502.19811 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19811
[32] Yanli Zhao, Andrew Gu, Rohan Varma, Liang Luo, Chien-Chin Huang,
Min Xu, Less Wright, Hamid Shojanazeri, Myle Ott, Sam Shleifer,
Alban Desmaison, Can Balioglu, Pritam Damania, Bernard Nguyen,
Geeta Chauhan, Yuchen Hao, Ajit Mathews, and Shen Li. 2023. Py-
Torch FSDP: Experiences on Scaling Fully Sharded Data Parallel.
arXiv:2304.11277 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.11277
[33] Size Zheng, Wenlei Bao, Qi Hou, Xuegui Zheng, Jin Fang, Chen-
hui Huang, Tianqi Li, Haojie Duanmu, Renze Chen, Ruifan Xu, Yi-
fan Guo, Ningxin Zheng, Ziheng Jiang, Xinyi Di, Dongyang Wang,
Jianxi Ye, Haibin Lin, Li-Wen Chang, Liqiang Lu, Yun Liang, Jidong
Zhai, and Xin Liu. 2025. Triton-distributed: Programming Overlap-
ping Kernels on Distributed AI Systems with the Triton Compiler.
arXiv:2504.19442 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19442
13
