--- Page 1 ---
FGM-HD: Boosting Generation Diversity of Fractal Generative Models through
Hausdorff Dimension Induction
Haowei Zhang1,2, Yuanpei Zhao1,2, Ji-Zhe Zhou1,2* , Mao Li1,2
1College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China
2Engineering Research Center of Machine Learning and Industry Inteligence, Ministry of Education of China
{zhanghaowei1, zhaoyuanpei}@stu.scu.edu.cn, {jzzhou, limao}@scu.edu.cn
Abstract
Improving the diversity of generated results while maintain-
ing high visual quality remains a significant challenge in im-
age generation tasks. Fractal Generative Models (FGMs) are
efficient in generating high-quality images, but their inher-
ent self-similarity limits the diversity of output images. To
address this issue, we propose a novel approach based on
the Hausdorff Dimension (HD), a widely recognized concept
in fractal geometry used to quantify structural complexity,
which aids in enhancing the diversity of generated outputs.
To incorporate HD into FGM, we propose a learnable HD
estimation method that predicts HD directly from image em-
beddings, addressing computational cost concerns. However,
simply introducing HD into a hybrid loss is insufficient to
enhance diversity in FGMs due to: 1) degradation of image
quality, and 2) limited improvement in generation diversity.
To this end, during training, we adopt an HD-based loss with
a monotonic momentum-driven scheduling strategy to pro-
gressively optimize the hyperparameters, obtaining optimal
diversity without sacrificing visual quality. Moreover, during
inference, we employ HD-guided rejection sampling to se-
lect geometrically richer outputs. Extensive experiments on
the ImageNet dataset demonstrate that our FGM-HD frame-
work yields a 39% improvement in output diversity compared
to vanilla FGMs, while preserving comparable image quality.
To our knowledge, this is the very first work introducing HD
into FGM. Our method effectively enhances the diversity of
generated outputs while offering a principled theoretical con-
tribution to FGM development.
Introduction
Generative models have achieved remarkable progress
in recent years, particularly in the image synthesis do-
main. Approaches such as generative adversarial networks
(GANs) (Goodfellow et al. 2014; Wiatrak, Albrecht, and
Nystrom 2019), variational autoencoders (VAEs) (Kingma,
Welling et al. 2013; Van Den Oord, Vinyals et al. 2017), dif-
fusion models (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach et al.
2022; Shen et al. 2025), and autoregressive and flow-based
models (Van Den Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu
2016; Kingma and Dhariwal 2018; You et al. 2022), have
demonstrated the ability to produce high-fidelity and seman-
tically coherent images. However, maintaining an adequate
*Corresponding authors: Ji-Zhe Zhou, Mao Li
balance between image quality and diversity remains a fun-
damental challenge. Although many models excel at gener-
ating visually appealing outputs, they often fail to capture
the full variability of the underlying data distribution.
Fractal Generative Models (FGMs) (Li et al. 2025) of-
fer a unique architecture for high-quality image generation
by leveraging recursive self-similarity, an intrinsic property
of fractals. By repeatedly applying a compact generative
module across multiple scales, FGMs can efficiently gen-
erate complex, globally consistent, and high-resolution im-
ages. This modular recursive design makes FGMs particu-
larly suitable for tasks requiring structural coherence and vi-
sual richness. Nevertheless, the same self-similar structure
that ensures global consistency can also result in repetitive
patterns and insufficient diversity in generated results.
To address the challenge of limited diversity in FGMs,
we introduce the Hausdorff Dimension (HD) (Hausdorff
1918) as a geometric indicator for structural complexity. As
a numerical concept in fractal geometry, HD quantifies the
variation of spatial detail across scales, with higher values
typically reflecting greater structural richness. This makes
HD particularly suitable for guiding the generation of di-
verse and intricate outputs.
Nevertheless, conventional HD estimation techniques,
such as the box counting method (Mandelbrot 1983), are
computationally expensive and not easily compatible with
large-scale training pipelines. In addition, HD measures
structural complexity, and deep layer embeddings learned
by neural networks have been proven to capture this struc-
ture effectively (Valle et al. 2022; Werbos 2002). Therefore,
at the commencement, we propose a learning-based HD esti-
mation method for efficient HD prediction directly from im-
age embeddings to reduce computational costs while main-
taining high accuracy, making it feasible for integration into
training pipelines.
However, simply introducing HD into a hybrid loss func-
tion is insufficient for improving generation diversity, as
it leads to degraded image quality and limited improve-
ment in generation diversity. We observed that in the hy-
brid loss function, the relative weighting of each compo-
nent is critical: during the early training phase, image qual-
ity is typically suboptimal and HD estimates are unreliable,
necessitating a focus on quality while gradually increasing
the weight of diversity as training progresses, without sac-
arXiv:2511.08945v2  [cs.CV]  18 Nov 2025


--- Page 2 ---
rificing visual quality. Therefore, an optimal balance be-
tween HD loss and generative loss is a key factor for ef-
fective training. To address this, we propose the Monotonic
Momentum-Driven Scheduling (MMDS) strategy, which
dynamically adjusts the influence of HD loss over time. The
MMDS strategy ensures that the model first focuses on high-
quality structure and progressively incorporates diversity,
providing a smoother transition and more stable optimiza-
tion without compromising generation quality.
To further enhance output diversity during inference, we
introduce an HD-guided sampling strategy. Leveraging the
recursive structure of FGMs, which naturally supports the
generation of multiple candidate patches in parallel, we re-
tain only those outputs whose estimated HD exceeds a pre-
defined threshold. This post hoc selection process filters
out structurally simple images, resulting in a final output
set with greater geometric richness and perceptual variety,
achieved without modifying the underlying generative archi-
tecture.
Experiments on the ImageNet dataset indicate that our
approach significantly improves diversity while maintaining
visual quality. In particular, our method achieves a 39% im-
provement in Recall compared to the vanilla FGM, high-
lighting HD’s effectiveness as both a training signal and
a sampling criterion. To our knowledge, this is the first
systematic effort to introduce HD into fractal generative
modeling. Additionally, the MMDS strategy for dynamic
weight optimization offers a generalizable framework that
can be applied to other models utilizing hybrid loss func-
tions, thereby extending its applicability across a broader
range of generative tasks.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows.
• Introducing Hausdorff Dimension for Diversity En-
hancement: We are the first to introduce HD into the
FGM framework, proposing a set of methods during
both training and inference, including the MMDS and
Sampling Strategy, to enhance generation diversity while
maintaining high image quality. Our work alleviates the
self-similarity limitation inherent in fractal-based gener-
ation.
• Developing a learnable and efficient HD estimation
module: To overcome the inefficiency of numerical HD
estimation methods, we design a learnable HD predic-
tor that operates directly on image embeddings, enabling
fast and accurate HD prediction and supporting scalable
integration into generative frameworks.
• Monotonic Momentum-Driven Scheduling (MMDS)
strategy: We introduce MMDS, a strategy that dynam-
ically adjusts the influence of HD loss during training
to balance visual quality and structural diversity, ensur-
ing stable optimization. MMDS can also be extended to
models with hybrid loss functions, providing a system-
atic approach to optimize the balance between loss com-
ponents in diverse generative tasks.
Figure 1: Overview of the FGM process, where the image
is generated from sparse patches to 256 × 256 resolution
through recursive refinement at smaller scales (e.g., 16 × 16
and 4 × 4 blocks). A shared generative module is reused
across scales, capturing global and fine-grained structural
details.
Related Work
Generative Models
Generative models have made significant strides in image
generation tasks. For instance, GANs (Goodfellow et al.
2014) have enabled high-quality image generation through
adversarial learning and have been widely applied in various
tasks. Similarly, VAEs (Kingma, Welling et al. 2013) lever-
age probabilistic modeling for generating images through
latent variable distributions. More recently, diffusion mod-
els (Ho, Jain, and Abbeel 2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Shen
et al. 2025) have gained popularity for generating high-
quality and diverse images by iteratively denoising sam-
ples. Moreover, autoregressive and flow-based models (Van
Den Oord, Kalchbrenner, and Kavukcuoglu 2016; Kingma
and Dhariwal 2018; You et al. 2022) excel in generating
high-quality images with strong mode coverage. Despite
these advancements, a key challenge remains achieving a
balance between image quality and diversity (Lan et al.
2024; Li et al. 2021a), as existing models struggle to gener-
ate sufficiently varied samples that comprehensively reflect
the underlying data distribution.
Fractal Generative Models
Fractal-based generative models leverage the recursive and
self-similar properties of fractals to synthesize complex vi-
sual patterns. Classical approaches such as iterated function
systems (IFS) (Barnsley 2014) and Lindenmayer systems
(L-systems) (Prusinkiewicz and Lindenmayer 2012) gen-
erate intricate structures through predefined rules, offering
mathematical simplicity but lacking adaptability. Recent ad-
vances have incorporated neural networks into fractal frame-
works, notably FGMs (Li et al. 2025), employing recursive
atomic modules to progressively refine images across multi-
ple scales. This design enables FGMs to efficiently generate
high-quality and visually coherent images with minimal ar-
chitectural complexity.
Although FGMs capture structural detail and visual qual-
ity, their recursive nature limits output diversity, leading


--- Page 3 ---
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed FGM-HD framework. (a) Training and Sampling Strategies: During training (gray line),
input noise is recursively processed by the FGM (purple section), and the generated images are evaluated by the HD estimation
module to compute HD loss. Then, the HD loss is dynamically weighted by the MMDS strategy (green section) through λ(t) to
balance image quality and structural diversity during optimization. During inference (blue line), a batch of samples is generated
from noise via FGM and passed through the Sampling Strategy (blue section). Only geometrically richer outputs with HD
values above the threshold (τ) are retained while others are discarded and regenerated, ensuring structurally diverse outputs
without modifying the generator architecture. (b) Hausdorff Dimension Estimation: The HD estimation (yellow section) is
performed using a multi-scale convolutional network built upon the ResNet152 architecture, enabling accurate and efficient HD
prediction directly from image embeddings.
to redundancy and hindering the representation of complex
data distributions. Thus, enhancing diversity remains a criti-
cal challenge for improvement.
Hausdorff Dimension
The HD concept (Hausdorff 1918) was originally introduced
to measure the complexity of geometric sets, enabling a pre-
cise characterization of self-similar or irregular structures.
For instance, Khrulkov and Oseledets (2019) showed that
generative models can approximate data supported on low-
dimensional manifolds, with HD providing a useful measure
of their expressive capacity. Simsekli et al. (2020) demon-
strated that HD serves as a proxy for model generalization,
revealing a strong correlation between geometric complexity
and generalization ability. More recently, Li et al. (2021b)
proposed Hausdorff GAN, which incorporates HD into the
training objective to align the intrinsic dimensionality of real
and generated data, resulting in improved output quality and
diversity. Leveraging HD, FGMs can generate more diverse
outputs while maintaining structural integrity, addressing the
limitations of traditional fractal self-similarity.
Methods
Preliminary of Fractal Generative Models (FGMs)
Inspired by the recursive and self-similar nature of fractals,
FGMs generate complex patterns by repeatedly applying the
same generative module at different scales, enabling them to
capture the data distribution’s global and local features. This
recursive design allows FGMs to generate high-quality im-
ages efficiently while maintaining multiscale structural de-
tails, making them suitable for real-time inference and de-
ployment on resource-constrained devices. An overview of
the generation process is illustrated in Figure 1 consisting of
the following steps:
• Initial Generation. First, a low-resolution image is gen-
erated using a base generative model. We use the masked
autoregressive model (MAR) (Li et al. 2024) for contin-
uous value autoregression, employing a diffusion-based
loss function to avoid discrete tokenization. This serves
as the foundation for further refinement.
• Recursive Refinement. The image is progressively re-
fined through the recursive application of the generative
module. Initially, the image is divided into coarse re-
gions, which are subdivided further at each level. Then,


--- Page 4 ---
the module synthesizes higher-resolution content, captur-
ing global structure and local details. At level l, the image
Il is generated from Il−1 as follows:
Il = Module(Il−1, θl),
(1)
where θl represents the parameters of the generative
module at level l.
• Final Output. After several recursive steps, a high-
resolution image is produced, characterized by intricate
details that emerge through the recursive process.
Hausdorff Dimension Estimation
The widely used box counting method (Mandelbrot 1983)
for HD estimation is accurate but computationally expen-
sive for high-resolution images and sensitive to noise and
edge complexities, limiting its applicability for modern im-
age analysis (Gneiting, ˇSevˇc´ıkov´a, and Percival 2012). HD
reflects an image’s structural features, with intricate tex-
tures and self-similar patterns generally exhibiting higher
values (Napolitano, Ungania, and Cannata 2012). Convo-
lutional neural networks (CNNs)(LeCun et al. 1989), due
to learning hierarchical representations, are well-suited to
capture these structural features for efficient HD estima-
tion (Valle et al. 2022).
To address the limitations of the box counting method and
leverage CNNs, we propose a novel method that directly ex-
tracts dimensionality features from image embeddings. Our
approach utilizes the ResNet152 (He et al. 2016) architec-
ture, enhanced with a multi-scale convolutional module,
as shown in Figure 2 (b). This model leverages the deep
feature extraction capabilities of ResNet152, enhanced by
multi-scale convolutions, to capture image features across
different scales, which is then used in a regression layer
for efficient and accurate HD prediction. Specifically, our
method achieves superior HD estimation precision while
significantly reducing computational overhead, making it
more suitable for real-world applications.
Framework
Training Strategy
To balance image quality and structural diversity during
training, we formulated the learning objective as a hybrid
loss function that combines the base generative loss and the
Hausdorff Dimension loss (HD loss), which is defined as:
LHD = |HDgen −HDtarget| ,
(2)
where HDgen denotes the estimated HD of a generated im-
age, and HDtarget represents the class-specific median HD
from the training dataset.
To incorporate HD loss into training in a stable and ef-
fective manner, we introduced a novel scheduling strat-
egy termed Monotonic Momentum-Driven Scheduling
(MMDS), which defines a time-dependent weighting func-
tion λ(t) that gradually increases during training to control
the influence of HD loss. The overall training objective be-
comes:
Ltotal = Lgen + λ(t) · LHD,
(3)
Algorithm 1: Monotonic Momentum-Driven Scheduling
(MMDS) Strategy
Require: Epochs E, momentum µ ∈[0, 1], scale factor γ
1: Initialize λ ←0, m ←0, Lprev ←0
2: for epoch e to E do
3:
Compute validation loss Lval
4:
∆L ←max(0, Lprev −Lval)
5:
m ←µ · m + (1 −µ) · γ · ∆L
6:
λ ←λ + m
7:
Lprev ←Lval
8:
Compute Ltotal = Lgen + λ · LHD
9:
Backpropagate and update model
10: end for
where Lgen is the primary generative loss, and λ(t) is a
non-negative, monotonically increasing coefficient.
As shown in Figure 3, in the early stages of training,
the model generates noisy images, leading to HD estimates
with large deviations and high variance, making HD es-
timation highly inaccurate and unstable. As training pro-
gresses, with the generated images improved, HD estima-
tion becomes more reliable and it is feasible to gradually
introduce HD loss to enhance structural diversity without
compromising image quality. To implement this progres-
sion, λ(t) is constructed via a momentum-driven accumu-
lation scheme, inspired by the SGD (Robbins and Monro
1951). This scheme ensures that λ(t) increases monotoni-
cally, with its rate of growth controlled by the accumulated
momentum. This momentum-driven approach reflects the
training state, allowing for smooth and controlled growth
over time, which avoids abrupt changes in HD loss weight-
ing, outlined in Algorithm 1. Compared to static schedules,
such as exponential or linear increases, MMDS is better
suited to dynamically adjust to the model’s evolving require-
ments during training. As demonstrated in our experiments
in Figure 5, MMDS results in a smoother loss trajectory and
improved convergence stability while effectively balancing
image quality and structural diversity throughout training.
Sampling Strategy
To further promote structural diversity in FGM’s outputs, we
introduced a post-processing strategy termed Hausdorff Di-
mension sampling (HD sampling). This method operates af-
ter initial sample generation and selectively retains images
that exhibit sufficient structural complexity, as measured by
their estimated HD. The complete filtering procedure is out-
lined in Algorithm 2.
Specifically, once a batch of candidate images is gener-
ated, we computed each sample’s HD and compared it with a
predefined threshold. Only samples with HD values exceed-
ing this threshold are retained, while others are discarded
and regenerated from the beginning, shown in Figure 2 (a).
By filtering out low-HD images, this method effectively
suppresses overly smooth, repetitive, or degenerate outputs,
resulting in a final sample set that is visually diverse and
structurally rich. As this process is applied post-generation,
it incurs no additional computational cost during training


--- Page 5 ---
Figure 3: Evolution of image quality and HD variance across
training epochs. Early-stage generations are noisy with un-
stable HD values, while later epochs yield high-quality im-
ages with more reliable HD estimation.
Algorithm 2: HD Sampling Strategy
Require: Threshold THD, batch of generated samples
{I1, I2, ..., IN}
1: Initialize empty list of selected samples S
2: for each generated sample Ii in {I1, I2, ..., IN} do
3:
Compute HDgenerated(Ii)
4:
if HDgenerated(Ii) ≥THD then
5:
Add Ii to selected list S
6:
else
7:
Regenerate Ii from scratch
8:
end if
9: end for
10: Return selected list S
and remains fully compatible with any pre-trained genera-
tive model.
Experiments
To validate our proposed FGM-HD framework’s effective-
ness, we conducted the following experiments: a) evaluating
the performance of HD estimation network, b) assessing the
overall effectiveness of the FGM-HD framework. All exper-
iments were conducted on NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPUs, using
the PyTorch framework for deep learning.
Dataset
Fractal Dataset. First, we constructed a dedicated dataset to
systematically study the HD behavior in controlled settings.
This dataset consists of 1,200 images evenly divided into
three categories: (i) a collection of canonical fractal images
(e.g., Sierpinski triangle and Koch snowflake) with known
theoretical HD; (ii) a diverse set of fractal patterns gener-
ated using IFS (Barnsley 2014) with varying parameters to
Method
Type
Error ↓
Time(s) ↓
Box Counting
Non-learning
0.002
4.70
Power Spectrum
0.079
3.41
Perimeter-Area
0.137
6.85
Sandbox Method
0.094
5.73
ResNet152
Learning
0.012
0.40
Ours
0.005
0.32
Table 1: Comparison of HD estimation methods, along with
their accuracy (Error) and runtime (Time).
Figure 4: Performance trends of evaluation metrics under
varying HD thresholds.
create a wide range of structural complexities; and (iii) Frac-
talDB images (Kataoka et al. 2020) with HD values that are
approximated using the box counting method. This balanced
composition enables the validation of HD estimation accu-
racy and benchmarking of generative models on data with
clearly defined fractal complexity.
Generation Dataset. Additionally, we evaluated our HD-
based methods on the ImageNet-1000 dataset (Deng et al.
2009), which contains high-resolution images from 1,000 di-
verse categories, and all the images are resized to 256 × 256
for consistency. Using our HD estimation network, we an-
alyzed structural complexity across categories and applied
class-wise HD targets during training. The images generated
by our proposed FGM-HD are compared with outputs from
publicly available pre-trained generative models.
Evaluation Metrics
To comprehensively evaluate our HD-based strategy effec-
tiveness, we adopted four widely used metrics to jointly as-
sess the diversity and quality of the generated results. We
used the Fr´echet inception distance (FID) (Heusel et al.
2017) to measure distributional similarity to real images, and
Inception Score (IS) (Salimans et al. 2016) to capture both
semantic clarity and variety. To assess structural diversity,
we used Recall (Kynk¨a¨anniemi et al. 2019), which evaluates
the coverage of the target distribution, and LPIPS (Zhang


--- Page 6 ---
Model
Type
FID ↓
IS ↑
Recall ↑
BigGAN-deep
GAN
6.95
198.2
0.28
GigaGAN
3.45
225.5
0.61
StyleGAN-XL
2.30
265.1
0.53
ADM
Diffusion
4.59
186.7
0.52
Simple Diffusion
3.54
205.3
0.56
VDM++
2.12
267.7
–
SiD2
1.38
–
–
DiffiT
1.73
276.5
0.62
JetFormer
AR+Flow
6.64
–
0.56
RCG
MAGE
2.15
253.4
0.53
FGM
Fractal
6.15
348.9
0.46
FGM-HD(Ours)
6.21
367.1
0.64
Table 2: Quantitative evaluation of pixel-level generative
models on ImageNet 256 × 256.
Variant
FID ↓
IS ↑
Recall ↑
LPIPS ↑
FGM (baseline)
6.15
348.9
0.46
0.64
+ Fixed HD Loss only
6.22
333.7
0.47
0.65
+ MMDS only
6.04
361.7
0.51
0.69
+ HD Sampling only
6.78
357.9
0.58
0.73
+ MMDS & Sampling
6.21
367.4
0.64
0.76
Table 3: Ablation study of HD-based components. Each
component contributes independently to the overall perfor-
mance, with the combination of MMDS and Sampling Strat-
egy achieving the best balance between diversity and visual
quality.
et al. 2018), which measures the perceptual difference be-
tween generated image pairs, providing a direct evaluation
of perceptual diversity. These metrics offer a holistic eval-
uation of the HD loss and HD sampling method’s effect on
generative quality and diversity.
Comparison of HD Estimation Methods
To assess the accuracy and computational efficiency of
different HD estimation techniques, we compared sev-
eral widely used classical methods and deep learning ap-
proaches. Specifically, we evaluated box counting, power
spectrum (Pentland 1984), perimeter-area scaling (Russ
1994), and sandbox method (Bandt 1991), as well as deep
convolutional regression models based on ResNet152 and
our proposed multi-scale convolutional network. All meth-
ods were tested on our proposed fractal dataset. Table 1
presents each method’s average estimation error and runtime
per image.
The results indicate that box counting remains the most
precise technique partially because it was used to label a part
of the dataset. In contrast, the other methods demonstrated
higher error and longer runtime. Our multi-scale convolu-
tional network achieves comparable accuracy with faster in-
ference. In practice, especially when using HD to improve
output diversity, computational efficiency is often more im-
Figure 5: Visualization of the MMDS strategy. The blue
curve shows the variation of λ optimized by MMDS, the
red curve represents the fixed exponential loss (final value:
3.14), and the green curve shows the MMDS loss (final
value: 2.85). MMDS Strategy leads to a smoother and lower
loss trajectory during training.
portant than maximum precision. Therefore, a moderate re-
duction in accuracy is acceptable if the estimates remain
consistent.
Effectiveness of Monotonic Momentum-Driven
Scheduling (MMDS)
To validate our MMDS strategy’s effectiveness, we visual-
ized the evolution of λ(t) and the corresponding training
loss in Figure 5. The blue curve depicts the momentum-
driven schedule, which begins increasing gradually at epoch
300 and plateaus beyond 800. The red and green curves rep-
resent the training losses under two different λ(t) schedules:
the red curve corresponds to a fixed exponential schedule
end up to 3.14, while the green curve illustrates our MMDS
strategy end up to 2.85. Training was stopped after 1,000
epochs because further training did not significantly improve
either quality or diversity. Since MMDS involves a mono-
tonic increase in HD loss, this stopping criterion prevents
overfitting by ensuring a balanced focus on visual quality
and diversity. The optimal balance between these factors was
reached after 1,000 epochs, allowing efficient convergence.
Compared
to
the
fixed
exponential
schedule,
the
momentum-driven λ(t) yields a significantly smoother and
lower loss trajectory. Despite the increasing contribution of
HD loss over time, the smoothed loss under dynamic weight-
ing exhibits consistent and stable descent. This indicates
that MMDS effectively introduces structural diversity with-
out disrupting training convergence. These results demon-
strate that the proposed scheduling mechanism successfully
balances structural complexity and optimization stability in
generative modeling.
HD Sampling Threshold
To evaluate the of HD sampling effect, we applied vary-
ing HD thresholds to the generated samples and monitored
performance using FID, IS, Recall, and LPIPS, as shown
in Figure 4. As the threshold increases from 1.1 to around


--- Page 7 ---
Figure 6: Comparison of generated 256 × 256 images between vanilla FGM and FGM-HD across representative ImageNet
classes.
1.7, FID remains low around a threshold of 1.55 before ris-
ing sharply, while IS improves moderately but declines be-
yond 1.6. Recall steadily increases until 1.7 before dropping.
LPIPS, which measures perceptual similarity, increases with
the threshold, reflecting improved image quality. However,
excessively high values may indicate perceptual distortions,
suggesting a trade-off between quality and diversity.
These results suggest that HD thresholds between 1.55
and 1.60 provide an effective balance, preserving sample
quality while enhancing structural diversity. This demon-
strates the applicability of HD sampling as a targeted post-
processing strategy.
Comparison with Baseline Generative Models
To evaluate our proposed HD-based enhancement’s effec-
tiveness during the challenging pixel-by-pixel image gen-
eration task, we compared several variants of our FGM-
HD framework with representative baseline generative mod-
els, including GANs (Brock, Donahue, and Simonyan 2018;
Sauer, Schwarz, and Geiger 2022; Kang et al. 2023), diffu-
sion models (Dhariwal and Nichol 2021; Kingma et al. 2021;
Hoogeboom et al. 2024; Hatamizadeh et al. 2024), and other
novel methods (Li, Katabi, and He 2024; Tschannen, Pinto,
and Kolesnikov 2024). The results are summarized in Ta-
ble 2.
The experimental results demonstrate that incorporating
HD loss during training and HD sampling during inference
significantly improves the diversity of the generated results.
Specifically, HD loss encourages higher structural complex-
ity, which leads to improved recall and perceptual variation.
HD sampling, as an effective post-processing mechanism,
further enhances diversity without altering the model archi-
tecture. Overall, this combination achieves a 39% improve-
ment in diversity metrics, while maintaining image quality,
as summarized in Table 3.
Qualitative Analysis
To qualitatively demonstrate our method’s capacity to gener-
ate diverse and high-quality images, Figure 6 compares im-
ages generated by vanilla FGM (left) and FGM-HD (right).
The images span a wide range of semantic categories and ex-
hibit rich structural variation, with noticeable improvements
in object shape, color, pose, and background after incorpo-
rating HD. These results visually support the improvements
in diversity metrics, highlighting the model’s ability to syn-
thesize realistic, class-consistent images with enhanced vi-
sual diversity. All the images are generated at a resolution of
256 × 256 in a pixel-by-pixel manner.
Conclusion
We proposed a novel HD-guided framework to enhance the
structural diversity of FGMs without compromising visual
quality. During training, we incorporated HD-based loss
with MMDS strategy, which dynamically adjusts the influ-
ence of HD loss, ensuring an optimal balance between im-
age quality and structural diversity. During inference, we
applied HD-guided rejection sampling to retain only geo-
metrically richer outputs, further promoting diversity. Ad-
ditionally, we introduced an efficient and learnable HD es-
timation method that directly predicts HD from image em-
beddings, significantly improving computational efficiency
and accuracy. Our approach demonstrated a 39% improve-
ment in generation diversity compared to vanilla FGM while
maintaining competitive image quality. By introducing HD
into the FGM framework, we provide a principled method to
enhance diversity without sacrificing quality. Furthermore,
the MMDS strategy offers a generalizable optimization tech-
nique for hybrid-loss models. Future work includes applying
this framework to conditional and multi-modal generative
models, and developing perceptually aligned HD estimation
methods for large-scale image synthesis.


--- Page 8 ---
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the National Major Sci-
entific Instruments and Equipments Development Project of
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62427820, in part by the Science Fund for Creative Re-
search Groups of Sichuan Province Natural Science Foun-
dation under Grant 2024NSFTD003, in part by the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities under
Grant 1082204112364, in part by the Digital Media Art, Key
Laboratory of Sichuan Province, Sichuan Conservatory of
Music(Grant No. 22DMAKL04). Numerical computations
were supported by Chengdu Haiguang Integrated Circuit
Design Co., ltd. with HYGON K100AI DCU units.
References
Bandt, C. 1991. Deterministic fractals and fractal measures.
Barnsley, M. F. 2014. Fractals everywhere. Academic press.
Brock, A.; Donahue, J.; and Simonyan, K. 2018.
Large
scale GAN training for high fidelity natural image synthe-
sis. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.11096.
Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.-J.; Li, K.; and Fei-
Fei, L. 2009. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image
database. In 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 248–255. Ieee.
Dhariwal, P.; and Nichol, A. 2021. Diffusion models beat
gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 34: 8780–8794.
Gneiting, T.; ˇSevˇc´ıkov´a, H.; and Percival, D. B. 2012. Es-
timators of fractal dimension: Assessing the roughness of
time series and spatial data. Statistical Science, 247–277.
Goodfellow, I. J.; Pouget-Abadie, J.; Mirza, M.; Xu, B.;
Warde-Farley, D.; Ozair, S.; Courville, A.; and Bengio, Y.
2014. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems, 27.
Hatamizadeh, A.; Song, J.; Liu, G.; Kautz, J.; and Vahdat, A.
2024. Diffit: Diffusion vision transformers for image gener-
ation. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 37–55.
Springer.
Hausdorff, F. 1918. Dimension und ¨außeres Maß. Mathe-
matische Annalen, 79(1): 157–179.
He, K.; Zhang, X.; Ren, S.; and Sun, J. 2016. Deep resid-
ual learning for image recognition. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, 770–778.
Heusel, M.; Ramsauer, H.; Unterthiner, T.; Nessler, B.; and
Hochreiter, S. 2017. Gans trained by a two time-scale up-
date rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 30.
Ho, J.; Jain, A.; and Abbeel, P. 2020. Denoising diffusion
probabilistic models. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 33: 6840–6851.
Hoogeboom, E.; Mensink, T.; Heek, J.; Lamerigts, K.; Gao,
R.; and Salimans, T. 2024. Simpler diffusion (sid2): 1.5 fid
on imagenet512 with pixel-space diffusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.19324.
Kang, M.; Zhu, J.-Y.; Zhang, R.; Park, J.; Shechtman, E.;
Paris, S.; and Park, T. 2023. Scaling up gans for text-to-
image synthesis. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, 10124–
10134.
Kataoka, H.; Okayasu, K.; Matsumoto, A.; Yamagata, E.;
Yamada, R.; Inoue, N.; Nakamura, A.; and Satoh, Y. 2020.
Pre-training without natural images. In Proceedings of the
Asian Conference on Computer Vision.
Khrulkov, V.; and Oseledets, I. 2019. Universality theorems
for generative models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.11520.
Kingma, D.; Salimans, T.; Poole, B.; and Ho, J. 2021. Vari-
ational diffusion models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 34: 21696–21707.
Kingma, D. P.; and Dhariwal, P. 2018. Glow: Generative
flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 31.
Kingma, D. P.; Welling, M.; et al. 2013. Auto-encoding vari-
ational bayes.
Kynk¨a¨anniemi, T.; Karras, T.; Laine, S.; Lehtinen, J.; and
Aila, T. 2019. Improved precision and recall metric for as-
sessing generative models. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 32.
Lan, G.; Xiao, S.; Yang, J.; and Wen, J. 2024. Generative
model perception rectification algorithm for trade-off be-
tween diversity and quality. In Proceedings of the AAAI con-
ference on artificial intelligence, volume 38, 13328–13336.
LeCun, Y.; Boser, B.; Denker, J. S.; Henderson, D.; Howard,
R. E.; Hubbard, W.; and Jackel, L. D. 1989. Backpropaga-
tion applied to handwritten zip code recognition.
Neural
computation, 1(4): 541–551.
Li, M.; Lv, J.; Tang, C.; Wang, J.; Lai, Z.; and Huang, Y.
2021a.
Combination of certainty and uncertainty: Using
FusionGAN to create abstract paintings. Neural Networks,
144: 443–454.
Li, T.; Katabi, D.; and He, K. 2024.
Return of uncondi-
tional generation: A self-supervised representation genera-
tion method. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37: 125441–125468.
Li, T.; Sun, Q.; Fan, L.; and He, K. 2025. Fractal generative
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.17437.
Li, T.; Tian, Y.; Li, H.; Deng, M.; and He, K. 2024. Au-
toregressive image generation without vector quantization.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
56424–56445.
Li, W.; Liang, Z.; Ma, P.; Wang, R.; Cui, X.; and Chen, P.
2021b. Hausdorff GAN: Improving GAN generation quality
with Hausdorff metric. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics,
52(10): 10407–10419.
Mandelbrot, B. B. 1983. The fractal geometry of nature/Re-
vised and enlarged edition. New York.
Napolitano, A.; Ungania, S.; and Cannata, V. 2012. Fractal
dimension estimation methods for biomedical images. In
MATLAB-A Fundamental Tool for Scientific Computing and
Engineering Applications-Volume 3. IntechOpen.


--- Page 9 ---
Pentland, A. P. 1984. Fractal-based description of natural
scenes. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, (6): 661–674.
Prusinkiewicz, P.; and Lindenmayer, A. 2012. The algorith-
mic beauty of plants. Springer Science & Business Media.
Robbins, H.; and Monro, S. 1951. A stochastic approxima-
tion method. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 22(3):
400–407.
Rombach, R.; Blattmann, A.; Lorenz, D.; Esser, P.; and Om-
mer, B. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent
diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF confer-
ence on computer vision and pattern recognition, 10684–
10695.
Russ, J. C. 1994. Fractal surfaces. Springer Science & Busi-
ness Media.
Salimans, T.; Goodfellow, I.; Zaremba, W.; Cheung, V.; Rad-
ford, A.; and Chen, X. 2016. Improved techniques for train-
ing gans. Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 29.
Sauer, A.; Schwarz, K.; and Geiger, A. 2022. Stylegan-xl:
Scaling stylegan to large diverse datasets.
In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2022 conference proceedings, 1–10.
Shen, H.; Zhang, J.; Xiong, B.; Hu, R.; Chen, S.; Wan,
Z.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Gong, Z.; Bao, G.; et al. 2025.
Efficient Diffusion Models: A Survey.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.06805.
Simsekli, U.; Sener, O.; Deligiannidis, G.; and Erdogdu,
M. A. 2020. Hausdorff dimension, heavy tails, and general-
ization in neural networks. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33: 5138–5151.
Tschannen, M.; Pinto, A. S.; and Kolesnikov, A. 2024. Jet-
Former: An autoregressive generative model of raw images
and text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19722.
Valle, D.; Wagemakers, A.; Daza, A.; and Sanju´an, M. A.
2022. Characterization of fractal basins using deep convolu-
tional neural networks. International Journal of Bifurcation
and Chaos, 32(13): 2250200.
Van Den Oord, A.; Kalchbrenner, N.; and Kavukcuoglu, K.
2016. Pixel recurrent neural networks. In International con-
ference on machine learning, 1747–1756. PMLR.
Van Den Oord, A.; Vinyals, O.; et al. 2017.
Neural dis-
crete representation learning. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 30.
Werbos, P. J. 2002. Backpropagation through time: what it
does and how to do it. Proceedings of the IEEE, 78(10):
1550–1560.
Wiatrak, M.; Albrecht, S. V.; and Nystrom, A. 2019. Sta-
bilizing generative adversarial networks: A survey. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1910.00927.
You, T.; Kim, S.; Kim, C.; Lee, D.; and Han, B. 2022. Lo-
cally hierarchical auto-regressive modeling for image gener-
ation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35: 16360–16372.
Zhang, R.; Isola, P.; Efros, A. A.; Shechtman, E.; and Wang,
O. 2018. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as
a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 586–595.


--- Page 10 ---
Appendix A: HD Estimation Network
We provide the architectural specifications and training con-
figuration for our multi-scale convolutional network which
directly estimates HD from image embeddings.
Network Architecture
Our HD estimation model builds on the ResNet152 back-
bone, known for its strong feature extraction capabilities.
To improve the model’s HD estimation ability, we replaced
the last two layers of ResNet152 with a multi-scale convo-
lutional module.
This module uses parallel convolutional branches with
3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7 kernel sizes applied to the shared in-
termediate feature maps from ResNet152’s last block. This
multi-scale approach captures spatial information at differ-
ent scales, allowing for better extraction of the structural de-
tails crucial for HD estimation.
Replacing the final layers, which typically focus on clas-
sification, with our custom module enables direct HD calcu-
lation, retaining high-level feature information throughout
the network. We experimented with various strategies and
discovered that replacing the fourth and fifth layers offers
the best balance between efficiency and accuracy, leading to
superior HD estimation performance.
Stage
Component
Kernel / Stride
Channels
Stem
Conv + BN + ReLU
7 × 7 / 2
64
MaxPool
3 × 3 / 2
64
Conv2 x
Bottleneck-1
1 / 1, 3 / 1, 1 / 1
256
Bottleneck-2
1 / 1, 3 / 1, 1 / 1
256
Bottleneck-3
1 / 1, 3 / 1, 1 / 1
256
Multi-Scale
Conv1
3 × 3 / 1
64
Conv2
5 × 5 / 1
64
Conv3
7 × 7 / 1
64
Concat + GAP
–
192
Output
Fully Connected
–
1
Table 4: HD estimation network architecture.
Multi-scale Replacement Experiments
We performed a series of experiments by replacing differ-
ent convolutional layers in the ResNet152 architecture to
improve the efficiency and accuracy of HD estimation. The
original ResNet152 consists of five stages, where each stage
progressively extracts deeper features through multiple con-
volutions, with each successive stage reducing the image
size.
Thus, we conducted experiments by replacing various
stages of the convolutional layers with a multi-scale con-
volution module (3 × 3, 5 × 5, 7 × 7 kernels). Additionally,
we performed an ablation study on the selection of kernel
sizes in the multi-scale convolutional module in Table 5.
The results demonstrated that replacing the Stages 4 and
5 layers provided the best balance between HD estimation
efficiency and accuracy in Table 6. While replacing more
stages of ResNet152 reduced time consumption, it also re-
sulted in a loss of deeper convolutional image embeddings,
significantly impacting accuracy. Furthermore, the choice of
kernel size played a crucial role in performance. Combin-
ing 3 × 3, 5 × 5, and 7 × 7 kernels yielded the best results,
capturing fine-grained details and larger, global structures.
The modified network, with only Stage 4 and 5 replaced,
and the optimal kernel combination, extracted structural fea-
tures more effectively, leading to improved HD prediction
with optimal performance.
Kernel Size
Time (s)
Loss
(a)
0.30
0.01
(b)
0.33
0.009
(c)
0.38
0.009
(a, b)
0.31
0.007
(b, c)
0.34
0.007
(a, b, c)
0.32
0.005
Table 5: Ablation study on multi-scale convolutions for HD
estimation. Kernels: (a) 3 × 3, (b) 5 × 5, (c) 7 × 7.
Model Architecture
Time(s)
Accuracy Error
Full ResNet152
0.40
0.012
Replacement for Stage 5
0.37
0.008
Replacement for Stages 4-5
0.32
0.005
Replacement for Stages 3-5
0.29
0.020
Replacement for Stages 2-5
0.27
0.037
Table 6: Performance comparison of different ResNet152 ar-
chitectures for HD estimation.
Training Details
The model was trained using the mean squared error (MSE)
loss between the predicted and ground-truth HD values. Op-
timization was performed using the Adam optimizer with an
initial learning rate of 1e−4, batch size of 32, and training
for 300 epochs. All input images were resized to 224 × 224
and normalized to [0, 1].
Appendix B: Training Strategy
Our HD estimation model’s training incorporated the Mono-
tonic MMDS strategy, which gradually introduces the influ-
ence of the HD loss over time. This approach ensures the
model strikes a balance between visual quality and structural
diversity, allowing for efficient convergence without overfit-
ting.
In the early stages of training (e.g., epoch 100–300), the
model produced highly noisy outputs with significant vari-
ance, as illustrated in Figure 8. These early-stage images
lack coherent structure, resulting in unreliable HD estima-
tions that fluctuate considerably (e.g., HD = 1.94, s2 = 0.067
at epoch 100). Introducing HD loss too early under such
conditions could destabilize training and deteriorate image
fidelity. As training advances, image quality progressively
improved, and HD estimations became more consistent and


--- Page 11 ---
Figure 7: Additional samples generated by FGM-HD across different categories, showcasing structural complexity and visual
diversity.
meaningful (e.g., by epoch 800–1000, HD stabilized around
1.7 with low variance). This justified our strategy of delay-
ing the incorporation of HD loss until the model has reached
a more stable generative phase. By gradually increasing the
HD loss weight after epoch 300, our MMDS stratrgy en-
abled a smooth transition toward enhanced structural diver-
sity, without compromising visual quality.
Training was stopped after 1,000 epochs, as further train-
ing did not significantly improve the loss or diversity met-
rics. The MMDS strategy gradually increased the HD loss,
and by epoch 1,000, the model achieved the optimal bal-
ance between visual quality and diversity. Continuing be-
yond this point would likely result in diminishing returns,
as further adjustments to the HD loss did not yield substan-
tial gains. This stopping criterion prevents overfitting, ensur-
ing the model maintains a good balance and converges effi-
ciently at epoch 1,000, achieving the desired performance.
This strategy allows the model to learn effectively and ef-
ficiently, focusing on quality and diversity while avoiding
unnecessary computational cost from further epochs.
Appendix C: Datasets
Fractal Dataset Construction
We constructed a dedicated fractal dataset to benchmark HD
estimation and diversity evaluation in a controlled setting,
as shown in Figure 9. The dataset contains 1,200 synthetic
images with a 256 × 256 resolution, consisting of:
• Canonical fractal images (1/3): e.g., Sierpinski triangle,
Mandelbrotset, and Koch snowflake, with known theoret-
ical HD values.
• IFS-generated fractals (1/3): Images generated using
the IFS with varying contraction coefficients and affine
rules to produce diverse recursive structures.
Figure 8: Evolution of image quality and HD variance across
training epochs. Early-stage generations are noisy with un-
stable HD values, while later epochs yield clearer images
with more reliable HD estimations.
• FractalDB samples with HD approximation (1/3): A
curated subset of fractal textures from FractalDB, where
HD values are estimated using the box counting method
and used as regression targets.
ImageNet HD Estimation
In addition, we evaluated the HD estimation on the
ImageNet-1000 dataset, where we generated 50 images per
category. For each image, we computed the median and
mean HD values for each category. This provided a wide
range of HD distribution values spanning from 1.1 to 1.9,


--- Page 12 ---
Figure 9: Representative samples from the constructed frac-
tal dataset.
Figure 10: The mean and median HD values from the 1000
ImageNet categories.
covering a diverse set of geometric complexities across the
dataset.
The HD values computed for ImageNet-1000 images
were used as part of the thresholding mechanism for HD-
based filtering. These computed HD values served as a pre-
liminary standard for threshold selection, further fine-tuned
as described in HD Sampling Threshold section. Further-
more, this dataset enabled the quantitative validation of our
HD estimation models and supported HD-supervised train-
ing and filtering pipelines. Example images from each cate-
gory are illustrated in Figure 10.
Appendix D: Qualitative Sample Gallery
To further illustrate our FGM-HD framework’s effective-
ness, a diverse selection of 256 × 256 samples generated
using our FGM-HD are presented in Figure 7. These exam-
ples span a wide range of semantic categories and demon-
strate the model’s ability to synthesize visually coherent and
structurally richer outputs.
Appendix E: Parameter Selection
We performed a series of experiments to evaluate the impact
of µ and γ on the MMDS strategy shown in Table 7. The
smoothness of the loss curve was quantified using a sliding
window approach, which measures the extent of fluctuations
in the loss curve. For each experiment, we applied a sliding
window technique, moving a window of fixed size over the
loss curve to compute a statistic (e.g., mean, variance) for
each window position. This allowed us to observe the fluc-
tuations in the loss curve and compute a smoothness score.
The table below shows the results of our experiments,
where we observed that µ = 0.9 and γ = 1.0 provided
a good balance between performance (Loss) and stability
(Smoothness).
µ
γ
Loss
Smooth
Convergence
0.9
0.5
3.09
0.041
> 1000
0.9
1.0
2.85
0.047
800
0.9
5.0
6.22
0.088
700
0.8
1.0
2.98
0.045
900
0.95
1.0
2.83
0.062
800
Table 7: Impact of µ and γ on MMDS strategy performance.
