--- Page 1 ---
ROLL
ROLLMUX: Phase-Level Multiplexing for Disaggregated RL Post-Training
Tianyuan Wu†, Lunxi Cao†, Yining Wei‡, Wei Gao†, Yuheng Zhao†, Dakai An†, Shaopan Xiong§,
Zhiqiang Lv§, Ju Huang§, Siran Yang§, Yinghao Yu§, Jiamang Wang§, Lin Qu§, Wei Wang†
†Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, ‡UIUC, §Alibaba Group
Abstract
Rollout–training disaggregation is emerging as the standard
architecture for Reinforcement Learning (RL) post-training,
where memory-bound rollout and compute-bound training
are physically disaggregated onto purpose-built clusters to
maximize hardware efficiency. However, the strict synchro-
nization required by on-policy algorithms introduces severe
dependency bubbles, forcing one cluster to idle while the de-
pendent phase is running on the other. We present ROLLMUX,
a cluster scheduling framework that reclaims these bubbles
through cross-cluster orchestration. ROLLMUX is built on the
insight that the structural idleness of one job can be effectively
utilized by the active phase of another. To realize this, we in-
troduce the co-execution group abstraction, which partitions
the cluster into isolated locality domains. This abstraction
enables a two-tier scheduling architecture: an inter-group
scheduler that optimizes job placement using conservative
stochastic planning, and an intra-group scheduler that orches-
trates a provably optimal round-robin schedule. The group
abstraction also imposes a residency constraint, ensuring that
massive model states remain cached in host memory to en-
able “warm-start” context switching. We evaluate ROLLMUX
on a production-scale testbed with 328 H20 and 328 H800
GPUs. ROLLMUX improves cost efficiency by 1.84× over
standard disaggregation and 1.38× over state-of-the-art co-
located baselines, all while achieving 100% SLO attainment.
1
Introduction
The focus of Large Language Model (LLM) development
has shifted from pre-training to Reinforcement Learning (RL)
post-training [1,3,6], a critical technique for unlocking rea-
soning capabilities in complex domains such as mathemat-
ics [2], coding [31], and tool use [8,51]. To achieve optimal
performance and model stability, production practices have
converged on synchronous, on-policy algorithms [6,35,39].
This paradigm mandates a strict, iterative learning process
comprising three phases with distinct resource bottlenecks: (1)
Rollout-A
Train-A
①
①
Rollout-A
Train-A
②
②
Naïve Disaggregation
Training
Pool
Rollout
Pool
Rollout-A ②
Rollout-A
Train-A
③
②
Disaggregation & Co-Scheduling
Training
Pool
Rollout
Pool
Rollout-B ②
Train-B ①
Rollout-B ③
Dependency Bubbles
Sync-A
Sync-B
Sync-A
A meta-iteration of Co-execution Group {A, B}
Train-A ③
Train-B ②
Sync-B
Solo iteration time (𝑇!"#")
Figure 1: Comparison between existing disaggregated RL
architecture and ROLLMUX’s co-scheduling paradigm.
rollout, a memory-bandwidth-bound inference stage where
the model generates tokens as experience trajectories; (2)
training, a compute-intensive stage where model parameters
are optimized based on the rewards; and (3) synchronization,
a network-bound stage where updated model parameters are
propagated back to inference workers.
To accommodate the divergent resource demands of these
phases, production deployment increasingly employs a dis-
aggregated architecture [10, 44, 49, 58]. Unlike monolithic
provisioning, this architecture separates the rollout and train-
ing phases onto purpose-built clusters (see Figure 1): a rollout
pool consisting of cost-effective, inference-optimized GPUs
(e.g., NVIDIA H20) and a training pool of high-performance,
compute-optimized GPUs (e.g., NVIDIA H800). By align-
ing hardware capabilities with specific phase characteristics,
disaggregation resolves the resource mismatches inherent in
a monolithic setup. Consequently, it achieves superior cost
efficiency and comparable throughput despite the introduction
of cross-cluster synchronization overheads [10,44,49,58].
However, disaggregation introduces a fundamental effi-
ciency challenge caused by dependency bubbles. Due to the
strict synchronization required by on-policy learning, the
training cluster must remain idle during rollout, and vice
versa (Figure 1-top), leading to severe cluster underutiliza-
tion. While systems such as AReaL [10], StreamRL [58], and
AsyncFlow [16] attempt to eliminate these bubbles by adopt-
arXiv:2512.11306v2  [cs.DC]  15 Dec 2025


--- Page 2 ---
ing asynchronous, off-policy algorithms, they achieve high
utilization only by relaxing the synchronization requirements.
This relaxation introduces sample staleness that often compro-
mises model accuracy and convergence stability, rendering it
unsuitable for tasks that demand strict on-policy performance.
We present ROLLMUX, a cross-cluster scheduling frame-
work for disaggregated RL post-training that mitigates depen-
dency bubbles by elevating the optimization scope from the
individual job to cluster-level orchestration. Our key insight
is that the dependency bubbles inherent to one job can be
effectively utilized to serve another. ROLLMUX exploits this
by orchestrating multiple RL jobs into a co-execution group,
tightly “weaving” their rollout and training phases across the
two resource pools (Figure 1-bottom). This co-scheduling ap-
proach enables efficient time-multiplexing of both rollout and
training GPUs, maximizing utilization while preserving the
synchronous dependencies required for on-policy learning.
While intuitive, realizing this co-scheduling benefit in pro-
duction is non-trivial due to three primary challenges. (C1)
First, production RL jobs exhibit extreme workload hetero-
geneity in model sizes (3B–32B), response lengths, and in-
teraction patterns (Figure 2), leading to highly diverse phase
durations and resource demands. Naive time-multiplexing of
such diverse workloads results in severe interference: for in-
stance, pairing two rollout-heavy jobs creates a bottleneck that
substantially delays both (Figure 3). Identifying an optimal,
interference-free schedule for these heterogeneous workloads
formulates a Job Shop Scheduling problem [23], which is
known to be NP-hard. (C2) Second, unlike standard deep
learning workloads with stable iteration times, RL rollouts
are highly stochastic: LLM generation follows a long-tailed
distribution [12,17,59], where a few straggler requests can
unpredictably prolong phase durations, rendering static plans
obsolete. (C3) Third, efficient time-multiplexing is fundamen-
tally constrained by context-switching costs. RL post-training
is inherently stateful, requiring the management of hundreds
of gigabytes of model weights and optimizer states (Table 2).
Repeatedly loading these massive states over a bandwidth-
limited cross-cluster network induces prohibitive cold-start
latencies—up to 80 seconds per switch (Figure 4)—which
can easily offset the throughput gains of co-scheduling.
ROLLMUX addresses these challenges via a holistic
algorithm-system co-design. At the core is a near-optimal
scheduling algorithm. The goal is to minimize the total re-
source provisioning cost—thereby minimizing dependency
bubbles—while adhering to job-specified SLOs, defined as the
acceptable slowdown relative to solo execution (Figure 1-top).
To tackle the intractability of heterogeneous scheduling (C1),
ROLLMUX decomposes the global optimization problem into
two tractable decisions: (1) inter-group scheduling, which
identifies jobs for group co-execution and, (2) intra-group
scheduling, which orchestrates execution sequences within a
co-execution group. When a new job arrives, the inter-group
scheduler scans for an existing co-execution group where the
job can be placed without violating the SLOs of any group
member. Among all SLO-compliant placement options, it se-
lects the one that yields the minimum marginal provisioning
cost; if no such group exists, it provisions a new, isolated
group. Within each group, the intra-group scheduler employs
a round-robin schedule, a policy we prove is optimal for min-
imizing dependency bubbles in this context (§4.3).
To handle runtime stochasticity (C2), ROLLMUX adopts a
two-pronged strategy combining conservative admission con-
trol with long-tail migration. For inter-group placement, the
scheduler assumes a worst-case scenario where all responses
reach the maximum token length, ensuring that SLO guar-
antees hold even under maximum load (§4.2). At runtime,
the intra-group scheduler dynamically adapts to the observed
response distribution. It employs long-tail migration, oppor-
tunistically moving long responses to a small subset of devices
to free up the majority of the rollout pool, thereby allowing
the next job to begin pipelined execution immediately (§4.3)
Finally, to mitigate the prohibitive switching overheads
(C3), ROLLMUX implements a warm-start mechanism. By
rightsizing co-execution groups to fit within the host memory
of the worker nodes, ROLLMUX ensures that all necessary job
states, such as model weights, optimizer states, and execution
contexts, remain cached in host memory. When a context
switch is required, the worker simply loads the cached state
from host memory to the GPU, rather than fetching it across
the slow cluster interconnect or from disk. This optimization
reduces context switching latency by two orders of magnitude
(Figure 4), making fine-grained time-multiplexing practical.
To enforce these fine-grained schedules, ROLLMUX in-
troduces a phase-centric control model that treats individual
RL phases as first-class schedulable entities. This abstraction
exposes the job’s internal dependency graph to the sched-
uler, transparently managing job state loading required for the
warm-start mechanism. Furthermore, ROLLMUX optimizes
cross-cluster model synchronization via a topology-aware
broadcast scheme. It pipes a single model copy across the
slow inter-cluster link through parallel point-to-point streams,
then utilizes high-speed local fabrics (e.g., NVLink or Infini-
Band) for intra-cluster broadcasting, effectively eliminating
the synchronization bottleneck in disaggregated setups.
We implemented ROLLMUX atop ROLL [43] and evalu-
ated it in a production-scale disaggregated testbed compris-
ing a rollout pool of 328 H20 GPUs and a training pool of
328 H800 GPUs. End-to-end replays of production work-
loads on these two clusters reveal that ROLLMUX reduces
total resource provisioning costs by up to 1.84× compared
to naive disaggregation and 1.38× compared to the state-of-
the-art veRL [41] baseline, all while maintaining 100% SLO
attainment (§7.4). Large-scale trace-driven simulations fur-
ther confirm that ROLLMUX’s inter- and intra-group schedul-
ing combined operates within 6% of the theoretical optimum
identified via brute-force search (§7.5).
2


--- Page 3 ---
2
Background and Motivation
RL Post-Training Workload Characterization. RL post-
training has evolved into a cornerstone workload for modern
AI infrastructure. In our production clusters, the volume of
RL jobs nearly tripled within six months, growing from 5k
monthly jobs in April to over 14k in September 2025, driven
largely by the need to instill complex reasoning capabilities
in LLMs [3, 6, 8, 39, 43]. Unlike LLM pre-training, which
is a uniform compute stream, the standard RL post-training
workflow comprises repeated cycles across three phases with
distinct resource bottlenecks. (1) Rollout: The actor LLM
generates responses for a batch of input prompts, which are
subsequently evaluated to collect the reward feedback. This
phase is characterized by high memory bandwidth pressure
due to KV-cache operations but relatively low arithmetic in-
tensity. On high-end training GPUs, this results in severe
compute underutilization [10,17,58]. (2) Training: The actor
LLM’s parameters are optimized based on the reward feed-
back. This phase is highly compute-intensive and requires
massive floating-point throughput and high-bandwidth inter-
connects (e.g., NVLink and InfiniBand) for gradient aggre-
gation [42]. (3) Synchronization: Updated parameters must
be broadcast from training workers to rollout workers. This
phase is network-bound, often becoming a bottleneck when
workers are distributed across different physical domains.
The Case for Disaggregated RL. The divergent resource re-
quirements of rollout and training create a fundamental ineffi-
ciency in traditional monolithic, co-located deployments [41],
where rollout and training are time-multiplexed on a sin-
gle cluster of homogeneous, compute-optimized GPUs (e.g.,
NVIDIA H100/H800). This forces the memory-bound roll-
out to run on expensive high-FLOPS hardware, leading to
significant resource mismatches and increased total cost of
ownership (TCO) [49,58].
Disaggregation offers a promising solution to address this
mismatch [10,44,49,58]. In this setup, the RL workload is dis-
aggregated across two purpose-specific resource pools (Fig-
ure 1-bottom): training is retained on a pool of costly, high-
FLOPS GPUs (e.g., H100/H800), while rollout is offloaded
to a cluster of cost-effective, inference-optimized GPUs (e.g.,
H20), which offer high HBM capacity and bandwidth at only
a fraction of the cost (Table 1). Compared to monolithic pro-
visioning, disaggregation aligns hardware capabilities with
phase characteristics, offering superior TCO in theory.
Dependency Bubbles. While disaggregation addresses hard-
ware mismatches, its efficiency can be significantly under-
mined by dependency bubbles. State-of-the-art RL post-
training relies on synchronous, on-policy algorithms to ensure
training stability and model quality [6,15,35,39]. This syn-
chronization constraint mandates that the training pool must
remain idle while waiting for the rollout pool to generate fresh
experiences, and conversely, the rollout pool must remain idle
Accelerator
Comp.
HBM Cap.
HBM B/w
Cost
(TFLOPS)
(GB)
(TB/s)
($/h) [61]
H20
148
96
4.0
1.85
H800
989.5
80
3.35
5.28
Table 1: Performance specifications and cost-effectiveness of
the GPUs used in our disaggregated clusters [58,61].
while waiting for the training pool to update parameters, as
illustrated in Figure 1-top.
Existing systems such as AReaL [10,49], StreamRL [58],
and AsyncFlow [16] attempt to eliminate these bubbles by
adopting asynchronous, off-policy algorithms. However, de-
coupling rollout from training introduces sample staleness,
which frequently compromises model convergence and final
accuracy, rendering these solutions unsuitable for tasks de-
manding strict on-policy performance. Consequently, produc-
tion deployments often revert to synchronous execution at the
cost of significant resource idleness. In fact, our evaluation in
§7.4 reveals that the idle time induced by dependency bubbles
forces disaggregated setups to incur even higher provisioning
costs ($0.94k/h) than the hardware-mismatched co-located
baselines ($0.71k/h), despite using cheaper GPUs for rollout.
Thus, without a scheduling mechanism to reclaim this lost
capacity, the theoretical TCO benefits of disaggregation are
effectively nullified by system-level inefficiencies.
3
Scheduling Opportunities and Challenges
In this section, we identify the opportunities for mitigating de-
pendency bubbles in disaggregated RL post-training through
cluster-level scheduling. We then examine the algorithmic
and system-level challenges in realizing these opportunities.
3.1
The Co-Scheduling Opportunity
From the perspective of a single job, the dependency bubbles
described in §2 are unavoidable without violating the synchro-
nization requirements of on-policy algorithms. However, in
shared, multi-tenant clusters running diverse RL workloads,
these individual inefficiencies represent available capacity
that can be reclaimed through global orchestration.
Our key insight is that the idle resources constituting one
job’s dependency bubbles can be utilized to execute the ac-
tive phase of another. By orchestrating jobs into co-execution
groups, the scheduler can tightly “weave” together their work-
flows, ensuring that the compute-intensive training phase of
one job executes in parallel with the memory-bound rollout
phase of another (Figure 1-bottom). This interleaved execu-
tion pattern effectively hides dependency bubbles, allowing
the system to simultaneously saturate both the cost-effective
rollout pool and the high-performance training pool, thereby
maximizing cluster-wide efficiency without compromising
the synchronization requirements of on-policy learning.
3


--- Page 4 ---






















	



	













" !

 
	


	
	
 	



 	

#"
 
Model Size
Max Len
Interaction
Figure 2: Top 10 popular RL post-training workloads in our
production cluster: jobs’ phase durations are highly diverse.
[S], [M] refers to single/multi-turn interaction during rollout.






	
	









	
	









	
	






	
	
J1: 4B, 8K
Multi-turn
J2: 8B, 8K
Multi-turn
Both slow down!
Rollout contention
Figure 3: A bad case of naive time-multiplexing: two rollout-
heavy jobs compete for a rollout node and both slow down.
3.2
Challenges
However, fully unlocking the benefits of co-scheduling at
production scale is non-trivial due to three primary challenges.
C1: Workload Heterogeneity and Scheduling Intractabil-
ity. First, realizing efficient co-scheduling is complicated by
the extreme diversity of production RL workloads. As de-
picted in Figure 2, jobs in our cluster span a wide spectrum of
model sizes (3B–32B), response lengths (4k–32k tokens), and
interaction modes (single- vs. multi-turn). This heterogeneity
manifests as highly variable phase durations, ranging from
50s to over 900s, and significant phase skew; for instance,
multi-turn agentic workloads often exhibit rollout phases that
are 3× to 4× longer than their corresponding training phases.
Consequently, naive time-multiplexing often proves detri-
mental due to resource contention. For example, arbitrarily
pairing two rollout-heavy jobs creates a bottleneck on the
inference nodes, forcing both jobs to stall. As illustrated in
Figure 3, such contention results in severe performance degra-
dation, slowing down concurrent jobs by 1.40× and 1.64×,
respectively. To avoid such interference, the scheduler must
identify optimal packings that satisfy strict performance SLOs.
However, mapping these heterogeneous, phase-skewed work-
loads to available resources formulates a Job Shop Scheduling
problem [13,23], which is known to be NP-hard even under
the simplifying assumption of deterministic phase durations.
C2: Stochastic Runtime and Skewness Bubbles. Second,
efficient scheduling orchestration is complicated by the in-
herent stochasticity of RL workloads. Unlike pre-training,
RL rollout creates a dynamic workload where execution time
depends on the variable length of generated responses, which
Model Size
3B
7B
14B
32B
Rollout
113.4
275.7
445.4
490.3(TP=2)
Train
156.2
240.0(TP=2)
456.1(TP=2)
520.4(TP=4)
Table 2: Memory footprint (GB) required for caching rollout
or training actors on an 8-GPU node across model sizes.
3B
7B
14B
32B
25
50
75
Time (s)
25.3
38.8
60.4
81.7
0.8
0.9
1.8
1.7
Rollout
3B
7B
14B
32B
25
50
75
26.7
32.7
59.0
81.2
1.9
4.1
4.7
5.9
Training
Cold-DiskLoad
Cold-ControlInit
Warm
Figure 4: Cold and warm start latency for rollout (left) and
training (right) across model sizes on an 8-GPU node.
follows a long-tail distribution (Figure 11). This introduces
two distinct system challenges. First, the workload is non-
stationary: the distribution of response lengths drifts across
iterations as the model updates, with a few "straggler" requests
frequently reaching the maximum token limit [12,58,59]. Be-
cause training computation scales linearly with token count,
this rollout variance propagates to the subsequent training
phase, rendering static orchestration planning obsolete. Sec-
ond, long-tail responses result in skewness bubbles during the
rollout phase [58,59]. Within a rollout batch, early-finishing
GPUs must idle while waiting for stragglers, effectively serial-
izing the batch completion. This forces the scheduler to solve
a dynamic variant of the Job Shop Scheduling problem, where
task durations are unpredictable, time-varying, and prone to
significant internal resource fragmentation.
C3: Context Switching Overhead and Memory Residency.
Third, the granularity of efficient time-multiplexing is funda-
mentally constrained by the cost of inter-job context switch-
ing. Unlike stateless LLM inference [11], RL post-training
is inherently stateful, managing a massive working set that
includes large model weights, optimizer states, and complex
execution contexts such as dataset pipelines and environment
states. Reconstructing these states from scratch upon every
switch—known as a cold start—incurs prohibitive overheads
due to both data- and control-plane re-initialization. As shown
in Figure 4, cold-starting a rollout or training phase on an 8-
GPU node (H20 for rollout and H800 for training) takes up to
80 seconds, degrading end-to-end throughput by up to 45%.
Furthermore, unlike serverless systems that can mitigate
cold starts via high-speed RDMA state transfers [11,53,55],
disaggregated RL setups are bottlenecked by limited cross-
cluster Ethernet bandwidth. Consequently, the only viable
mechanism for rapid switching is a warm-start strategy, where
job states remain cached in local host DRAM. While this
approach significantly reduces switching latency by up to
48× (Figure 4), it imposes severe memory pressure. Since a
single phase’s state consumes hundreds of gigabytes (Table 2),
even high-memory nodes (1–2 TB) are strictly limited to a
4


--- Page 5 ---
residency of two to five concurrent jobs. This creates a tight
residency constraint, forcing the scheduler to optimize for
utilization within a bounded memory budget.
4
The ROLLMUX Scheduling Design
We present ROLLMUX, a cluster scheduling framework
that reclaims dependency bubbles for disaggregated RL
post-training through cross-cluster orchestration. ROLLMUX
adopts a holistic algorithm-system co-design: we decouple
the logical scheduling policy (§4) from the underlying exe-
cution plane (§5). This section details the core scheduling
algorithms.
4.1
Co-Execution Group
ROLLMUX’s scheduling objective is to minimize total re-
source provisioning cost—and thereby minimize dependency
bubbles—while strictly adhering to job performance SLOs
and node memory constraints. To achieve this, we introduce
the co-execution group abstraction. A co-execution group is a
set of jobs that share a specific pair of rollout and training re-
source pools via time-multiplexing. Within a group, all rollout
phases execute on the group’s assigned rollout workers, and
all training phases execute on the group’s training workers. By
partitioning jobs into disjoint groups, ROLLMUX transforms
the intractable global co-scheduling problem into a collection
of independent, parallel sub-problems within groups.
This group-based scheduling directly addresses two pri-
mary challenges identified in §3.2. First, by decomposing
the cluster-wide search space into smaller, isolated groups,
ROLLMUX ensures that scheduling decisions remain compu-
tationally tractable at production scale, even with thousands
of concurrent jobs (C1). Second, the group abstraction serves
as a strict locality domain. By pinning jobs to specific sets
of nodes, ROLLMUX enforces the residency constraint: it en-
sures that the massive working sets (weights and optimizer
states) of all group members remain resident in host DRAM.
This guarantees that context switches can be served via high-
speed local memory transfers (warm starts) rather than slow
disk or cross-cluster fetches (C3).
The co-execution group abstraction naturally leads to a two-
tier scheduling hierarchy: (1) inter-group scheduling (§4.2),
which assigns arriving jobs to groups to minimize provision-
ing costs while satisfying memory and SLO constraints, and
(2) intra-group scheduling (§4.3), which orchestrates the run-
time execution order of job phases within a group to minimize
dependency bubbles.
4.2
Inter-Group Scheduler
Problem Formulation. We model the cluster as a collection
of disjoint co-execution groups. We define a co-execution
group G as a tuple (JG,RG,TG,ΦG), where JG is the set of ac-
tive RL jobs in the group, RG and TG denote the sets of rollout
(e.g., H20) and training (e.g., H800) GPUs provisioned for the
group, and ΦG = {Pj} j∈JG is the set of resource placements,
where Pj specifies the exact subset of rollout and training
nodes job j is pinned to. This pinning Pj strictly determines
where the job’s state is cached to enable its warm start.
The inter-group scheduler solves the following online
placement problem: upon the arrival of a job j, it must as-
sign j to a co-execution group—either an existing one or a
newly created one—and allocates specific resource placement
Pj. To make optimal placement, we define the provisioning
cost of a group, Cost(G), as the aggregate hourly price (Ta-
ble 1) of all allocated GPUs in its rollout and training pools
(RG and TG). The scheduler’s objective is to minimize the
marginal provisioning cost ∆incurred by admitting job j:
minG ∆= Cost(G′)−Cost(G),
where G′ represents the group’s state after accommodating
job j. This formulation naturally encourages “packing” jobs
into existing dependency bubbles (where ∆= 0) over provi-
sioning new hardware (where ∆> 0). The placement decision
is subject to two critical constraints:
1) Memory Residency. To guarantee warm starts (C3), the
aggregate working set of all jobs pinned to a specific node
must not exceed that node’s host memory capacity.
2) SLO Attainment. The placement must satisfy the perfor-
mance SLOs of both the new job and all existing jobs. The
SLO is defined by each job as the tolerance for co-execution
slowdown (e.g., 1.1×) relative to solo execution.1 Formally,
for every job k in the updated group G, we require:
T co-exec
k
≤SLOk ×T solo
k
.
Here, T solo
k
is the estimated iteration time when job k is run-
ning alone (Figure 1-top), which is simply the sum of its
rollout and training phase durations; T co-exec
k
is the expected
iteration time under co-execution, which is derived by simu-
lating the intra-group schedule (§4.3).
Making Placement Decisions. Navigating the search space to
find an optimal placement is non-trivial due to both workload
heterogeneity (C1) and runtime stochasticity (C2). ROLL-
MUX addresses these complexities with three strategies.
1) Handling Stochasticity via Conservative Planning. To
guarantee SLO compliance despite the volatile, unpredictable
job execution time (C2), ROLLMUX decouples admission
control from runtime optimization. The inter-group scheduler
acts as a “gatekeeper” that makes placement decisions based
on worst-case execution bounds. Specifically, for an arriving
job j, we estimate its phase durations (T roll
j
and T train
j
) assum-
ing that every generated response reaches the maximum token
limit defined in the job configuration. By planning against this
upper bound, we ensure that the chosen placement satisfies
the SLO constraints even under the most adverse stochastic
1We assume a tight SLO, e.g., tolerance for up to 2× slowdown.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Roll-A
Direct
Packing
[Small Job]
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-A
Train-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Train-C
Roll-C
Train-C
Roll-C
Rollout
Scaling
[Skew Job]
Isolated
Group
[Large Job]
Train-C
Roll-C
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Train-C
Roll-C
Existing Jobs: {A, B}, New Job to Schedule: C
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-A
Train-A
Train-C
Roll-C
Train-C
Roll-C
Best placement strategy depends on new job C’s profile (𝑻𝑪
𝒓𝒐𝒍𝒍, 𝑻𝑪
𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒊𝒏)
Figure 5: Placement strategies of the inter-group scheduler.
Roll-A
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Bubbles
Train-A
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-C
Train-C
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Roll-C
Train-C
Job Delay
Fully-saturated
Under-utilized
Over-saturated
𝑇!
"#$% < 𝑇&
'('")
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
𝑇!
"#$% = 𝑇&
'('")
𝑇!
"#$% > 𝑇&
'('")
Figure 6: Status of a co-execution group. ROLLMUX only
places new jobs into under-utilized groups with unsatu-
rated dependency bubbles and avoids creating over-saturated
groups.
conditions. If the actual runtime durations are shorter, which
is typical, the intra-group scheduler dynamically reclaims the
resulting slack to improve utilization (§4.3).
2) Optimal Placement Search. With these conservative
estimates, ROLLMUX performs a global search to minimize
the marginal provisioning cost ∆. For each arriving job, the
scheduler iterates through all candidate groups and evaluates
three placement strategies:
• Direct Packing: Inserting the job into existing depen-
dency bubbles within a group without provisioning new
resources (Figure 5-top). This maximizes utilization of
already-paid-for capacity.
• Rollout Scaling: If a group has available training capacity
but is bottlenecked on inference, which is common with
rollout-heavy agentic workloads, ROLLMUX scales up the
group’s rollout pool by provisioning just enough rollout
nodes to accommodate the new job (Figure 5-middle).
• Isolated Provisioning: As a fallback, ROLLMUX provi-
sions a new, isolated group for the new job (Figure 5-
bottom).
The scheduler iterates through these strategies2, selecting the
valid placement that minimizes the marginal cost ∆while
satisfying both the memory residency and SLO constraints.
3) Pruning Saturated Groups. To ensure this search re-
2To avoid the significant overhead of reconfiguring distributed parallel
groups, ROLLMUX does not scale the training pool but simply adjusts the
arriving job’s data parallelism degree to match the training pool size.
mains tractable at production scale (C1), ROLLMUX proac-
tively prunes the search space. Before evaluating specific
placements, the scheduler filters out groups that are already
saturated, where the aggregate job load reaches the group’s
bottleneck resource capacity, and adding more work to the
group would lead to performance degradation.
Formally, for a group G, let T cycle
G
= maxj∈JG T solo
j
be the
natural cycle iteration time dictated by the longest job in the
group. We define the group’s bottleneck load T load
G
as the total
time required to process all phases on the bottleneck node.
Since all training nodes have identical phases, while rollout
nodes may differ (see Figure 5), we have
T load
G
= max
 
∑
j∈JG
T train
j
, max
n∈ΦG
 
∑
j on node n
T roll
j
!!
.
If T cycle
G
≥T load
G
, the group is saturated, containing no
“slack” to absorb new work (Figure 6). Such groups are pruned
immediately as any further addition would force delays.
Algorithm Summary. We integrate these strategies into a
unified online scheduling logic detailed in Algorithm 1. The
algorithm takes a new job j and the set of existing groups as
input. To find the optimal placement, the algorithm first iter-
ates through all existing groups (line 3), discarding those that
are already saturated (line 4). For each remaining candidate
group, it evaluates potential placement strategies for the job
(direct packing or rollout scaling); placements that would vio-
late memory constraints (line 8) or SLO constraints (line 10)
are discarded. The algorithm evaluates the marginal cost for
each feasible placement (lines 6–12) and updates its records if
the placement leads to a lower cost (lines 13–14). Finally, the
algorithm compares its records against the baseline cost of
provisioning a fresh, isolated group (lines 15–17) and returns
the group and job placement that yield the lowest costs.
The algorithm allows for highly efficient decision-making.
Since the number of placement strategies per group is small,
the search complexity is linear with respect to the number
of active groups. As empirically demonstrated in §7.5, this
heuristic allows the scheduler to make optimal decisions in
sub-seconds even in clusters with thousands of jobs.
4.3
Intra-Group Scheduler
Once the inter-group scheduler assigns a job to a group, the
intra-group scheduler is responsible for orchestrating the run-
time execution sequence. Its primary objective is to maxi-
mize resource utilization—and thereby minimize dependency
bubbles—within the assigned resource pools.
The Round-Robin Policy. ROLLMUX employs a cyclic
round-robin schedule. Within a co-execution group, the sched-
uler defines a meta-iteration in which every active job exe-
cutes exactly one rollout phase and one training phase (Fig-
ure 1). These phases are orchestrated sequentially on their
assigned resource pools. For example, in a group with jobs
{A,B}, the rollout pool executes RollA →RollB, while the
6


--- Page 7 ---
Algorithm 1 Inter-Group Scheduling Algorithm
Require: Job to schedule j, all existing groups {Gi}n
i=1.
Ensure: Best group G∗, best placement P∗
j .
1: procedure SCHEDULE(j,{Gi}n
i=1)
2:
∆∗←∞, G∗←None, P∗
j ←None
▷Initialize best values.
3:
for each group G in {Gi}n
i=1 do
▷Try all existing groups.
4:
if T load
G
≥T cycle
G
then
▷Skip saturated groups.
5:
continue
6:
P ←GENERATEPLACEMENTS(G)
7:
for each resource placement Pj in P do
8:
if j.mem_req ≥minnode∈Pj(node.mem_avail) then
9:
continue
10:
if exists k ∈{j}∪JG, s.t., T co-exec
k
> SLOk ×T solo
k
then
11:
continue
12:
∆←Cost(G∪{(j,Pj)})−Cost(G)
13:
if ∆< ∆∗then
14:
Update ∆∗←∆, G∗←G, P∗
j ←Pj
15:
∆←Cost({ j},{})
▷Try to place j in a new group.
16:
if ∆< ∆∗then
17:
Update ∆∗←∆, G∗←{j}, P∗
j ←{}
18:
return G∗,P∗
j
training pool executes TrainA →TrainB.
While simple, this policy is optimal under the preconditions
enforced by ROLLMUX. Recall that the inter-group sched-
uler (§4.2) proactively prunes any group where the aggregate
load exceeds the natural cycle time (T load
G
> T cycle
G
). For the
remaining unsaturated groups, their optimality is provable.
Theorem 1 (Utilization Optimality) For any unsaturated
group G, a meta-iteration schedule that executes each job’s
phases exactly once in a round-robin order maximizes the
aggregate utilization of both rollout and training pools.
Proof Sketch. The optimality rests on the definition of an
unsaturated group: the bottleneck node’s total workload T load
G
is no more than the longest job’s standalone cycle time T cycle
G
.
Intuitively, this implies that we can pack all other jobs’ corre-
sponding phases (e.g., their rollout phases) into the longest
job’s dependency bubbles (e.g., its idle rollout nodes during
training). This ensures a round-robin cycle that executes each
job’s phases exactly once to complete in time T cycle
G
. We then
empirically show any deviation from this simple schedule is
suboptimal. (1) Executing less is impossible: Omitting any job
from the cycle leads to more bubbles and starvation, which
is trivially non-optimal. (2) Executing more is inefficient: Re-
peating any job phase prolongs the cycle time as the added
phase can only start after finishing the slowest job. However,
this added duration is disproportionately larger than the useful
work added, leading to a net decrease in resource utilization.
Therefore, the round-robin schedule, which executes all
required work in the shortest possible cycle time, is utilization-
optimal. We provide a formal proof in Appendix 9.
Long-Tail Migration. While the round-robin schedule is op-
timal for deterministic workloads, production RL phases are
highly stochastic (C2). Specifically, rollout durations follow
a heavy-tailed distribution where the completion time of an
input batch is dictated by a small number of “straggler” re-
Roll-A
Train-A
Roll-B
Train-B
Training
Pool
Rollout
Pool
Roll-A
Train-A
Training
Pool
Rollout
Pool
Train-B
Roll-B
Migration for
long tails
Long-tail rollout
Training Shrink due to Unsaturated Long-Tail Rollout
Promptly
Launch job-B
Long-tail Migration + Dynamic Rollout Scaling
Figure 7: Long-tail migration effectively handles dynamism.
sponses that reach maximum token limits [12,17,58,59]. This
phenomenon creates significant intra-phase fragmentation: as
the majority of responses finish early, most GPUs in the roll-
out pool idle wait for the few stragglers to complete, creating
“skewness bubbles” (Figure 7-top).
To reclaim this fragmented capacity, ROLLMUX employs
long-tail migration to dynamically adapt the schedule at run-
time. The intra-group scheduler continuously monitors the
progress of active rollout phases. When a phase enters a tail-
bound state, triggered when a threshold of responses (e.g.,
80%) have completed, the system interrupts the execution,
consolidates the remaining long-tail responses onto a small
subset of workers, and immediately starts the next job’s roll-
out phase on the newly freed rollout GPUs (Figure 7-bottom).
This mechanism effectively pipelines the tail of one job with
the head of the next, ensuring high utilization and faster com-
pletion.
4.4
Generality and Composability
ROLLMUX is agnostic to the specific RL algorithm employed.
Its scheduling mechanism generalizes to diverse on-policy RL
algorithms, including PPO [37], GRPO [39], and DAPO [54].
While primarily designed for on-policy algorithms, ROLL-
MUX remains applicable to off-policy jobs (e.g., one-step
off-policy [58]) that exhibit structural dependency bubbles
due to insufficient overlap between training and rollout. More-
over, ROLLMUX’s cluster-level orchestration is orthogonal to
intra-job optimizations. Techniques such as parameter relo-
cation [27], request-level tail batching [12], and speculative
decoding [4,17,22,34] operate within the scope of a single
job or phase, making them fully composable with ROLLMUX.
5
The ROLLMUX Execution Plane
The scheduling policies described in §4 provide a theoretical
blueprint for reclaiming dependency bubbles. However, real-
izing these gains in production clusters requires an execution
plane capable of enforcing fine-grained decisions. This sec-
tion details the system mechanisms that bridge this gap. We
focus on two implementation challenges: (1) enabling rapid
context switching via a phase-centric control model (§5.1),
and (2) mitigating cross-cluster bandwidth bottlenecks via
7


--- Page 8 ---
topology-aware model synchronization (§5.2).
5.1
Phase-Centric Control
Conventional deep learning schedulers view the “job” as the
atomic unit of resource allocation. This coarse granularity is
insufficient to interleave distinct phases of different jobs on
the same hardware. To address this, ROLLMUX introduces
a phase-centric execution model that elevates individual RL
phases to first-class schedulable entities.
Declarative Phase Management. We model each RL job as
a dependency graph of phases. After a one-time initialization
(Init) of the job states (e.g., models, datasets), the job en-
ters a cyclic dependency loop: Rollout →Train →Sync.
ROLLMUX exposes this internal structure to the scheduler via
a declarative Python API. Users simply annotate their phase
functions with a @rollmux.phase decorator, which injects a
transparent runtime shim to manage the execution lifecycle.
When a phase is invoked, this shim first blocks execution until
it acquires a run permit from the intra-group scheduler. Upon
approval, it performs a warm start by loading the phase’s res-
ident working set from host DRAM into GPU memory. Once
the user function completes, the shim immediately offloads
the updated state back to host memory and releases the GPU
resources, making the hardware instantly available for the
next phase in the group’s queue. Crucially, ROLLMUX opti-
mizes this switching process by decoupling data plane state
from control plane context. Naively terminating a process af-
ter a phase completes would force the system to tear down and
rebuild expensive control plane (e.g., NCCL communicators,
environment handles) upon every switch. Instead, ROLLMUX
employs a lightweight suspension strategy: after offloading,
the shim places the process into a sleep loop while retaining
its control plane context without consuming GPU resources.
On the next wake-up, resuming the phase only requires reload-
ing its cached state onto the GPU, avoiding expensive cold
starts from disk and control-plane re-initialization.
Runtime Hooks. Finally, the system exposes a runtime hook
interface @rollmux.runtime_hook. This interface serves
two critical roles. First, it drives the round-robin schedule:
the intra-group scheduler maintains a FIFO queue for each
worker node. When a job’s phase completes, the hook sig-
nals the scheduler to enqueue the job’s next phase onto the
alternate resource pool’s queue (e.g., moving from rollout to
training) and starts the next waiting phase on the now-idle re-
sources. Second, it enables the long-tail migration (§4.3). By
exposing internal token generation progress, the hook allows
the scheduler to detect tail-bound states and externally trigger
migration, dynamically reconfiguring resources in real-time.
5.2
Topology-Aware Model Synchronization
To mitigate the cross-cluster bandwidth bottleneck, ROLL-
MUX employs a topology-aware communication strategy
Parameters Held
Parameters To Transfer
①Parallel P2P
②Intra-cluster Broadcast
R1
R0
R7
Train Cluster
TP0
TP1
Rollout Cluster
DP3
R3
R2
DP0
DP1
DP0
DP1
DP2
R4
R5
R6
veRL – AllGather within Micro-DP Groups (Inter-cluster Comm = 4M)
RollMux – Two-stage Update (Inter-cluster Comm = M)
R1
R0
Train Cluster
TP0
TP1
Rollout Cluster
DP3
R3
R2
DP0
DP1
DP0
DP1
DP2
R7
R4
R5
R6
Figure 8: A synchronization example from the training cluster
(TP=2, DP=2) to the rollout cluster (DP=4), where ROLLMUX
sends exactly one copy across the cross-cluster network. M
denotes the number of total parameters.
to efficiently synchronize model parameters from the train-
ing cluster to the rollout cluster. State-of-the-art RL frame-
works (e.g., veRL [41]) rely on flat collective operations like
AllGather to propagate model updates. While efficient in
monolithic clusters, this approach is pathological in disaggre-
gated setups. It treats the slow cross-cluster Ethernet link and
the fast intra-cluster InfiniBand/NVLink fabric as a single uni-
form network. Consequently, it forces every rollout worker to
independently fetch a full copy of the model parameters over
the slow cross-cluster link (Figure 8-top), causing a severe
bottleneck while leaving local high-speed fabrics idle.
ROLLMUX eliminates this inefficiency by replacing the
flat collective with a hierarchical two-stage transfer. 1⃝In
the first stage (inter-cluster scatter), ROLLMUX partitions
the updated model into N disjoint shards, where N is the
number of training GPUs. Each training GPU transmits a
unique shard to a corresponding rollout GPU via parallel
point-to-point (P2P) streams. This ensures that exactly one
full copy of the model traverses the slow cross-cluster link. 2⃝
In the second stage (intra-cluster broadcast), the receiving
GPUs immediately disseminate their shards to all other rollout
workers using the high-bandwidth InfiniBand/NVLink fabric.
This two-stage pipeline effectively mitigates the slow cross-
cluster bottleneck, minimizing overall synchronization time
and fully utilizing network hierarchies.
6
System Implementation
We implemented ROLLMUX as a fully functional cluster
scheduling framework atop ROLL [43]. The system com-
prises approximately 5.2k lines of code (LoC), written pri-
marily in Python for controllers and C++ for communication
modules.
Workflow. The system operation follows the closed loop il-
lustrated in Figure 9. Upon job submission, ROLLMUX first
launches a lightweight profiler ( 1⃝) to generate worst-case du-
8


--- Page 9 ---
③Group Placement
Job Config + SLO
Profiler
Inter-Group Scheduler (§ 4.2)
①
②(Troll, Ttrain)
Co-execution Group
Job-A
Job-B
Intra-
Group
Scheduler
(§ 4.3)
Job-C
Rollout
Actors
Train
Actors
Opt. Comm.
(§ 5.2)
④Start/Migration Signal
⑤Done Signal
Rollout Cluster
Train Cluster
Ethernet
Actor Cache in Host Memory
Figure 9: ROLLMUX system architecture.
ration estimates for the job’s rollout and training phases ( 2⃝).
These estimates are fed into the inter-group scheduler ( 3⃝),
which identifies the optimal co-execution group and resource
placement to minimize marginal cost (§4.2). Once placed,
the job comes under the control of the intra-group scheduler
(§4.3). This runtime controller orchestrates the round-robin
meta-iteration ( 4⃝), enforcing the phase-centric state manage-
ment and triggering long-tail migrations based on real-time
feedback from the runtime hooks (§5.1). Once a phase com-
pletes, ROLLMUX offloads its state to the actor cache in host
DRAM, releases GPU resources, and subsequently launches
the next job’s waiting phase from the scheduler queue ( 5⃝).
Isolation and Fault Tolerance. To ensure production-grade
reliability, ROLLMUX enforces strict fault isolation. Each job
owns a dedicated Ray [28] instance with its isolated runtime
environment. Jobs communicate exclusively with the sched-
uler via the Redis [36] channel and never directly with one
another. Consequently, a crash in one job is fully contained
within its pod, preventing error propagation and ensuring the
stability of other jobs within the same co-execution group.
7
Evaluation
We evaluate ROLLMUX to answer the following key re-
search questions. RQ1 (Co-Execution Efficacy): How effec-
tively does ROLLMUX’s co-execution mechanism manage
job groups with diverse phase profiles (§7.2)? RQ2 (Perfor-
mance Breakdown): What are the individual contributions
of ROLLMUX’s key optimizations (i.e., long-tail migration,
topology-aware model sync) to overall system performance
(§7.3)? RQ3 (Performance at Scale): How does ROLLMUX
perform under a real-world production workload trace, in
terms of cluster-level utilization and provisioning cost (§7.4)?
RQ4 (Scheduling Quality): How efficient and how close to
optimal is ROLLMUX’s scheduler (§7.5)?
Job
Turns
Model
Len3
Bsz
NT
NR
Type-A
Single-Turn
Qwen-2.5-7B
8K
256
8
8
Type-B
Single-Turn
Qwen-2.5-14B
8K
256
8
8
Type-C
Single-Turn
Qwen-2.5-32B
8K
256
16
16
Type-D
Multi-Turn
Qwen-3-8B
8K∗
256
8
8
Type-E
Multi-Turn
Qwen-3-14B
16K∗
64
8
8
Table 3: Job configurations in experiments, NT,NR are the
corresponding numbers of training/rollout GPUs.
7.1
Experimental Setup
Cluster Setup. Our experimental testbed consists of two geo-
distributed, heterogeneous clusters, where the training cluster
(Cluster-T) is equipped with compute-optimized NVIDIA
H800 GPUs, while the rollout cluster (Cluster-R) is com-
posed of cost-effective H20 GPUs. The internal fabric of
each cluster is a high-speed 400 Gbps InfiniBand network.
However, the two clusters are connected via a bandwidth-
constrained 20 Gbps Ethernet link. Table 1 details the hard-
ware specifications and hourly costs, where an H800 GPU is
2.85× more expensive than an H20 GPU.
Workloads. We construct our workloads based on real-
world traces collected from a production cluster. For micro-
benchmarks (§7.2–§7.3), we define a suite of five represen-
tative job types (Table 3) using Qwen [50] models (7B–32B)
with varying batch sizes, sequence lengths, and rollout/train-
ing GPUs, covering both single-turn RLVR (on DeepMath-
103K [39] dataset) and multi-turn agentic reasoning (on Math-
Orz57K [21] dataset). For at-scale evaluation (§7.4), we
replay a two-week trace comprising 200 heterogeneous jobs.
This trace features high variance in model sizes (3B–32B)
and diverse datasets spanning mathematics [39], software
engineering [31], games [7], and other in-house datasets.
Baselines. We compare ROLLMUX against three baselines.
• Solo Disaggregation (Solo-D): The standard disaggrega-
tion practice where jobs are executed on dedicated rollout
and training pools without time-multiplexing.
• Co-location (veRL [41]): The traditional monolithic ap-
proach, where all phases execute on the high-performance
training cluster (Cluster-T) using the popular veRL
framework. It avoids network bottlenecks but suffers from
hardware resource mismatch.
• Gavel+ [29]: An enhanced version of the heterogeneity-
aware Gavel scheduler [29], modified to support RL post-
training. Gavel+ optimizes resource allocation at the job
level (calculating optimal GPU fractions) but lacks fine-
grained control to interleave phase-level executions.
7.2
Micro-Benchmarks
To demonstrate how ROLLMUX effectively reclaims depen-
dency bubbles (§4.3), we conduct three micro-benchmarks in
3For multi-turn workloads, Len refers to a per-turn output length.
9


--- Page 10 ---
0
250 500 750 10001250
Wallclock
Time (s)
Trainer-1
Rollout-1
8×H800
8×H20
0
1
2
Per-Cost Thpt.
(Normalized)
Solo-D
Gavel+
veRL
RollMux
1.17×
1.24×
1.82×
A1-rollout
A1-train
A2-rollout
A2-train
(a) Temporal Mux (single-turn, Type-A×2).
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Wallclock
Time (s)
Trainer-1
Rollout-1
Rollout-2
Rollout-3
8×H800
8×H20
8×H20
8×H20
0
1
2
Per-Cost Thpt.
(Normalized)
Solo-D
Gavel+
veRL
RollMux
1.26×
1.57×
2.04×
D1-rollout
D1-train
D2-rollout
D2-train
E-rollout
E-train
(b) Train Mux (multi-turn, Type-D×2 + E).
0
1000
2000
3000
Wallclock
Time (s)
Trainer-1
Rollout-1
Rollout-2
Rollout-3
8×H800
8×H800
8×H20
8×H20
0
1
2
Per-Cost Thpt.
(Normalized)
Solo-D
Gavel+
veRL
RollMux
1.14×
1.27×
2.11×
C-rollout
C-train
D1-rollout
D1-train
D2-rollout
D2-train
(c) Spatial Mux (mixed, Type-C + D×2).
Figure 10: Micro-benchmarking results. For each benchmark, the left panel is a gantt chart showing the co-execution timeline;
the right panel quantifies the benefit, in which ROLLMUX achieves 1.82−2.11× higher cost-efficiency.
different multiplexing scenarios and measure cost efficiency
(throughput per dollar) against the baselines.
Temporal Multiplexing. First, we evaluate co-executing
two jobs with similar structures (Type-A) via temporal mul-
tiplexing, representing an ideal case where jobs are fully
complementary. As shown in Figure 10a, ROLLMUX per-
fectly interleaves their execution, keeping both the rollout
and training clusters fully utilized. Consequently, ROLLMUX
improves cost-efficiency by 82%, 55.6%, and 46.8% over
Solo-D, Gavel+, and veRL, respectively. The baselines fall
short because Solo-D and Gavel+ leave one resource pool idle
at all times, while the monolithic veRL underutilizes its ex-
pensive H800 compute power during memory-bound rollout
phases.
Handling Rollout-Heavy Jobs. Next, we target rollout-
heavy workloads by co-scheduling two Type-D jobs (T roll
D
≈
2.5T train
D
) and one Type-E job (T roll
E
≈6T train
E
). In this sce-
nario, ROLLMUX scales the rollout pool to 24 H20 GPUs,
dedicating an inference node to each job’s rollout phase while
time-multiplexing a single H800 training node for all training
phases in a round-robin sequence (Figure 10b). This sched-
ule achieves 104%, 61.9%, and 29.9% higher cost-efficiency
than Solo-D, Gavel+, and veRL. Solo-D and Gavel+ perform
poorly as the prolonged rollout phases force the expensive
training nodes to sit idle for extended periods.
Spatial Multiplexing. Finally, we evaluate ROLLMUX’s abil-
ity to handle heterogeneity by co-scheduling one large Type-C
job (requiring 16×H20+16×H800) and two smaller Type-
D jobs (each requiring 8×H20+16×H800). As depicted in
Figure 10c, ROLLMUX identifies the idle resources created
by the large job’s rollout phase and strategically “packs” the
two smaller jobs into these bubbles. This dynamic spatial
packing maximizes aggregate utilization, delivering 111%,
85.1%, and 66.1% higher cost-efficiency compared to Solo-D,
Gavel+, and veRL. This result highlights a critical advantage:
unlike the baselines, ROLLMUX can dynamically consolidate
diverse jobs to available capacity.
Interference Overhead. To quantify the cost of co-execution,
we measure the throughput degradation caused by inter-job
contention (Table 4). Because the inter-group scheduler proac-
tively prunes placements that would violate residency or per-
formance constraints, ROLLMUX incurs a minimal 5—9%
Micro-benchmark
Solo Disaggregation
Ideal
ROLLMUX
(a) Temporal Mux
1.00
1.07
0.98
(b) Train Mux
1.00
1.07
0.95
(c) Spatial Mux
1.00
1.11
0.91
Table 4: Normalized training throughput, showing ROLLMUX
incurs less than a 10% overhead compared to isolated exe-
cution (baseline 1.0). For reference, ‘Ideal’ represents the
performance ceiling from co-locating all phases on H800.
overhead compared to solo execution. Even compared to an
idealized co-location upper bound where each job runs all
phases exclusively on expensive H800 GPUs with zero net-
work cost, the throughput gap remains a modest 9.0–20.0%,
confirming that the heavy lifting of context switching and syn-
chronization is effectively masked by our optimizations, and
bad placements potentially causing contention are precluded.
7.3
Ablation Study
We next break down ROLLMUX’s performance to quantify
the individual contributions of its key runtime optimizations.
Long-Tail Migration. First, we evaluate the effectiveness
of request migration in neutralizing the stochasticity of RL
rollout (§4.3). As illustrated in Figure 11-left, the generation
length of rollout requests exhibits a pronounced heavy-tailed
distribution across all model sizes and output lengths, where
a small fraction of "straggler" requests persist long after the
majority have finished. Figure 11-right demonstrates that en-
abling request migration effectively reclaims the capacity of
“skewness bubbles.” By preemptively migrating the tail-bound
requests to a small subset of GPUs, ROLLMUX allows the
next job’s rollout phase to begin immediately on the freed
majority of resources, improving the end-to-end throughput
by 1.06× to 1.28×. Notably, the gains are most pronounced
for workloads with longer output sequences (e.g., 14B-8k)
where the straggler effect is amplified. The benefit is slightly
more modest when pairing jobs with highly dissimilar char-
acteristics (e.g., 7B-8k and 14B-8k), as the natural variance
in their phase durations already mitigates some contention.
Topology-Aware Model Sync. Next, we evaluate the effi-
ciency of ROLLMUX’s topology-aware model synchroniza-
tion scheme in geo-disaggregated setups (§5.2). As shown
in Figure 12, for a single-node update (8 H800s →8 H20s),
10


--- Page 11 ---
0
4k
8k
Output Len
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
7B-4k
7B-8k
14B-8k
[7B-4k]
×2
[7B-8k]
×2
[7B-8k,
14B-8k]
[14B-8k]
×2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Throughput
(Normalized)
1.12
1.19
1.06
1.28
w/ Mig.
w/o Mig.
Figure 11: Left: the long-tail distribution of LLM generation
length in the rollout phase. Right: effectiveness of request
migration in mitigating long-tail rollouts.
7B
14B
32B
8 →8 GPUs
0
20
40
Sync Time (s)
7.5
13.8
30.7
0.9
1.7
3.9
7B
14B
32B
16 →16 GPUs
0
20
40
8.2
15.2
33.8
3.1
5.8
12.3
veRL
RollMux-P2P
RollMux-Broadcast
Figure 12: Model synchronization time. Left: single-node,
from 8 H800 to 8 H20 GPUs. Right: multi-node, from 16
H800 to 16 H20 GPUs. ROLLMUX’s topology-aware model
sync is up to 8.33× faster compared to veRL [41].
ROLLMUX achieves 7.87×–8.33× speedup over veRL. This
significant improvement stems from its hierarchical strat-
egy: ROLLMUX transmits exactly one copy of the model
parameters across the slow inter-cluster link and leverages the
high-bandwidth local NVLink fabric for the final intra-cluster
broadcast. In contrast, the baseline is bottlenecked by redun-
dantly fetching independent copies for every rollout GPU.
This advantage scales robustly: even in a multi-node setting
(16 H800s →16 H20s), ROLLMUX maintains 2.62×–2.75×
speedup (Figure 12), confirming that our topology-aware pro-
tocol effectively masks the bandwidth limitations inherent to
disaggregated clusters.
7.4
ROLLMUX at Scale
To evaluate ROLLMUX’s performance at production-scale, we
replay a two-week trace from one of our cluster tenants. The
trace comprises 200 highly heterogeneous RL post-training
jobs using Qwen-family models, including both single- and
multi-turn interaction patterns on diverse datasets. Among
them, the model sizes range from 3B to 32B, the maximum
response lengths range from 4k to 32k tokens (mean: 12.1k),
and the mean job duration is 27.9 hours. We assign each job
an SLO sampled uniformly from (1,2) relative to its solo run-
time. We compare ROLLMUX against the industry-standard
solo disaggregation (Solo-D), with 1:1 rollout and training
GPUs, and the monolithic co-located baseline (veRL).
In terms of cluster provisioning cost, ROLLMUX spends
only $510 per hour to accommodate all jobs, a 1.84× and
1.38× reduction compared to Solo-D and veRL, respectively,
while meeting all job SLOs (Figure 13a). This cost efficiency
directly stems from our scheduling algorithm (Algorithm 1)
that minimizes the marginal cost upon job arrivals.
In terms of resource efficiency, ROLLMUX reduces depen-
dency bubbles by 24.4% on the rollout cluster and 43.1%
on the training cluster compared to solo disaggregation. The
improvement is more pronounced for training because the
workloads are typically rollout-heavy, leaving more bubbles
on the training GPUs (Figure 13b and Figure 13c). By tightly
packing jobs, ROLLMUX requires a peak of only 152 H800
GPUs for training, a 2.16× reduction from the 328 H800s
needed by both veRL and solo disaggregation. For rollout,
ROLLMUX’s peak usage is 216 H20 GPUs, a 1.52× reduction
compared to the 328 H20s required by solo disaggregation. Al-
though the co-located veRL baseline uses no separate rollout
GPUs, ROLLMUX is still 1.38× more cost-effective overall.
It achieves this by offloading memory-bandwidth-intensive
rollout phases to cheaper H20 GPUs via disaggregation while
filling the resulting dependency bubbles by co-scheduling.
7.5
Scheduler Performance
We finally evaluate the optimality and scalability of ROLL-
MUX’s inter-group scheduler (§4.2) via large-scale trace sim-
ulation.
Experimental Setup. We use job arrival patterns from a 300-
job, 580-hour segment of the Microsoft Philly multi-tenant
training cluster trace [24], the average job duration is 14.4
hours, and the longest is 142.9 hours. While the trace dictates
arrival times and durations, we synthesize the job characteris-
tics to model modern RL post-training workloads. As detailed
in Table 6, we define three job profiles based on the ratio of
rollout time (Troll) to training time (Ttrain). (1) Balanced (BL):
Balanced Troll and Ttrain, representative of single-turn work-
loads like RLHF [30] or RLVR [39]; (2) Rollout-Heavy (RH):
Troll ≫Ttrain, modeling multi-turn workloads such as agentic
reasoning [31]; and (3) Train-Heavy (TH): Ttrain ≫Troll for
evaluation completeness, but is rare in real-world RL training.
For each profile, we generate jobs of three sizes (Small,
Medium, Large), resulting in nine distinct job configurations.
We test each profile individually and also use a Mixed work-
load, which contains a uniform mix of all nine configurations,
to simulate a realistic production environment.
Baselines. We compare ROLLMUX against following base-
lines:
• Offline Optimal (Opt). Assigns arriving jobs to offline op-
timal placements found via a brute-force search over
all possible groupings and placements–including job re-
ordering and re-grouping that are infeasible in online
deployments–and serves as a theoretical upper bound.
• Random. Assigns arriving jobs to a random group (or a
new one) that can accommodate it. The job is then placed
on random rollout and train nodes within this group.
• Greedy (Most-Idle). Assigns arriving jobs to the group
with the highest idle-time percentage. Within that group,
it places the job on the most idle rollout and train nodes.
11


--- Page 12 ---
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (h)
0
1000
2000
Per-Hour Cost ($/h)
veRL
Naive-D
RollMux
(a) Cluster provisioning cost.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (h)
0
100
200
300
# H20
veRL
Naive-D
RollMux
(b) Number of rollout (H20) GPUs.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Time (h)
0
100
200
300
# H800
veRL
Naive-D
RollMux
(c) Number of training (H800) GPUs.
Figure 13: [Testbed] Cluster provisioning cost and GPU usage of ROLLMUX and baselines under real-world production
workloads, where ROLLMUX reduces total provisioning cost by 1.38× and 1.84× compared to veRL and Solo-D, respectively.
BL
RH
TH
Mixed
Workload Type
0
1
2
Cost (Normalized)
1.12
2.00
1.75
1.10
1.92
1.89
1.01
1.72
1.38
1.06
1.97
1.66
RollMux
Random
MostIdle
Opt
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SLO Attainment
(a) Sensitivity to workload types.
1.2
1.5
2.0
Unif(1,2)
SLO
0
1
2
Cost (Normalized)
1.07
2.09
1.73
1.07
1.95
1.75
1.07
1.89
1.59
1.06
1.97
1.66
RollMux
Random
MostIdle
Opt
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SLO Attainment
(b) Sensitivity to job SLOs.
2
3
4
5
Max Group Size
0
1
2
Cost (Normalized)
1.10
2.01
1.68
1.06
2.15
1.71
1.06
1.97
1.66
1.07
1.91
1.59
RollMux
Random
MostIdle
Opt
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
SLO Attainment
(c) Sensitivity to group residency.
Figure 14: [Simulation] Sensitivity analysis of ROLLMUX’s inter-group scheduler.
Sensitivity Analysis. To determine how sensitive the sched-
uler’s quality is to its key parameters, we vary a single param-
eter while all others are set to a default configuration4.
Impact of Workload Characteristics. Figure 14a shows that
ROLLMUX’s near-optimal performance holds across all work-
load types. It consistently achieves 100% SLO attainment
with a cost overhead of just 1.01×–1.12× relative to the opti-
mal. In contrast, the baselines perform poorly across different
workloads, with Greedy slightly outperforms the Random
strategy. The Random strategy’s cost is 1.72×–2.00× opti-
mal with only 37–58% SLO attainment, while the Greedy
scheduler is slightly better but still inadequate, reaching
1.38×–1.89× optimal cost for 42–61% SLO attainment.
Impact of Job SLOs. We vary the job SLO requirements,
testing both uniform SLOs (all jobs set to 1.2, 1.5, or 2.0)
and heterogeneous, job-specific SLOs drawn from Unif(1,
2). As shown in Figure 14b, ROLLMUX’s performance is
highly stable against SLO tightness, always achieving 100%
attainment with a consistent, near-optimal cost. Conversely,
the baselines are highly sensitive to the SLO target and more
expensive (1.59×–2.09× optimal). As the SLO target loosens
from 1.2 to 2.0, the SLO attainment for Random and Greedy
improves from 38%/43% to 71%/73%, respectively. This
shows that while looser SLOs make it easier for naive heuris-
tics to succeed by chance, they still fail to provide guarantees.
Impact of Group Residency. Since node memory capacity
directly limits the group size, we evaluate its impact by vary-
ing the maximum allowed group size from 2 to 5. Figure 14c
shows that performance is relatively insensitive to the max-
imum group size for all methods. Across all configurations,
ROLLMUX consistently maintains the lowest cost and 100%
SLO attainment, while the baselines remain significantly de-
4Default configuration: mixed workload types, heterogeneous SLOs
drawn from Unif(1,2), and a max group residency of 5.
Decision
Number of Concurrent Jobs
Lat. (ms)
5
9
13
100
500
1000
2000
ROLLMUX
5.6
6.5
7.6
41.9
198
318
591
Opt.
113
>1min†
>5h†
—*
—*
—*
—*
† Represents latency exceeding 1 minute and 5 hours, respectively.
* Not applicable; computation is intractable at this scale.
Table 5: Decision latency (ms) vs. number of concurrent
jobs. ROLLMUX scales well; Brute-force Opt’s latency grows
exponentially and quickly becomes impractical.
fected (only 48%–61% SLO attainment) and more expensive
(1.59×–2.15× optimal). This suggests that even small group
sizes (e.g., 2 or 3) provide sufficient packing flexibility for
ROLLMUX to find efficient placements; larger groups do not
bring improved performance or cost efficiency.
Scheduler Scalability and Latency. We evaluate ROLL-
MUX’s decision latency and scalability, with results presented
in Table 5. ROLLMUX demonstrates near-linear scalability:
its decision time is only 591 ms for 2,000 jobs, confirming
that Algorithm 1 efficiently handles production-scale work-
loads. In stark contrast, the brute-force optimal solver exhibits
exponential growth in latency, exceeding five hours for just
13 jobs–rendering it infeasible for any practical workload size.
8
Related Work
Deep Learning Schedulers. Extensive research has focused
on scheduling for general-purpose deep learning clusters.
These works aim to improve fairness [14,26,47], GPU sharing
efficiency [46,48], heterogeneity awareness [29,40], and job
goodput [33, 56]. However, these systems universally treat
the entire job as the atomic unit of scheduling and assume sta-
ble, predictable iteration times. ROLLMUX is the first phase-
12


--- Page 13 ---
centric co-scheduling system for stochastic RL post-training
jobs.
RL Post-Training Frameworks. Recent systems have fo-
cused on optimizing the performance of a single, individ-
ual RL post-training job. While early frameworks used
static resource partitioning [20,25,52], subsequent work im-
proved utilization via co-location [41], multi-controller de-
signs [45], long-tail mitigation [12, 59], and asynchronous
algorithms [10, 16, 58]. Different from these single-job op-
timizations, ROLLMUX addresses the complementary part
by taking a global, cluster-level perspective, orchestrating
multiple concurrent jobs via co-scheduling.
Disaggregated Systems. ROLLMUX builds on the principle
of disaggregation, a concept explored in OS kernels [38] and
serving systems [19,32,57]. The most direct parallel is the
prefill-decode disaggregation in LLM inference [19,32,57].
Within this domain, recent serving systems have also ex-
plored efficient resource management, but all in a single-job
scope [5,9,18,60]. In contrast, ROLLMUX introduces the first
scheduling framework specifically designed for multi-tenant
clusters, a scenario not addressed by prior works.
9
Conclusion
This paper presents ROLLMUX, a multi-tenant cluster sched-
uler tailored for rollout-training disaggregated RL post-
training. ROLLMUX introduces a two-tier scheduling mecha-
nism that near-optimally partitions RL jobs into co-execution
groups and orchestrates their execution in a tightly-woven
pattern. This approach effectively reduces dependency bub-
bles caused by disaggregation, thereby minimizing cluster
provisioning costs. Extensive evaluation using real-world pro-
duction traces on disaggregated clusters with up to 328 GPUs
each demonstrates that ROLLMUX achieves up to 1.84× cost
savings while maintaining 100% performance SLO attain-
ment.
References
[1] Introducing openai o3 and o4-mini. https://openai.
com/index/introducing-o3-and-o4-mini/, 2024.
[2] AIME 2024 Dataset, 2025.
[3] Qwq-32b: Embracing the power of reinforcement learn-
ing.
https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwq-32b/,
2025.
[4] Qiaoling Chen, Zijun Liu, Peng Sun, Shenggui Li,
Guoteng Wang, Ziming Liu, Yonggang Wen, Siyuan
Feng, and Tianwei Zhang. Respec: Towards optimizing
speculative decoding in reinforcement learning systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26475, 2025.
[5] Weihao Cui, Yukang Chen, Han Zhao, Ziyi Xu, Quan
Chen, Xusheng Chen, Yangjie Zhou, Shixuan Sun, and
Minyi Guo. Optimizing slo-oriented llm serving with
pd-multiplexing, 2025.
[6] DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning
capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
[7] Farama Foundation.
Gymnasium - frozenlake
environment.
https://gymnasium.farama.org/
environments/toy_text/frozen_lake/, 2024. Ac-
cessed: 2025-09.
[8] Jiazhan Feng, Shijue Huang, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang,
Yujia Qin, Baoquan Zhong, Chengquan Jiang, Jinxin
Chi, and Wanjun Zhong. Retool: Reinforcement learn-
ing for strategic tool use in llms.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.11536, 2025.
[9] Jingqi Feng, Yukai Huang, Rui Zhang, Sicheng Liang,
Ming Yan, and Jie Wu. Windserve: Efficient phase-
disaggregated llm serving with stream-based dynamic
scheduling. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Inter-
national Symposium on Computer Architecture, pages
1283–1295, 2025.
[10] Wei Fu, Jiaxuan Gao, Xujie Shen, Chen Zhu, Zhiyu
Mei, Chuyi He, Shusheng Xu, Guo Wei, Jun Mei, Ji-
ashu Wang, et al. Areal: A large-scale asynchronous
reinforcement learning system for language reasoning.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.24298, 2025.
[11] Yao Fu, Leyang Xue, Yeqi Huang, Andrei-Octavian
Brabete, Dmitrii Ustiugov, Yuvraj Patel, and Luo Mai.
ServerlessLLM: Low-latency serverless inference for
large language models. In USENIX OSDI), pages 135–
153, 2024.
[12] Wei Gao, Yuheng Zhao, Dakai An, Tianyuan Wu, Lunxi
Cao, Shaopan Xiong, Ju Huang, Weixun Wang, Siran
Yang, Wenbo Su, et al. Rollpacker: Mitigating long-tail
rollouts for fast, synchronous rl post-training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.21009, 2025.
[13] Michael R Garey and David S Johnson. Computers and
intractability, volume 29. wh freeman New York, 2002.
[14] Juncheng Gu, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Kang G Shin, Yibo
Zhu, Myeongjae Jeon, Junjie Qian, Hongqiang Liu, and
Chuanxiong Guo. Tiresias: A {GPU} cluster manager
for distributed deep learning. In 16th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI 19), pages 485–500, 2019.
[15] Shixiang Gu, Tim Lillicrap, Richard E. Turner, Zoubin
Ghahramani, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Sergey Levine.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Interpolated policy gradient: Merging on-policy and off-
policy gradient estimation for deep reinforcement learn-
ing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2017.
[16] Zhenyu Han, Ansheng You, Haibo Wang, Kui Luo,
Guang Yang, Wenqi Shi, Menglong Chen, Sicheng
Zhang, Zeshun Lan, Chunshi Deng, et al. Asyncflow:
An asynchronous streaming rl framework for efficient
llm post-training.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01663,
2025.
[17] Jingkai He, Tianjian Li, Erhu Feng, Dong Du, Qian Liu,
Tao Liu, Yubin Xia, and Haibo Chen. History rhymes:
Accelerating llm reinforcement learning with rhymerl.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18588, 2025.
[18] Ke Hong, Lufang Chen, Zhong Wang, Xiuhong Li, Qi-
uli Mao, Jianping Ma, Chao Xiong, Guanyu Wu, Buhe
Han, Guohao Dai, et al. semi-pd: Towards efficient llm
serving via phase-wise disaggregated computation and
unified storage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19867, 2025.
[19] Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Liangliang Xu, Xusheng
Chen, Jiang Xu, Shuang Chen, Hao Feng, Chenxi Wang,
Sa Wang, Yungang Bao, et al. Inference without interfer-
ence: Disaggregate llm inference for mixed downstream
workloads. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11181, 2024.
[20] Jian Hu, Xibin Wu, Wei Shen, Jason Klein Liu, Zilin
Zhu, Weixun Wang, Songlin Jiang, Haoran Wang, Hao
Chen, Bin Chen, et al. Openrlhf: An easy-to-use, scal-
able and high-performance rlhf framework.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.11143, 2024.
[21] Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, Qi Han, Daxin Jiang, Xi-
angyu Zhang, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Open-reasoner-
zero: An open source approach to scaling up reinforce-
ment learning on the base model, 2025.
[22] Qinghao Hu, Shang Yang, Junxian Guo, Xiaozhe Yao,
Yujun Lin, Yuxian Gu, Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Ana
Klimovic, and Song Han. Taming the long-tail: Effi-
cient reasoning rl training with adaptive drafter. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.16665, 2025.
[23] Anant Singh Jain and Sheik Meeran.
Deterministic
job-shop scheduling: Past, present and future. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, 113(2):390–434,
1999.
[24] Myeongjae Jeon, Shivaram Venkataraman, Amar Phan-
ishayee, Junjie Qian, Wencong Xiao, and Fan Yang.
Analysis of {Large-Scale}{Multi-Tenant}{GPU} clus-
ters for {DNN} training workloads. In 2019 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 19), pages
947–960, 2019.
[25] Oleksii Kuchaiev, Jason Li, Huyen Nguyen, Oleksii
Hrinchuk, Ryan Leary, Boris Ginsburg, Samuel Kriman,
Stanislav Beliaev, Vitaly Lavrukhin, Jack Cook, et al.
Nemo: a toolkit for building ai applications using neural
modules. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09577, 2019.
[26] Kshiteej Mahajan, Arjun Balasubramanian, Arjun
Singhvi, Shivaram Venkataraman, Aditya Akella, Amar
Phanishayee, and Shuchi Chawla. Themis: Fair and
efficient {GPU} cluster scheduling. In 17th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (NSDI 20), pages 289–304, 2020.
[27] Zhiyu Mei, Wei Fu, Kaiwei Li, Guangju Wang,
Huanchen Zhang, and Yi Wu. Real: Efficient rlhf train-
ing of large language models with parameter realloca-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14088, 2024.
[28] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang,
Alexey Tumanov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Eli-
bol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul, Michael I Jordan,
et al. Ray: A distributed framework for emerging {AI}
applications. In 13th USENIX symposium on operating
systems design and implementation (OSDI 18), pages
561–577, 2018.
[29] Deepak
Narayanan, Keshav
Santhanam, Fiodar
Kazhamiaka, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia.
{Heterogeneity-Aware} cluster scheduling policies for
deep learning workloads. In 14th USENIX Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 20), pages 481–498, 2020.
[30] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[31] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep
Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. Training
software engineering agents and verifiers with swe-gym,
2024.
[32] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka
Shah, Íñigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini.
Splitwise: Efficient generative llm inference using phase
splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages
118–132. IEEE, 2024.
[33] Aurick Qiao, Sang Keun Choe, Suhas Jayaram Subra-
manya, Willie Neiswanger, Qirong Ho, Hao Zhang, Gre-
gory R Ganger, and Eric P Xing. Pollux: Co-adaptive
cluster scheduling for goodput-optimized deep learning.
In 15th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 21), 2021.
14


--- Page 15 ---
[34] Ruoyu Qin, Weiran He, Weixiao Huang, Yangkun
Zhang, Yikai Zhao, Bo Pang, Xinran Xu, Yingdi Shan,
Yongwei Wu, and Mingxing Zhang. Seer: Online con-
text learning for fast synchronous llm reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.14617, 2025.
[35] Abhinav Rastogi, Albert Q Jiang, Andy Lo, Gabrielle
Berrada, Guillaume Lample, Jason Rute, Joep Bar-
mentlo, Karmesh Yadav, Kartik Khandelwal, Khy-
athi Raghavi Chandu, et al. Magistral. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.10910, 2025.
[36] Salvatore Sanfilippo. Redis - the real-time data platform,
2009. Accessed: 2025-09-08.
[37] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal policy optimiza-
tion algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[38] Yizhou Shan, Yutong Huang, Yilun Chen, and Yiying
Zhang. {LegoOS}: A disseminated, distributed {OS}
for hardware resource disaggregation. In 13th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (OSDI 18), pages 69–87, 2018.
[39] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing
the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300, 2024.
[40] Weihang Shen, Mingcong Han, Jialong Liu, Rong Chen,
and Haibo Chen. {XSched}: Preemptive scheduling
for diverse {XPUs}. In 19th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
25), pages 671–692, 2025.
[41] Guangming Sheng, Chi Zhang, Zilingfeng Ye, Xibin Wu,
Wang Zhang, Ru Zhang, Yanghua Peng, Haibin Lin, and
Chuan Wu. Hybridflow: A flexible and efficient rlhf
framework. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European
Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1279–1297,
2025.
[42] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri,
Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro.
Megatron-lm: Training multi-billion parameter lan-
guage models using model parallelism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1909.08053, 2019.
[43] ROLL Team. Reinforcement Learning Optimization for
Large-Scale Learning: An Efficient and User-Friendly
Scaling Library.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.06122,
2025.
[44] Jinghui Wang, Shaojie Wang, Yinghan Cui, Xuxing
Chen, Chao Wang, Xiaojiang Zhang, Minglei Zhang,
Jiarong Zhang, Wenhao Zhuang, Yuchen Cao, et al.
Seamlessflow: A trainer agent isolation rl framework
achieving bubble-free pipelines via tag scheduling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.11553, 2025.
[45] Zhixin Wang, Tianyi Zhou, Liming Liu, Ao Li, Jiarui
Hu, Dian Yang, Yinhui Lu, Jinlong Hou, Siyuan Feng,
Yuan Cheng, et al. Distflow: A fully distributed rl frame-
work for scalable and efficient llm post-training. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.13833, 2025.
[46] Qizhen Weng, Lingyun Yang, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang,
Xiaochuan Tang, Guodong Yang, and Liping Zhang.
Beware of fragmentation: Scheduling {GPU-Sharing}
workloads with fragmentation gradient descent. In 2023
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC
23), pages 995–1008, 2023.
[47] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ram-
jee, Muthian Sivathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han,
Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng, Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang,
et al. Gandiva: Introspective cluster scheduling for deep
learning. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18), pages
595–610, 2018.
[48] Wencong Xiao, Shiru Ren, Yong Li, Yang Zhang,
Pengyang Hou, Zhi Li, Yihui Feng, Wei Lin, and
Yangqing Jia. {AntMan}: Dynamic scaling on {GPU}
clusters for deep learning.
In 14th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI 20), pages 533–548, 2020.
[49] Ran Yan, Youhe Jiang, Tianyuan Wu, Jiaxuan Gao,
Zhiyu Mei, Wei Fu, Haohui Mai, Wei Wang, Yi Wu,
and Binhang Yuan. AReaL-Hex: Accommodating asyn-
chronous rl training over heterogeneous gpus. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.00796, 2025.
[50] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chen-
gen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu,
Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei,
Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jian-
wei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren
Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang,
Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze
Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize
Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang,
Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu
Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun
Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and
Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
[51] Shunyu Yao, Howard Chen, John Yang, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Webshop: Towards scalable real-world
15


--- Page 16 ---
web interaction with grounded language agents. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
35:20744–20757, 2022.
[52] Zhewei Yao, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Olatunji Ruwase,
Samyam Rajbhandari, Xiaoxia Wu, Ammar Ahmad
Awan, Jeff Rasley, Minjia Zhang, Conglong Li, Connor
Holmes, et al. Deepspeed-chat: Easy, fast and affordable
rlhf training of chatgpt-like models at all scales. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.01320, 2023.
[53] Minchen Yu, Rui Yang, Chaobo Jia, Zhaoyuan Su, Sheng
Yao, Tingfeng Lan, Yuchen Yang, Yue Cheng, Wei Wang,
Ao Wang, et al. λScale: Enabling fast scaling for server-
less large language model inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.09922, 2025.
[54] Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan,
Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gao-
hong Liu, Lingjun Liu, et al. Dapo: An open-source llm
reinforcement learning system at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.14476, 2025.
[55] Dingyan Zhang, Haotian Wang, Yang Liu, Xingda
Wei, Yizhou Shan, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen.
{BlitzScale}: Fast and live large model autoscaling with
o (1) host caching. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Op-
erating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25),
pages 275–293, 2025.
[56] Pengfei Zheng, Rui Pan, Tarannum Khan, Shivaram
Venkataraman, and Aditya Akella. Shockwave: Fair
and efficient cluster scheduling for dynamic adaptation
in machine learning. In 20th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
23), pages 703–723, 2023.
[57] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu,
Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang.
{DistServe}: Disaggregating prefill and decoding for
goodput-optimized large language model serving. In
18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 24), pages 193–210, 2024.
[58] Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Xiaoniu Song, Hanpeng
Hu, Chao Jin, Bingyang Wu, Nuo Chen, Yukun Chen,
Yu Zhou, Changyi Wan, et al. Streamrl: Scalable, het-
erogeneous, and elastic rl for llms with disaggregated
stream generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15930,
2025.
[59] Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Bingyang Wu, Shengyu
Liu, Yukun Chen, Changyi Wan, Hanpeng Hu, Lei Xia,
Ranchen Ming, Yibo Zhu, et al. Optimizing rlhf train-
ing for large language models with stage fusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2409.13221, 2024.
[60] Kan Zhu, Yufei Gao, Yilong Zhao, Liangyu Zhao,
Gefei Zuo, Yile Gu, Dedong Xie, Tian Tang, Qinyu
Xu, Zihao Ye, Keisuke Kamahori, Chien-Yu Lin, Ziren
Wang, Stephanie Wang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and
Baris Kasikci. Nanoflow: Towards optimal large lan-
guage model serving throughput, 2025.
[61] Ruidong Zhu, Ziheng Jiang, Chao Jin, Peng Wu, Cesar A.
Stuardo, Dongyang Wang, Xinlei Zhang, Huaping Zhou,
Haoran Wei, Yang Cheng, Jianzhe Xiao, Xinyi Zhang,
Lingjun Liu, Haibin Lin, Li-Wen Chang, Jianxi Ye, Xiao
Yu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. Megascale-infer:
Serving mixture-of-experts at scale with disaggregated
expert parallelism, 2025.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Appendix
Proof of Meta-iteration Schedule’s Optimality. To show
the utilization-optimality of the meta-iteration schedule for
non-overloaded groups, we first formally define the utilization
of a group with meta-iteration time Tmeta, where its rollout
(UR) and training utilization (UT) are:
UR =
∑j∈JG T roll
j
Tmeta
,
and
UT =
∑j∈JG T train
j
Tmeta
.
Since the meta-iteration schedule repeats, it suffices to ana-
lyze a single meta-iteration where every job’s rollout and train-
ing phase executes once. Recall that T cycle
G
= max j∈JG T solo
j
is the solo iteration time of the slowest job, and let j1 be
the job attaining this maximum so that T cycle
G
= T roll
j1
+T train
j1
.
For simplicity, the following proof considers only one rollout
node and one training node, while the optimality generalizes
to multi-node settings. By the definition of a non-overloaded
group, we have
T cycle
G
= T roll
j1
+T train
j1
≥max

∑j∈JG T roll
j
,∑j∈JG T train
j

.
This directly implies that the total rollout work of all other
jobs can fit within j1’s training phase, and vice-versa:
∑j∈JG\j1 T roll
j
≤T train
j1
,
∑j∈JG\ j1 T train
j
≤T roll
j1 .
Consequently, job j1’s execution time decides the entire
schedule’s cycle time, yielding the cycle time as T solo
j1
.
Conversely, any schedule that repeats a job is sub-optimal
for a non-overloaded group because it extends the meta-
iteration’s duration but adds proportionally less work, leading
to a net decrease in resource utilization. We show this by
trying to add a repetition of any job k to the meta-iteration
schedule. Repeating job k adds work to both pools and nec-
essarily prolongs the cycle time by at least T solo
k
due to wait-
ing for the longest j1, causing the new utilization U′ lower
than the original U. We can bound the change in utilization,
∆U = U′ −U, as follows. The change for the rollout and the
training pool, ∆UR and ∆UT, is bounded by:
∆UR = U′
R −UR ≤∑j∈JG T roll
j
+T roll
k
T solo
j1
+T roll
k
−∑j∈JG T roll
j
T solo
j1
,
∆UT = U′
T −UT ≤∑j∈JG T train
j
+T train
k
T solo
j1
+T train
k
−∑j∈JG T train
j
T solo
j1
.
Therefore, the total change in utilization is
∆U = ∆UR +∆UT = U′
R −UR +U′
T −UT
≤
T train
k
T solo
j1
−T solo
k
∑j∈JG T train
j
+T solo
j1
T roll
k
−T solo
k
∑j∈JG T roll
j
T solo
j1
(T solo
j1
+T solo
k
)
=
T solo
k
(T solo
j1
−∑j∈JG T solo
j
)
T solo
j1
(T solo
j1
+T solo
k
)
≤0.
This proves that any repetition degrades overall utilization,
making the round-robin schedule utilization-optimal for non-
overloaded groups.













 "







&$)&$'(	
*



%(



#$"


$'(!

Avg=0.87K $/h
Avg=0.81K $/h
Avg=1.62K $/h
Avg=1.36K $/h
Figure 15: [Simulation] Cost-effectiveness and SLO attain-
ment under a realistic mixed workload. (Workload: mixed,
SLO∼Unif(1,2), max group size=5).
Table 6: Job configurations used in the simulation. Each job is
defined by its rollout time (Troll) and train time (Ttrain), which
are drawn from different uniform distributions.
Workload
Size
Rollout Time (Troll)
Train Time (Ttrain)
Balanced
Small
Unif(50, 100)
Unif(50, 100)
(BL)
Medium
Unif(100, 200)
Unif(100, 200)
Large
Unif(200, 300)
Unif(200, 300)
Rollout-
Small
Unif(100, 200)
Unif(25, 50)
Heavy
Medium
Unif(200, 400)
Unif(50, 100)
(RH)
Large
Unif(400, 600)
Unif(100, 200)
Train-
Small
Unif(25, 50)
Unif(100, 200)
Heavy
Medium
Unif(50, 100)
Unif(200, 400)
(TH)
Large
Unif(100, 200)
Unif(400, 600)
Mixed
All
All
All
Workloads for Simulation. Table 6 details the job profiles
used in § 7.5.
[Simulation] End-to-end Performance. This part reports the
end-to-end performance of ROLLMUX’s scheduler under a re-
alistic setting with Mixed workloads with heterogeneous job
SLOs. As illustrated in Figure 15, ROLLMUX, achieves 100%
SLO attainment by design, matching the theoretical Offline
Optimal scheduler. In contrast, the heuristic-based baselines
struggle significantly: the Random and Greedy (Most-Idle)
schedulers meet the SLOs for only 60% and 62% of jobs,
respectively. This is because ROLLMUX’s cost-based opti-
mization (§ 4.3) explicitly prunes any placements that would
violate a job’s SLO by assigning it an infinite cost.
In terms of resource efficiency, the average cost of ROLL-
MUX is at 0.87K $/h, only 1.06× higher than the Offline
Optimal. In contrast, the baselines are far more expensive.
The Random and Greedy strategies incur average costs of
1.62K and 1.36K $/h, respectively (1.97× and 1.66× of op-
timal). This high cost is driven by their sub-optimal group
partitioning, where their costs spike to over 5K $/h by scal-
ing out to 1400 GPUs. ROLLMUX, however, manages load
with a peak cost of only ∼1.8K $/h, requiring at most 504
GPUs, demonstrating its effectiveness at identifying SLO-
aware, cost-efficient placements in a complex, online setting.
17
