--- Page 1 ---
1
Low-Altitude Satellite-AAV Collaborative Joint
Mobile Edge Computing and Data Collection via
Diffusion-based Deep Reinforcement Learning
Boxiong Wang ID , Hui Kang ID , Jiahui Li ID , Geng Sun ID , Senior Member, IEEE, Zemin Sun ID , Jiacheng Wang ID ,
Dusit Niyato ID , Fellow, IEEE, and Shiwen Mao ID , Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The integration of satellite and autonomous aerial
vehicle (AAV) communications has become essential for the
scenarios requiring both wide coverage and rapid deployment,
particularly in remote or disaster-stricken areas where the
terrestrial infrastructure is unavailable. Furthermore, emerging
applications increasingly demand simultaneous mobile edge com-
puting (MEC) and data collection (DC) capabilities within the
same aerial network. However, jointly optimizing these operations
in heterogeneous satellite-AAV systems presents signiﬁcant chal-
lenges due to limited on-board resources and competing demands
under dynamic channel conditions. In this work, we investigate
a satellite-AAV-enabled joint MEC-DC system where these plat-
forms collaborate to serve ground devices (GDs). Speciﬁcally, we
formulate a joint optimization problem to minimize the average
MEC end-to-end delay and AAV energy consumption while
maximizing the collected data. Since the formulated optimization
problem is a non-convex mixed-integer nonlinear programming
(MINLP) problem, we propose a Q-weighted variational policy
This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (62272194, 62471200), in part by the Science and Technology Devel-
opment Plan Project of Jilin Province (20250102210JC, 20250101027JJ), in
part by the Seatrium New Energy Laboratory, Singapore Ministry of Education
(MOE) Tier 1 (RT5/23 and RG24/24), the Nanyang Technological University
(NTU) Centre for Computational Technologies in Finance (NTU-CCTF), and
the Research Innovation and Enterprise (RIE) 2025 Industry Alignment Fund -
Industry Collaboration Projects (IAF-ICP) (Award I2301E0026), administered
by Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), in part by the
Postdoctoral Fellowship Program of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
(GZC20240592), in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Gen-
eral Fund (2024M761123), in part by the Scientiﬁc Research Project of Jilin
Provincial Department of Education (JJKH20250117KJ), and in part by the
Graduate Innovation Fund of Jilin University (2025CX210). (Corresponding
authors: Jiahui Li and Geng Sun.)
Boxiong Wang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology,
Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China, and also with Beijing Zhongguan-
cun Academy, Beijing 100089, China. (Email: wangbx0320@163.com).
Jiahui Li and Zemin Sun are with the College of Computer Science
and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. (E-mails: liji-
ahui@jlu.edu.cn; sunzemin@jlu.edu.cn).
Hui Kang is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin
University, Changchun 130012, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of
Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. (E-mail: kanghui@jlu.edu.cn).
Geng Sun is with the College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin
University, Changchun 130012, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of
Symbolic Computation and Knowledge Engineering of Ministry of Education,
Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. He is also with the College of
Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
639798 (E-mail: sungeng@jlu.edu.cn).
Jiacheng Wang and Dusit Niyato are with the College of Computing
and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (E-mails:
jiacheng.wang@ntu.edu.sg; dniyato@ntu.edu.sg).
Shiwen Mao is with the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL 36849-5201 USA (E-mail:
smao@ieee.org).
optimization-based joint AAV movement control, GD associa-
tion, ofﬂoading decision, and bandwidth allocation (QAGOB)
approach. Speciﬁcally, we reformulate the optimization problem
as an action space-transformed Markov decision process to
adapt the variable action dimensions and hybrid action space.
Subsequently, QAGOB leverages the multi-modal generation
capacities of diffusion models to optimize policies and can
achieve better sample efﬁciency while controlling the diffusion
costs during training. Simulation results show that QAGOB
outperforms ﬁve other benchmarks, including traditional DRL
and diffusion-based DRL algorithms. Furthermore, the MEC-DC
joint optimization achieves signiﬁcant advantages when compared
to the separate optimization of MEC and DC.
Index Terms—Satellite communication, autonomous aerial ve-
hicles (AAV) communication, task scheduling, energy optimiza-
tion, diffusion model, DRL.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE advancements in wireless communications and the
development of manufacturing technologies have driven
an exponential growth of Internet of Things (IoT) applications.
These applications simultaneously require ubiquitous network
coverage, robust distributed data storage, and real-time com-
puting service capabilities. However, due to the limited com-
puting and storage resources, IoT ground devices (GDs) are
typically unable to effectively handle the compute-intensive
tasks and store the large amounts of data by themselves. In
this context, mobile edge computing (MEC) has emerged as a
paradigm for computational ofﬂoading, while data collection
(DC) systems address the storage challenge. Traditionally,
these functions have been treated as separate systems with
independent optimization objectives. However, modern IoT ap-
plications increasingly demand a uniﬁed approach where both
MEC and DC are jointly optimized to maximize the resource
utilization and minimize the operation of redundant facilities.
For example, in the scenarios such as uncrewed mining [1],
remote environmental monitoring [2], and post-disaster rescue
[3], devices face dual demands. Speciﬁcally, they are required
to perform computationally intensive tasks such as image
recognition, anomaly detection, or path planning. Simulta-
neously, they are required to continuously transmit sensor
or vision data for remote monitoring and model updating.
While the existing terrestrial infrastructures (e.g., Wi-Fi, edge
servers) can provide high-throughput connectivity and low-
latency computing for urban deployments, their reliance on
arXiv:2601.07307v1  [cs.NI]  12 Jan 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
the ﬁxed infrastructures creates signiﬁcant coverage gaps in
remote regions and renders them vulnerable during natural
disasters and emergency scenarios where rapid deployment
and resilient connectivity are paramount [4].
Although satellite and autonomous aerial vehicle (AAV)-
assisted networks have been considered to assist MEC and
DC systems, their individual deployments exhibit inherent
limitations in the scenarios that require both MEC and DC.
Speciﬁcally, satellite platforms, particularly the low Earth orbit
(LEO) satellite constellations, can provide seamless global
connectivity, which is crucial for offering stable connections
and computing services in remote or disaster-stricken areas,
which has made them popular in recent years [4]–[6]. How-
ever, their orbital altitude introduces inherent latency con-
straints that can signiﬁcantly impact the time-sensitive MEC
applications requiring immediate response. Conversely, AAVs
have drawn extensive attention due to their ﬂexibility and low
cost [7]–[9]. Moreover, AAVs can hover over GDs to provide
more reliable and real-time services than satellites. Neverthe-
less, they are severely constrained by the limited energy and
onboard computing resources. These inherent shortcomings
of individual systems become crucial in environments that
demand intensive computation ofﬂoading and continuous DC.
Fortunately, the integration of aerial and space access networks
can complement each other through the collaboration of AAVs
and satellites, providing on-demand communications, adaptive
DC, and dynamic MEC services, which is an important
application of the sixth-generation (6G) network [10].
However, implementing such satellite-AAV-enabled joint
MEC-DC systems face several major challenges. First, the
functional heterogeneity between MEC and DC introduces
conﬂicting requirements. Speciﬁcally, MEC tasks are latency-
sensitive, computation-intensive, and priority-driven, whereas
DC tasks are latency-insensitive, demand high throughput,
and are cost-sensitive [11]. This heterogeneity complicates
the allocation of communication, computation, and energy
resources under dynamic network conditions. Second, the dual
objectives of MEC and DC inherently compete in trajectory
planning, resource allocation, and energy management. For
instance, moving AAVs toward latency-critical MEC areas
ensures timely task ofﬂoading but increases interference and
reduces the data rate for DC devices. Processing MEC tasks
locally can reduce delay. However, it consumes additional
energy that could be available for propulsion or DC trans-
mission. Furthermore, limited AAV communication and com-
puting resources introduce trade-offs between task latency and
coverage. These interconnected challenges demand innovative
solutions that can handle high-dimensional decision spaces and
adapt to rapidly changing operational environments.
Accordingly, this paper investigates the joint optimization
problem of MEC and DC in satellite-AAV networks, aiming
to enhance the performance of both MEC and DC while
considering the energy consumption of AAVs. However, opti-
mizing such a heterogeneous dynamic system requires online
decision-making capabilities that can adapt to varying network
conditions and service demands in real-time. Furthermore, the
high-dimensional hybrid decision space introduces additional
complexity that conventional online algorithms cannot effec-
tively address. Therefore, this paper proposes a generative dif-
fusion model-enabled reinforcement learning-based approach
to tackle these optimization challenges by leveraging its ability
to learn complex patterns and make rapid decisions. The main
contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• Satellite-AAV-Enabled Joint MEC and DC System: We
investigate a satellite-AAV-assisted system for joint MEC
and DC to coordinate satellites and AAVs in performing
MEC and DC simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, the system
integrates an LEO satellite and AAVs to balance the
computational load while enhancing the capability of the
system for processing computationally intensive tasks and
freshness-insensitive data for application in IoT scenarios
such as factory monitoring and smart grids. To the best
of our knowledge, this joint MEC and DC system in
satellite-AAV-assisted networks has not yet been studied
in the literature.
• Energy-sensitive MEC-DC Joint Optimization Problem
Formulation: We model the system to explore its het-
erogeneous resource allocation and dynamics, and ﬁnd
that the end-to-end (E2E) delay of MEC, the amount
of collected data for DC, and the energy consumption
of AAVs are three conﬂicting objectives. Therefore, we
formulate a joint optimization problem to optimize these
objectives simultaneously. Speciﬁcally, by adjusting the
AAV movement, GD association, and ofﬂoading deci-
sions as well as the bandwidth allocation of AAVs, we
aim to minimize the average E2E delay and AAV energy
consumption while maximizing the amount of collected
data. Furthermore, the formulated optimization problem
is a non-convex mixed-integer nonlinear programming
(MINLP) problem with long-term optimization objectives
and dynamics.
• Diffusion-Based Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) So-
lution: To address the challenging optimization problem,
we reformulate it as a Markov decision process (MDP)
with a transformed action space and solve it by using the
DRL framework. Speciﬁcally, we propose a diffusion-
based DRL solution. The solution integrates a Gale-
Sharpley (GS)-based GD association strategy into the
DRL framework based on the Q-weighted variational
policy optimization (QVPO) algorithm. Moreover, we
employ a transformation method to convert the discrete
and varying dimensional decision variables into suitable
actions for DRL. The proposed QVPO-based joint AAV
movement control, GD association, ofﬂoading decision,
and bandwidth allocation (QAGOB) approach provides a
systematic framework for the ﬁrst time for the satellite-
AAV joint MEC-DC scenario and realizes an effective
solution.
• Performance Evaluation and Analysis: Simulation re-
sults demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of the
proposed diffusion-based DRL solution. Speciﬁcally, the
proposed method outperforms the other ﬁve benchmark
algorithms in terms of the three optimization objectives as
well as the completion rate of MEC and DC. Moreover,
the QAGOB approach exhibits training stability and con-


--- Page 3 ---
3
TABLE I
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THIS WORK AND EXISTING WORKS
References
AAV
Satellite-AAV
MEC
DC
Joint MEC-DC
Energy
sensitive
DRL
Diffusion-based
DRL
[10], [12]
✓
✓
×
✓
×
✓
×
×
[13], [14], [15]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
×
×
[16], [17], [18]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
×
×
[19]
✓
✓
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
[20]
✓
✓
×
✓
×
×
✓
×
[21]
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
×
×
[22], [23]
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
×
[24]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
×
×
[25]
✓
✓
×
✓
×
×
×
×
[26], [27]
✓
✓
×
✓
×
✓
×
×
[28]
✓
✓
×
×
×
✓
×
×
[29], [30]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
✓
×
[31]
×
×
✓
×
×
✓
✓
×
[32]
✓
✓
✓
×
×
✓
✓
×
[33]
✓
✓
×
×
×
×
✓
×
[34]
✓
×
×
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
[35]
✓
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
✓
[36]
✓
×
×
×
×
×
✓
✓
This work
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
vergence robustness under various random environments
and parameter settings. Furthermore, QAGOB improves
the AAV energy consumption while achieving improve-
ments of 11.48% in the MEC delay and 13.99% in the
collected data volume, respectively.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
reviews the related research. Section III presented the detailed
system models. The formulation of the joint optimization
problem is presented in Section IV. Section V proposes the
diffusion-based DRL approach, and Section VI provides the
simulation results and analysis. Finally, the conclusion of this
paper is given in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review the related works on the satellite-
AAV joint MEC-DC architecture, joint optimization for MEC,
DC, and AAV energy consumption, as well as the optimization
methods of the DRL framework. Moreover, Table I illustrates
the differences between the state-of-the-art works and this
work.
A. Satellite-AAV-Enabled MEC and DC Architecture
Recent studies have explored satellite-AAV collaborative
architectures for MEC to address the limitations of terrestrial
infrastructure in remote areas. For instance, the authors in [13]
investigated an integrated space-air-ground network leveraging
the terahertz (THz) spectrum and AAV collaboration, where
AAVs act as reconﬁgurable MEC nodes to optimize task
ofﬂoading and resource allocation for energy-efﬁcient service
delivery. The authors in [16] introduced an edge information
hub architecture, deploying AAVs as aerial coordinators to
orchestrate satellite-backhauled sensing data and MEC re-
sources for the control of ground robots in disaster scenar-
ios. The authors in [17] investigated a multi-AAV satellite-
aerial-terrestrial network, where AAVs and satellites jointly
serve ground users through task splitting, trajectory planning,
and computation resource distribution. The authors in [14]
designed a tactical ad-hoc MEC network combining LEO
satellites, AAV-MEC servers, and ground nodes to enable
resilient computation ofﬂoading in hostile environments. For
IoT applications in isolated regions, the authors in [18] demon-
strated a satellite-based MEC architecture with AAV-assisted
edge preprocessing to reduce backhaul trafﬁc and latency for
delay-tolerant tasks. The authors in [15] further extended this
paradigm to vehicular networks, where AAVs dynamically
ofﬂoad tasks to satellites or terrestrial MEC servers to alleviate
congestion in mobile scenarios.
Prior works have also investigated satellite-AAV-assisted
DC systems. For example, the authors in [10] proposed an
LEO satellite-assisted AAV framework for the Internet of re-
mote Things (IoRT) DC, where AAVs gather data from ground
sensors and employ dual transmission modes to optimize the
energy consumption and trajectory design. The authors in [12]
integrated fault-tolerant coding into a satellite-AAV mobile
edge caching system, where LEO satellites broadcast data
to AAVs for the decentralized sensor DC. The authors in
[19] addressed information freshness in space-air-ground inte-
grated networks (SAGINs) by designing a multi-layer architec-
ture combining satellites, high-altitude platforms (HAPs), and
AAVs. The authors in [20] introduced a cache-enabled AAV-
LEO satellite system to mitigate backhaul link ﬂuctuations,
utilizing AAV-mounted cache nodes for temporary data storage
and DRL-based trajectory optimization to adapt to the uneven
data distributions in dynamic environments. The authors in
[21] tackled massive data aggregation challenges in multi-
tier satellite-AAV networks by proposing a game-theoretic
multiple access approach.
Some studies have involved both MEC and DC. For ex-
ample, the authors in [22] proposed a multi-AAV-assisted
air-ground-space power IoT (PIoT) framework that deeply
integrates wireless power transfer (WPT), MEC, and DC. In
this framework, AAVs provide energy to ground power devices
through WPT and collect data, then process the data in real
time using onboard MEC resources, and ﬁnally transmit the
processed data via LEO satellites.
In summary, existing research on satellite-AAV-assisted


--- Page 4 ---
4
networks has primarily focused on independent MEC and DC
systems. With satellites and AAVs, jointly optimizing MEC
and DC introduces additional challenges, such as resource
competition, conﬂicts among multiple objectives, and schedul-
ing issues under dynamic heterogeneous channel conditions.
As such, this motivates us to explore joint MEC and DC in
satellite-AAV-enabled networks.
B. Joint Optimization for MEC and DC
For the optimization of satellite and AAV-enabled networks,
existing research has primarily focused on resource allocation
and AAV trajectory optimization. For example, the authors
in [24] focused on minimizing the total energy consumption
of GDs in an AAV-assisted satellite MEC system, where the
joint optimization of the task ofﬂoading decisions and AAV
trajectory was performed under energy budget constraints.
The authors in [25] prioritized secure uplink communications
in satellite-supported IoT networks, formulating a max-min
secrecy rate optimization problem that jointly optimizes the
uplink power allocation, AAV beamforming, and positioning
to mitigate eavesdropping risks. The authors in [26] aimed to
maximize energy efﬁciency in non-orthogonal multiple access
(NOMA)-enabled SAGINs by co-designing the user associa-
tion, power allocation, and three-dimensional (3D) AAV tra-
jectory while accounting for the satellite mobility. The authors
in [27] addressed energy-constrained computation ofﬂoading
in SAGINs, minimizing the system latency under task arrival
uncertainty by optimizing the task ofﬂoading proportions and
AAV-to-server forwarding decisions.
Some other works have investigated the joint optimiza-
tion of multiple objectives. For instance, the authors in [28]
investigated an AAV-enabled SAGIN where AAVs act as
base stations or MEC servers, jointly optimizing the 3D
trajectory and resource allocation to balance the user quality-
of-experience (QoE) and energy efﬁciency. The authors in
[29] studied the joint computation ofﬂoading problem in the
satellite-AAV framework, minimizing the task delay and the
task energy consumption while reducing the total task costs.
However, the existing optimization approaches in these
studies do not jointly optimize the MEC and DC objectives
or consider the trade-offs between the MEC latency, the
amount of collected data, and the AAV energy consumption.
Therefore, they are not suitable for our considered system.
C. Optimization Approaches for MEC and DC
To overcome the challenges of resource allocation and
dynamic scheduling in complex network optimization, DRL
methods are considered a promising solution and have been
increasingly applied to satellite-AAV-assisted communication
systems. For example, the authors in [23] proposed a mixed
discrete-continuous DRL algorithm for task ofﬂoading in
LEO-MEC-assisted energy-harvesting AAV systems, enabling
adaptive decision-making under the time-varying satellite con-
nectivity and energy constraints. The authors in [30] developed
a risk-sensitive DRL framework for delay-oriented IoT task
scheduling in SAGINs, balancing energy consumption and
latency by evaluating state-speciﬁc risks in energy-constrained
MDPs. The authors in [31] investigated multi-agent collabo-
rative LEO-IoT scenarios with a partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP) model and proposed information
broadcasting mechanisms to optimize the task ofﬂoading la-
tency and energy efﬁciency across distributed satellites and
AAVs. The authors in [32] further integrated multi-agent actor-
critic frameworks to coordinate orbital edge ofﬂoading strate-
gies among AAVs and LEO satellites, maximizing the task
completion rates under delay constraints while minimizing
the AAV energy consumption. The authors in [37] proposed
a DRL-based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm to adjust
the selection of evolutionary operators according to the dynam-
ics of the optimization objectives. The authors in [33] applied
multi-agent deep deterministic policy gradient (MADDPG) in
cognitive satellite-AAV networks, jointly optimizing the AAV
trajectory and power allocation for spectrum-efﬁcient NOMA
transmissions under strict delay-sensitive QoS requirements.
While traditional DRL methods are capable of solving
optimization problems in real-time decision-making scenar-
ios, their policy networks struggle to capture patterns and
dependencies in complex data, limiting the policy expression
and exploration capabilities [34]. In contrast, diffusion-based
DRL methods have recently received increasing attention.
Compared with diffusion models in image generation, their
application objectives shift from generative data synthesis
to policy optimization, their outputs transition from pixel
representations to action vectors, and their training paradigm
evolves from unsupervised learning to value-guided reinforce-
ment learning with explicit reward optimization [36]. For
example, the authors in [34] proposed a diffusion model-
enhanced DRL framework for the AAV-assisted secure DC
and energy transfer in IoT, where a diffusion model generates
the AAV trajectories and device scheduling strategies under
jamming attacks, balancing the secure age of information
(AoI) minimization and energy efﬁciency. The authors in [35]
investigated AAV swarm-enabled secure surveillance systems,
integrating the generative diffusion models into DRL to op-
timize collaborative beamforming and trajectory planning for
the joint secrecy rate maximization and ﬂight energy reduc-
tion. By leveraging the probabilistic reasoning capabilities of
diffusion models, their approach captures the complex trade-
offs between multi-objective constraints in the dynamic aerial
environments. The authors in [36] further demonstrated the
versatility of diffusion-based DRL in network trafﬁc man-
agement, where diffusion models guide the adaptive service
provider selection for personalized content generation, show-
casing potential extensions of diffusion models.
Although these diffusion-based DRL methods have shown
potential in real-time decision-making scenarios, they do not
consider the low sample efﬁciency and limited exploration
capabilities of diffusion models when they are directly applied
to online DRL methods. Moreover, the aforementioned works
are all purely discrete or continuous, which cannot be applied
to the hybrid and variable-dimensional action space of the
formulated joint optimization in satellite-AAV-assisted com-
munication systems. To address these limitations, this paper
seeks to propose an efﬁcient diffusion-based DRL solution
to accommodate the hybrid and variable-dimensional action


--- Page 5 ---
5
LEO satellite
Internet
MEC/DC AAV 
IoT devices
Interference
link
MEC link
Trajectory
끫롾2
끫롾1
끫롾3
끫롾4
Task
끫롾5
끫롾6
끫롾3
끫롾4
Time slot ܶ௡
끫롾3 끫롾4
Computing
DC
DC
끫롾5끫롾6
Time slot ܶ௡
DC
MEC data loads
Result data
끫롾1끫롾2 끫롾3 끫롾4
Computing
DC
DC
Transmission 
timeline
Computing 
timeline
Transmission 
timeline
Computing timeline
Fig. 1. Illustration of the LEO satellite-AAV-enabled joint MEC-DC system.
The system enables multi-tier computing where tasks are processed by AAVs
or further ofﬂoaded to the satellite. The satellite also acts as the destination
for data collection. Note that inter-cell interference exists among AAVs during
the simultaneous service provisioning.
spaces, thus meeting the speciﬁc requirements of satellite-
AAV-enabled MEC and DC optimization problems.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, we present the considered satellite-AAV-
enabled joint MEC-DC network, including the network model,
communication model, MEC model, and DC model.
A. Network Model
Fig. 1 illustrates the considered satellite-AAV-enabled joint
MEC-DC system. In this system, there are NG stationary IoT
GDs in a monitored area, denoted as g ∈G = {1, 2, . . . , NG},
and these GDs have different functions and require performing
computing or uploading data. For example, the GDs may
need to perform computation-intensive tasks with tight time
constraints, such as ﬁre warning [38] and image processing
[39]. Moreover, these GDs continuously store data during
operation and need to be uploaded or reported for further
analysis. However, since the GDs in the considered scenario
are in remote areas, there is no communication infrastructure
that can directly provide communication and computing ser-
vices. Moreover, the GDs have limited computing capability
and restricted storage capacity, hence, the data needs to be
transmitted to a nearby edge server or data center for process-
ing or storage. Therefore, there is a set of AAVs, denoted as
v ∈V = {1, 2, . . . , NV }, equipped with computing units and
storage units to provide edge computing and data collecting
service for the GDs. Following the edge computing and data
collection (DC), the result data is returned to the GDs, and
the collected data is uploaded to an LEO satellite, denoted as
Sa, which can provide backhaul connectivity to the Internet
and has computing capability to complement the MEC.
In a system operation cycle, the time horizon is divided
into T slots with a length of τ, which can be denoted as
t ∈T
= {1, 2, . . . , T}. In each time slot t, the GDs
accumulate the data waiting to be collected and generate
computing tasks at irregular intervals. Note that the AAVs are
equipped with an omnidirectional antenna and a directional
antenna to communicate with the GDs and the satellite,
respectively. Subsequently, each AAV ﬂies or hovers over the
GDs to provide edge computing service and collect stored
data. Speciﬁcally, as shown in Fig. 1, the AAVs ﬁrst transmit
the MEC task data and start collecting the stored data of
the nearby GDs while they are performing computing, and
the transmission of MEC task data is ﬁnished. Note that we
consider that the AAVs do not have the full-duplex function
[40], and thus, the transmission of DC will be interrupted when
MEC result data requires returning. At the same time, the
AAVs can decide whether to ofﬂoad part of the MEC tasks
to the satellite Sa to alleviate the computational workload.
Since GDs usually have limited transmit power and cannot
communicate with the satellite directly, the result data will
be returned to the AAV and further back to the GD after the
satellite computation is completed.
Moreover, since the AAVs communicate with the GDs under
the same frequency band, there exists co-channel interference
that needs to be considered. Furthermore, since IoT devices
are generally difﬁcult to apply one-to-many communication
protocols due to their limited transmit power and computation
resources, we consider that a GD can only be served by
one AAV while an AAV can serve multiple GDs within a
time slot [8]. Additionally, the orthogonal frequency division
multiple access (OFDMA) protocol is applied in each AAV to
avoid inner-cell interference [41].
Without loss of generality, we consider a 3D Cartesian
coordinate system, where the AAVs move at a ﬁxed altitude
H. Therefore, the positions of AAVs and GDs in time slot
t are denoted as Pv(t) = {xv(t), yv(t), H} and Pg(t) =
{xg(t), yg(t), 0}, respectively.
B. Communication Model
Based on the aforementioned system, the considered air-
ground channel model and the satellite-air channel model are
introduced.
1) Ground-to-Air (G2A) / Air-to-Ground (A2G) Channel
Model: In each time slot, the channels between the GDs and
AAVs are considered quasi-static and vary across different
time slots [42]. Subsequently, the AAVs can establish line-
of-sight (LoS) links with the GDs due to their high ﬂight
altitude [3]. Therefore, the probabilistic LoS model is adopted
in this work and the probability of Los link is given by
P LoS
v,g (t) = 1/(1+n1 exp{−n2((180/π) arctan(H/dv,g(t))−
n1)}), where the distance between AAV v and GD g is
represented by dv,g(t) = ∥Pv(t) −Pg(t)∥, n1 and n2 are
constant values related to the environment [33]. Accordingly,
the path loss between AAV v and GD g is given by
PLv,g(t) = Lv,g(t) + P LoS
v,g (t)δLoS + P NLoS
v,g
(t)δNLoS, (1)
where Lv,g(t) = 20 log dv,g(t) + 20 log fc + 20 log( 4π
c ) is the
free space path loss between AAV v and GD g in time slot t
and fc, as well as c, are the carrier frequency and velocity


--- Page 6 ---
6
of light, respectively. Moreover, P NLoS
v,g
(t) = 1 −P Los
v,g (t) is
the probability of a non-LoS (NLoS) link between AAV v
and GD g in time slot t, δLoS and δNLoS are the constants
corresponding to the excessive path losses for LoS and NLoS
links, respectively.
As a result, the channel gain between AAV v and GD g is
given by
hv,g(t) = 10−
P Lv,g(t)
10
= 10−
(δLoS −δNLoS )P LoS
v,g
(t)+δNLoS
10
(∥Pv(t) −Pg(t)∥)2 
4πfc
c
2 .
(2)
To represent the association state between the AAVs and
GDs, we deﬁne an indicator variable Xv,g(t) = 1 or 0 to
denote whether AAV v is associated with GD g. As such,
the transmission rate from GD g to AAV v is given by
RG2A
v,g (t) = Bv,g(t) log2

1 +
pg(t)hv,g(t)
Im+n0Bv,g(t)

, where pg(t)
is the transmit power of GD g in time slot t, Im
=
PM
j=1,j̸=v
PN
l=1,l̸=gXj,l(t)pj,l(t)hj,l(t) is the co-channel in-
terference from other GDs associated with other AAVs in time
slot t, n0 is the noise power spectral density, and Bv,g(t)
denotes the bandwidth that AAV v allocates to GD g in time
slot t.
Since the result data (e.g., face recognition and image
processing) is generally much less than the MEC task data
[8], AAV downlink transmission durations are very short.
Therefore, the inter-cell interference from other AAVs can be
ignored for simplicity, allowing consideration of interference-
free downlink transmission [43]. As such, the transmis-
sion rate from AAV v to GD g is given by RA2G
v,g (t) =
Bv,g(t) log2

1 + pv(t)hv,g(t)
n0Bv,g(t)

, where pv(t) is the transmit
power of AAV v in time slot t.
2) Air-to-Satellite (A2S) / Satellite-to-Air (S2A) Channel
Model: In the process of communication between the satellite
and AAVs, we consider the impact of rain attenuation, which
can be formulated based on the Weibull distribution [44].
Therefore, the power attenuation of the satellite-AAV link is
given by
γv,s(t) =
λ2GvGs
(4πdv,s(t))2 10−Frain
10 ,
(3)
where λ is the carrier wave length, Gv and Gs are the antenna
gains of AAV v and satellite Sa, respectively. Moreover,
dv,g(t) represents the distance between AAV v and satellite Sa,
and Frain is the rain attenuation modeled by Weibull distribu-
tion [44]. Thus, the transmission rate from AAV v to satellite
Sa is given by RA2S
v,s (t) = Bv,s(t) log2

1 + pv(t)γv,s(t)
n0Bv,s(t)

,
where Bv,s(t) is the bandwidth that satellite Sa allocates to
AAV v in time slot t, and its value is equal to the total satellite
bandwidth Bs divided by the number of AAVs connected to
satellite Sa in time slot t.
Similarly, the transmission rate from satellite Sa to AAV v
is given by RS2A
v,s (t) = Bv,s(t) log2

1 + ps(t)γv,s(t)
n0Bv,s(t)

, where
ps(t) is the transmit power of satellite Sa in time slot t.
C. MEC Model
The MEC tasks generated by the GDs have their inherent
properties in the considered system. Speciﬁcally, the MEC
tasks generally have a processing time constraint, which
is set to ensure the quality of service (QoS) of the GDs.
Moreover, in the considered scenario, the communication and
computation resources are limited, thus, the MEC tasks may
not be processed immediately but have a deadline, such as
[45]. Therefore, a task is considered valid when it starts
to be processed within the deadline, otherwise, the task is
invalid. Based on this, we denote the set of tasks of GD g
as fg,k ∈F = {fg,1, fg,2, . . . , fg,Kg}, where Kg denotes
the number of tasks of GD g and a four-element tuple
{Lg,k, T max
g,k , Dg,k, ρg,k} is used to characterize the MEC task
fg,k, where Lg,k, T max
g,k , and Dg,k represent the data length,
the maximum tolerable delay, and the deadline of the task fg,k,
respectively. Moreover, ρg,k is the ratio of the result data size
to the task data size, which is in the value interval of (0, 1).
1) Task Generation: In real-world scenarios, the MEC tasks
usually randomly arrive and are unpredictable. To simulate this
randomness, existing studies typically model task generation
by sampling from a Bernoulli distribution or by assuming a
normally distributed generation probability for each time slot
[46], [47]. However, these static assumptions often result in
scenarios that are either consistently dense or sparse. Such
lack of workload volatility limits the ability of algorithms to
learn robust strategies, potentially requiring complex manual
reward shaping to accommodate extreme cases. Additionally,
these approaches assume that the task generation probability
is constant and independent across time slots, which fails
to capture the dynamic nature of real-world task arrivals.
Therefore, to better reﬂect the stochastic nature of task arrivals,
we adopt the exponential distribution [48], which is widely
used to model the random inter-arrival times of computation
tasks in MEC systems. Consequently, the task generation
model can be given by
Pg,f(t) = 1 −e−δf t,
(4)
where Pg,f(t) is the probability that GD g generates an MEC
task f in time slot t, δf is the task density coefﬁcient, which
controls the speed of task generation. Moreover, to simulate
the stochastic nature of the length of the task data, we consider
a Poisson distribution to model the size of the task data, i.e.,
Lg,k ∼P(λMEC).
2) End-to-End (E2E) Delay: The MEC delay mainly con-
sists of three parts, which are the uplink transmission delay,
the computation delay, and the downlink transmission delay,
respectively.
At the beginning of the MEC process, the task data is ﬁrst
uploaded to the AAVs from the GDs and the uplink trans-
mission delay from GD g to AAV v is given by T G2A
v,g,k(t) =
Xv,g(t)Lg,k/RG2A
v,g . Subsequently, if AAV v has requirement
that task fg,k needs to be further ofﬂoaded to satellite Sa, the
uplink transmission delay from AAV v to satellite Sa is given
by T A2S
s,v,g,k(t) = Lg,k/RA2S
v,s (t).
After the transmission of task data, the MEC tasks are
computed on the AAVs or the satellite. Moreover, we con-
sider that the GDs have limited computational resources, and


--- Page 7 ---
7
thus the local computing is unavailable and the tasks are
considered to be ofﬂoaded only to the AAVs or the satellite
[49]. Therefore, when task fg,k is ofﬂoaded to AAV v to
be computed, the computation delay in time slot t is given
by T com
v,g,k(t) = Xv,gIvLg,k/ωv, where Iv is the computation
intensity on AAV v (cycles/bit) and ωv denotes the computing
capability, i.e., the CPU operating frequency of AAV v.
Similarly, the computation delay on satellite Sa in time slot
t is given by T com
s,g,k(t) = IsLg,k/ωs, where Is and ωs are
computation intensity on satellite Sa and computing capability
of satellite Sa, respectively.
Finally, the result data is transmitted back to the GDs
from the satellite or the AAVs. Speciﬁcally, the downlink
transmission delay from satellite Sa to AAV v is given by
T S2A
s,v,g,k(t) = ρg,kLg,k/RS2A
v,s (t). Subsequently, the down-
link transmission delay from AAV v to GD g is given by
T A2G
v,g,k(t) = Xv,gρg,kLg,k/RA2G
v,g (t).
Therefore, in the case that task k only be ofﬂoaded to AAV
v to be processed, the delay for task k in time slot t can be
given by
Tv,g,k(t) = T G2A
v,g,k(t) + T com
v,g,k(t) + T A2G
v,g,k(t).
(5)
Moreover, in the case that task k is further ofﬂoaded to AAV
v to be processed, the delay for task k in time slot t can be
given by
Ts,v,g,k(t) =T G2A
v,g,k(t) + T A2S
s,v,g,k(t) + T com
s,g,k(t) + T S2A
s,v,g,k(t)+
T A2G
v,g,k(t) + 2T pro
s,v (t),
(6)
where T pro
s,v (t) = dv,s(t)/c is the propagation delay.
As a result, the total E2E delay of tasks ofﬂoaded from the
GDs to the AAV v in time slot t is given by
Tv(t) =
XNG
g=1(1 −og(t))Tv,g,k(t) +
XNG
g=1 og(t)Ts,v,g,k(t),
(7)
where og(t) is a ofﬂoading variable, which denotes whether
the task f from GD g is further ofﬂoaded to the satellite.
3) MEC Task completion rate: In IoT MEC scenarios,
tasks are typically latency-sensitive and subject to strict de-
lay constraints. A task is considered failed if it cannot be
completed within its maximum tolerable latency due to the
weak communication signal, heavy computational loads, or
insufﬁcient CPU computing capability on the nearby edge
servers. Therefore, the task completion status is an important
metric to reﬂect the service coverage capability and the QoS
of the GDs. Denote bg,k as the completion status indicator
variable with a value of 1 or 0 to indicate whether the task fg,k
is completed or not, respectively. As such, the task completion
rate in the system is deﬁned as follows:
CMEC =
PNG
g=1
PKg
k=1 bg,k
PNG
g=1 Kg
× 100%.
(8)
D. DC Model
Recall that the GDs accumulate data in every time slot, and
the AAVs need to collect the delay-insensitive data and upload
it to the satellite to return to the cloud data center. Therefore,
the local data accumulation of the GDs is considered to be
generated continuously in each time slot, and the amount of
data generated by GD g in time slot t follows a Poisson
distribution, namely Dg(t) ∼P(λDC) [50].
Subsequently, the accumulated data is collected and tem-
porarily stored by the AAVs before being uploaded to the
satellite. Notably, the collected data is delay-insensitive, which
allows AAVs to defer immediate upload. Furthermore, given
the potential signiﬁcant distance from cloud data centers, the
AAVs ﬁrst handle the transmission of the MEC task data,
and only collect and upload data to the satellite when the
MEC tasks are not being transmitted. Therefore, the amount
of collected data is deﬁned as the amount of data received by
satellite Sa, which is given by
D(t) =
XNV
v=1 τ DC
v
(t)RA2S
v,s (t),
(9)
where τ DC
v
(t) denotes the duration of AAV v performing DC
in time slot t.
Similar to the MEC task completion rate, we deﬁne the
satellite DC rate to reﬂect the DC service coverage capability
of the considered system. The DC rate is the ratio of the total
volume of the received DC data at the satellite Sa to the total
amount of the data generated by all GDs, which is given by
CDC =
PT
t=0 D(t)
PNG
g=1
PT
t=0 Dg(t)
× 100%.
(10)
E. Rotary-Wing AAV Energy Consumption Model
To ensure the continuous operation of the considered
satellite-AAV-enabled joint MEC-DC network, the energy
management of the AAVs is crucial due to the limited energy
capacity of AAVs. Speciﬁcally, the energy consumption of the
AAVs mainly comprises propulsion power consumption and
computation energy consumption.
We denote Em
v (t) as the propulsion power consumption
of AAV v hovering and moving in a two-dimensional (2D)
plane in time slot t, and the details of the propulsion power
consumption model can refer to [7].
For the edge computing on AAV v, the energy consumed
to process task fg,k in time slot t can be given by [51]
Ec
v,g(t) = κvCLg,k(t),
(11)
where κv is the energy consumed per CPU cycle on AAV v.
Therefore, the overall energy consumption of AAV v in time
slot t is deﬁned as follows:
Ev(t) = Em
v (t) +
XNG
g=1 Ec
v,g(t).
(12)
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In the considered satellite-AAV joint MEC-DC system, the
satellite and AAVs are considered to provide MEC and DC
services for the GDs to enhance the performance of both MEC
and DC under energy constraints. Therefore, the considered
system involves three objectives, i.e., reducing the average E2E
delay of the computing tasks of GDs, increasing the amount of
collected data of GDs, and reducing the energy consumption
of AAVs.


--- Page 8 ---
8
During the operation of the aforementioned system, due
to the co-channel interference, the position of the AAVs, the
association between the AAVs and GDs, and the bandwidth
allocation of the AAVs jointly determine the communication
rate between the GDs and AAVs, thereby affecting the average
E2E delay and the amount of collected data. As such, these
three variables are interdependent and coupled. Additionally,
the ofﬂoading decision from the AAVs to the satellite can
inﬂuence the computational load balancing during MEC and
the computing energy consumption of the AAVs. Thus, there
is an interplay and conﬂicting correlation among the AAV
ofﬂoading decision, the AAV movement, the GD association,
and the AAV bandwidth allocation. The deﬁnitions of these
decision variables are as follows.
We deﬁne four decision variables related to the AAV: (i)
The AAV positions consisting of the continuous coordinates
of each AAV are represented by the matrix P = {Pv(t)|v ∈
V, t ∈T }. (ii) The association between the GDs and AAVs is
represented by the matrix X = {Xv,g(t)|v ∈V, g ∈G, t ∈T }
with each discrete element denotes whether the AAV-GD are
associated. (iii) The AAV ofﬂoading decision is represented
by the matrix O = {ov(t)|v ∈V, t ∈T } containing the
vectors of the AAV service capacity size dimensions, with each
discrete element of the vector representing whether to ofﬂoad
the task to the satellite. (iv) The AAV bandwidth allocation
is represented by the matrix B = {bv(t)|v ∈V, t ∈T },
where each continuous vector element represents the size of
the bandwidth allocated to the GD associated with the AAV. In
the following, the expressions for the considered optimization
objectives are provided. Additionally, a detailed analysis of
the weighted sum method employed in this paper and alter-
native multi-objective optimization approaches is provided in
Appendix A.
Optimization Objective 1: The ﬁrst objective is to improve
the performance of the AAVs and the satellite when providing
the MEC services for the GDs, namely, the average E2E delay.
Thus, the ﬁrst objective is given by
f1 (P , X, O, B) =
PT
t=1
PNV
v=1 Tv(t)
PNG
g=1 Kg
.
(13)
Optimization Objective 2: The second objective is to in-
crease the amount of collected data, which is given by
f2(P , X, O, B) =
XT
t=1 D(t).
(14)
Optimization Objective 3: The third optimization objective
is to reduce the energy consumption of the AAVs during the
processes of MEC and DC. Therefore, the third optimization
objective is given by
f3(P , X, O) =
XT
t=1
XNV
v=1 Ev(t).
(15)
According to the aforementioned three objectives, the con-
sidered optimization problem can be formulated as follows:
P :
min
{P ,X,O,B}Q = {f1, −f2, f3},
(16a)
s.t. T f
v,g,k(t) ≤T max
g,k , ∀v ∈V, ∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T ,
(16b)
T f
s,v,g,k(t) ≤T max
g,k , ∀v ∈V, ∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T ,
(16c)
X
v∈V Xv,g(t) = 1, ∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T ,
(16d)
X
g∈G
Xv,g(t) ≤N max
g
, ∀g ∈G, ∀t ∈T , (16e)
xmin ≤xv(t) ≤xmax, ∀v ∈V, ∀t ∈T ,
(16f)
ymin ≤yv(t) ≤ymax, ∀v ∈V, ∀t ∈T ,
(16g)
0 ≤mv(t) ≤mmax
v
, ∀v ∈V, ∀t ∈T ,
(16h)
∥Pa(t) −Pb(t)∥≥dmin, ∀a, b ∈V, a ̸= b,
∀t ∈T ,
(16i)
where (16b) and (16c) impose the constraints on the delay
of the tasks for the GDs, (16d) and (16e) constrain the ranges
of the associated indicator variables and limit the maximum
number of the associated AAVs. Moreover, (16f) and (16g)
restrict the movement range of the AAVs in the X and Y
directions, (16h) limits the maximum movement distance of an
AAV within a time slot, and (16i) ensures collision avoidance
among the AAVs.
The problem P exhibits the following key properties. First,
the problem P is an MINLP problem, containing both contin-
uous decision variables (P , B) and integer variables (X, O),
with nonlinear relationships in the constraints such as (16i).
Furthermore, the problem P is non-convex due to its non-
convex constraints including (16b), (16c), and (16i) [8], [35].
Second, the optimization objectives of the problem P are in-
ﬂuenced by the dynamic nature of the tasks from the GDs and
the long-term movement state of the AAVs. This requires both
immediate performance to adapt to the dynamic changes in the
environment and sustainable long-term operational strategies.
Finally, the solution space of problem P is complex due to
the high-dimensional and interdependent variables, which also
exhibit multi-modal decision characteristics where the multiple
distinct solutions may achieve similar performance levels.
Consequently, the problem P is a non-convex MINLP
problem with long-term optimization objectives and dynamics.
Although traditional methods such as convex optimization
and evolutionary computing are effective in many cases, they
are unsuitable for optimization in the dynamic and uncertain
environments. For instance, in every time slot, traditional
methods need to iterate repeatedly to learn the optimal strategy,
which may lead to the excessive computational costs and be
inefﬁcient. Fortunately, DRL is capable of providing sequential
dynamic decision-making and optimal control for long-term
optimization problems in dynamic environments, which is a
promising method [35]. In the following section, the proposed
solution is detailed.
V. DRL-BASED METHOD
In this section, we propose the QAGOB approach to address
the considered joint optimization problem. Speciﬁcally, we
ﬁrst employ an MDP to reformulate the considered joint opti-
mization problem and simplify the action space. Subsequently,
the QAGOB method is proposed.


--- Page 9 ---
9
A. MDP Simpliﬁcation and Formulation
The problem P can be reformulated as an MDP to facilitate
the application of DRL, which typically consists of a ﬁve-tuple
< S, A, P◦, R, γ >, where S, A, P◦, R, and γ represent the
state space, action space, state transition probability, reward,
and discount factor, respectively.
Generally, the agent can be deployed in a local control
center and all decision variables in the formulated optimization
problem are converted into the action space in the MDP to
make decisions. However, there are several main challenges
in deriving the action space from the decision variables in
the modeled problem P . First, the decision variables include
both continuous variables (P , B) and discrete variables (X,
O), which are usually difﬁcult to solve by directly using
DRL algorithms. Second, although the hybrid action space
can be converted into a continuous action space by mapping
the continuous space to a discrete space, the dimension of the
solution space of the GD association variable X may grow
exponentially with the number of the GDs and the AAVs,
making it difﬁcult for DRL to train and converge. Moreover,
some decision variables may encounter the problem of the
varying action dimensions when converted into the elements of
the action space. Speciﬁcally, when considering the bandwidth
allocation and ofﬂoading decisions, the number of the GDs
that need to be considered depends on the number of the
GDs associated with the AAV in time slot t. Therefore, further
consideration of the action space is required. These challenges
motivate us to simplify and transform the action space, which
is described as follows.
1) Action Reduction and Transformation: To ensure stable
DRL training and convergence, an efﬁcient low-complexity
GD association strategy is ﬁrst employed to reduce the action-
space dimensionality. Speciﬁcally, GS-based methods, charac-
terized by low complexity and stable matching, are widely
used to obtain GD associations in each time slot. The GS-
based GD association strategy is summarized as follows.
Initially, GD g sends a request to its nearest AAV v, and
AAV v accepts GD g if it has not reached its service capacity.
Otherwise, the AAV compares its currently served GDs and
disconnects the farthest one to admit the new GD. The
disconnected GD then requests the second-nearest AAV and
repeats this process until all AAVs reach capacity or all GDs
exhaust their available AAV choices. The detailed description
is presented in Algorithm 1.
Subsequently, the problems of the hybrid action space and
varying action dimensions need to be addressed. Suppose that
in time slot t, the number of GDs associated with AAV v is m.
For the discrete ofﬂoading decision variable O, its relatively
small dimension has minimal impact on the DRL algorithm
training stability. As the ofﬂoading decisions for each GD are
independent, we can deﬁne them as continuous actions and
only consider the top m actions based on the the numerical
values for ofﬂoading actions of AAV v, which are then mapped
to the discrete decisions. This approach eliminates the variable
action dimension issue while maintaining the decision efﬁcacy.
For the variable dimensionality of bandwidth allocation, we
implement a softmax-based mapping method since the total
Algorithm 1: GS-based GD association strategy
1 Initialize: Create an available AAV list Vg and set variable
CONSg ←False for g ∈G;
2 while ∃g, CONSg = False and Vg ̸= ∅do
3
Choose the nearest AAV v ∈Vg;
4
Xv,g(t) ←1;
5
CONSg ←True;
6
if P
g∈G Xv,g(t) > N max
g
then
7
Find the farthest GD gf;
8
Xv,gf (t) ←0;
9
Vgf ←Vgf \{v};
10
CONSgf ←False;
11
end
12 end
13 Return X(t);
bandwidth for each AAV is ﬁxed and the bandwidth of each
associated GD needs to be determined. Speciﬁcally, we extract
the m highest values from the bandwidth allocation policy
for AAV v, obtain proportions using the softmax function,
and multiply these by the total bandwidth of each AAV to
determine the allocated bandwidth for each associated GD,
which can be given by
Bv,g(t) = Bv ×
exp (bv,g(t))
P
g′∈Gv(t) exp (bv,g′(t)),
(17)
where Gv(t) is the set of GDs associated with AAV v, bv,g(t) is
the raw bandwidth allocation value for GD g from the policy,
and Bv is the total bandwidth available for AAV v.
Hence, the high-dimensional hybrid variable-dimension ac-
tion space derived from the decision variables can be reduced
and transformed into a ﬁxed-dimension continuous action
space related to the AAV movement control, ofﬂoading de-
cisions, and bandwidth allocation. Next, the speciﬁc MDP
formulation is provided.
2) MDP Formulation: Beneﬁting from the aforementioned
simpliﬁcation and transformation of the action space, the
considered optimization problem can be reformulated as an
MDP with a continuous action space, and the key deﬁnitions
are given as follows:
• State Space: Since the task ofﬂoading and DC in the joint
MEC-DC system depend on the relative distance of the
AAVs and the GDs, the task status of GDs, the amount of
stored data, and the remaining time, we deﬁne the states
as follows:
st = {P t
V, P t
G, U t
G, Dt
G, tr},
(18)
where P t
V, P t
G, U t
G, and Dt
G, tr represent the AAV
positions, the GD positions, the urgency of the earliest
tasks of GDs, the amount of stored data of GDs, and the
number of remaining time slots in time slot t, respec-
tively. Speciﬁcally, U t
G equals the product of the deadline
and the maximum tolerable delay of the earliest task of
each GD in time slot t, and tr equals T −t.
• Action Space: As aforementioned, in time slot t, the
AAV movement, ofﬂoading decisions, and bandwidth
allocation are optimized in the MDP to minimize the
average E2E delay and AAV energy consumption while


--- Page 10 ---
10
buffer
Diffusion
{끫룮ठ
࢚, 끫룮ऑ
࢚, ࢁऑ
࢚, ࡰऑ
࢚, ࢚࢘}
State
ݏ௧
ܽ௧
Action
Actor
Target actor
Soft
update
Gradient
descent
Critics
Target critics
ࡽࣂ૚
ࡽࣂ૛
ࡽࣂ૚
′
ࡽࣂ૛
′
Soft
update
Gradient
descent
Gradient
descent
࢙௧, ࢇ௧, ࢘௧, ࢙௧+1
…
ݏ
ܽ
ݏ
ܽ
ݏ
ܽ
ࢄࡺ
ࢄ࢔
ࢄ࢔−૚
ࢄ૚
ࢄ૙
…
…
Reverse process
(࢙࢚, ࡺ, ࢞ࡺ)
(࢙࢚, ࢔, ࢞࢔)
(࢙࢚, ࢔−૚, ࢞࢔−૚)
(࢙࢚, ૚, ࢞૚)
argmax ܳ(ݏ, ܽ)
Optimal 
policy
Sample data batch
Sample
Weighted Q
Action 
selection
(࢙௧, ࢇ௧, ࢘௧, ࢙௧+1)
(࢙௧, ࢇ௧, ࢘௧, ࢙௧+1)
(࢙௧, ࢇ௧, ࢘௧, ࢙௧+1)
GS-based 
association
Reward 
function
buffer
Replay
ࢗ(࢞࢔, ࢞࢔−૚)
Forward process
Gaussian
noise
࢓ठ
࢚
ࢻठ
࢚
࢕ठ
࢚
࢈ठ
࢚
ࢄ(࢚)
Fig. 2. The schematic of the proposed QAGOB approach. The architecture integrates a diffusion model into the DRL actor-critic structure to serve as the
policy network, whereby the diffusion policy generates complex continuous actions via a reverse denoising process. Furthermore, the device association is
decoupled from the neural network and efﬁciently solved by a GS-based approach.
maximizing the amount of collected data. Consequently,
the action set is deﬁned as follows:
at = {mt
V, αt
V, ot
V, bt
V},
(19)
where mt
V, αt
V, ot
V, and bt
V represent the distance, the
direction of AAV movement, and the decisions related to
ofﬂoading as well as the bandwidth allocation for each
associated GDs of the AAVs in time slot t, respectively.
• Reward Function: In DRL models, the immediate re-
wards obtained after the output action interacts with
the environment provide a quantiﬁable measure of the
policy in a given state, and subsequently, the agent
continuously learns the optimal policy based on the
returned rewards. Thus, the formulated joint optimization
problem of minimizing the average E2E delay and AAV
energy, as well as maximizing the volume of collected
data, can be transformed into a problem of maximizing
the cumulative rewards, and the reward function can be
deﬁned as follows:
rt = rt
l + ρ1rt
d + ρ2rt
e + rt
p,
(20)
where ρ1 and ρ2 are two weighting factors used to unify
the reward terms to the same order of magnitude. rt
l is
equal to the difference between the maximum tolerable
delay of the task and the actual E2E delay. Moreover,
rt
d
= D(t) and rt
e
= −E(t) respectively quantify
the total amount of collected data and the total energy
consumption of all AAVs in time slot t. Additionally, rt
p
is a penalty reward, applicable when an AAV violates the
boundary constraints or collides with another AAV.
B. Diffusion Model-based Solution
In this section, the motivation for using the diffusion model-
based methods is ﬁrst elaborated. Subsequently, the fundamen-
tal principles of the QVPO are introduced. Consequently, the
QAGOB approach is proposed.
1) Motivation for Using Diffusion Model-based Method:
DRL typically employs multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) as
function approximators in the policy networks due to their
simplicity and ease of implementation. However, when using
MLPs to output the actions in the complex, high-dimensional
continuous control scenarios, they suffer from the follow-
ing limitations. First, MLP-based policies often produce the
single-modal action distributions (e.g., Gaussian), which fail
to capture the multiple viable strategies in the complex en-
vironments [36]. For instance, the agent may need to choose
between mutually exclusive actions to satisfy MEC, DC, or
energy-saving requirements. A single-modal output poorly rep-
resents such a scenario, as it cannot assign high probabilities
to multiple separated action regions simultaneously. Second,
MLPs inherently limit the exploration capabilities as their
deterministic or the narrow stochastic sampling tends to con-
verge prematurely to the suboptimal modes, especially in the
sparse-reward or high-dimensional spaces [52]. Consequently,
in the high-dimensional continuous control tasks, such as the
considered satellite-AAV joint MEC-DC scenario, traditional
MLP-based policy architectures may lead to inefﬁcient learn-
ing and poor generalization, struggling to adapt to the high-
dimensional continuous control scenarios.
In contrast, generative approaches offer a transformative ap-
proach to the policy representation in DRL, which can address
the core limitations of the MLP-based methods. Among them,


--- Page 11 ---
11
transformer-based and generative adversarial network (GAN)-
based approaches can be integrated with DRL. However, they
typically produce single-modal action distributions and suffer
from unstable training processes [52], [53]. Diffusion models,
on the other hand, provide a promising alternative through
their capability for multi-modal action generation, structured
exploration, and progressively stable training characteristics
[54]. First, diffusion models inherently support multi-modal
action distributions by modeling the policies as stochastic
processes and enhance the representation of strategies. Second,
the noise-adding and denoising mechanism of diffusion models
enables the structured exploration. Speciﬁcally, by iteratively
reﬁning the actions through the reverse diffusion steps, they
balance the exploration (stochastic sampling) and exploita-
tion (gradient-guided optimization), thereby avoiding local
optima, which is common in MLP-based policies. Further-
more, diffusion-based policies demonstrate superior training
stability and robustness since their gradual denoising process
enables smoothing policy optimization and mitigating gradient
variance. By combining these properties, diffusion models
achieve higher exploration performance, adaptability to the
multi-modal tasks, and reliability in the complex, highly dy-
namic, and high-dimensional continuous control environments.
Therefore, we employ a diffusion model-based enhanced DRL
approach to solve the considered optimization problem.
2) Preliminary of Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
(DDPM): Diffusion models such as DDPM [55], are gener-
ative models that learn to gradually denoise data through a
sequential process. They consist of two key phases, which are
a forward process that incrementally corrupts data into noise,
and a reverse process that learns to reverse this corruption
to recover the original data distribution. In what follows, the
detailed procedure of DDPM is provided.
Forward Process: Given an original data sample x0 , the
forward process progressively adds the Gaussian noise over
N steps. At each step n, the noisy sample xn is generated
from xn−1 as follows:
q(xn|xn−1) = N(xn;
p
1 −βnxn−1, βnI),
(21)
where I denotes the identity matrix, and βn is the variance
schedule. By leveraging the Markov chain property, the pos-
terior probability of xN conditioned on x0 can be derived in
a closed form as follows:
q(xN|x0) = Qn=N
n=1 q(xn|xn−1).
(22)
Moreover, the relationship between xn and x0 at any step
n in the forward process is described as follows:
xn =
√
¯αx0 +
√
1 −¯αnϵ,
(23)
where ¯αn = QN
n=1 αn, wherein αn = 1−βn, and ϵ ∼N(0, I)
is a standard Gaussian noise. Eventually, xN converges to an
isotropic Gaussian distribution N(0, I).
Reverse Process: The reverse process starts from noise dis-
tribution p(xN) = N(xN; 0, I) and iteratively denoises it to
reconstruct x0. At each step n, the model learns to approximate
the true posterior q(xn−1|xn) using a parameterized Gaussian
transition:
p(xn−1|xn) = N(xn−1; µθ(xn, n), Σθ(xn, n)),
(24)
where µθ and Σθ are the learnable mean function and variance
function implemented as a neural network parameterized by θ,
respectively. As such, the reverse process is trained to reverse
the forward diffusion steps, gradually reﬁning xN into x0.
Variational Lower Bound (VLB) Loss: During the training
process, the objective of DDPM is to maximize the VLB,
which is given by LV LB = Eq(x0:N)
h
log
pθ(x0:N)
q(x1:N|x0)
i
and can
be simpliﬁed to the ﬁnal loss, which is given by
En∼[1,N],x0,ϵn
hϵn −ϵθ(√¯
αnx0 +
√
1 −¯αnϵn, n)
2i
.
(25)
3) Basic Principles of QVPO: QVPO is a diffusion-based
model-free online RL algorithm. Speciﬁcally, QVPO intro-
duces several novel techniques to improve the sample efﬁ-
ciency and training stability of online RL, including the Q-
weighted variational loss, entropy regularization, and efﬁcient
behavior policy design. These mechanisms address the key
bottlenecks encountered when combining diffusion models
with online RL, such as obtaining high-quality state-action sets
as training samples, controlling training costs with effective
exploration capabilities, and reducing the high variance of
diffusion policies during the online interactions. By coordi-
nating a diffusion-based policy network with value-guided
optimization, QVPO is able to achieve robust learning in the
complex high-dimensional continuous control environments.
Q-weighted Variational Objective for Diffusion Policy: To
train the diffusion policy using the variational bound objective,
QVPO proposes a Q-weighted variational objective. Specif-
ically, by adding the Q-values of the state-action pairs to
the VLB objective, the diffusion policy can be effectively
optimized. In this process, to address the issues of negative
Q-values and the requirement for the high-quality training
samples, QVPO further introduces a transformation function
to convert Q-values into equivalent non-negative weights and
obtain the high-quality samples, which is given by
L(θ) ≜Es,a∼πk(a|s),ϵ,n
h
ωeq(s, a)
ϵ −ϵθ
 √¯αna+
√
1 −¯αnϵ, s, n
2 i
,
(26)
ωeq(s, a) ≜ωqadv(s, a) =
(
A(s, a),
A(s, a) ≥0,
0,
A(s, a) < 0,
(27)
where A(s, a) = Q(s, a) −V (s, a) is the advantage function
and V (s, a) denotes the importance of the state s.
Diffusion Entropy Regularization: To enhance the explo-
ration capability of the diffusion model within limited steps
to avoid the excessive training and evaluation costs, QVPO
introduces an entropy regularization term for the diffusion
policy as follows:
Lent(θ) ≜Es,a∼U,ϵ,n

ωent(s)
ϵ −ϵθ
 √¯αna+
√
1 −¯αnϵ, s, n
2i
,
(28)
where ωent(s) = ωent
PNs
i=1
ωeq(s,ai)
Ns
is a coefﬁcient related to
state s for balancing the exploration and exploitation and Ns
is the number of training samples selected from the diffusion
strategy for state s.


--- Page 12 ---
12
Algorithm 2: QAGOB
1 Initialize: Replay buffer Rb, diffusion buffer Rd,
diffusion-based policy network πϕ with parameter ϕ, critic
networks Qθ1, and Qθ2 with parameter θ1, θ2;
2 for episode= 1, 2, · · · , E do
3
Reset the environment and observe the initial state s0;
4
for t = 1, 2, · · · , T do
5
Sample ς candidate actions {ai}ς
i=1 ∼πϕ through
the denoising process;
6
Select the action at with the highest Q value
according to Eq. (29);
7
Store state-action pair {st, at} →Rd;
8
Calculate GD association matrix X(t) by using
Algorithm 1;
9
Apply action at and association matrix X(t) to
obtain reward rt, and observe next state st+1;
10
Store transition (st, at, rt, st+1) →Rb;
11
Sample Nπ state-action pairs from Rd, and generate
Nu samples from uniform distribution U;
12
Endow the Nπ samples with the weights according
to Eq. (27);
13
Select an action amax with the maximum weight
among Nπ samples;
14
Endow the Nu samples with weight
ωent(s) = ωent · ωeq(s, amax);
15
Update the policy network parameters by
minimizing the summation of Eqs. (26) and (28);
16
Sample a batch of transitions from Rb;
17
Construct the TD target as yt = rt + γQθ(st+1,
πς
ϕ(a|st+1)) for each transition;
18
Update the critic network parameters via MSE loss
[56];
19
Update the target network parameters:
θi ←ϱθi + (1 −ϱ)θi, i ∈{1, 2},
ϕ ←ϱϕ + (1 −ϱ)ϕ, where ϱ is the soft update
parameter.
20
end
21 end
Reducing Diffusion Policy Variance via Action Selection:
Despite the diffusion model enabling online RL agents to
explore diverse policies, its inherent stochasticity introduces
signiﬁcant policy variance, leading to inefﬁciency in the en-
vironment interactions via the behavior policy. To mitigate
this, QVPO proposes an efﬁcient behavior policy πς
θ, which
enhances the sample efﬁciency by prioritizing high-Q actions
during the exploration. Speciﬁcally, the core idea is that the
action samples with higher Q-values are more likely to produce
trajectories with substantial cumulative rewards, thus being
more valuable for training. Formally, the efﬁcient behavior
policy is deﬁned as follows:
πς
θ(a | s) ≜
argmax
a∈{a1,...,aς∼πθ(a|s)}
Q(s, a),
(29)
where ς represents the action selection number. Note that due
to the signiﬁcant difference in the diffusion policy, a value
smaller than ς can be used when calculating the target policy
for the TD target to avoid the severe overestimation of the
target Q-values.
C. The Proposed QAGOB Methodology
In this section, the workﬂow of the proposed QAGOB so-
lution is presented, followed by the computational complexity
analysis of the proposed QAGOB approach.
1) Main Flow of QAGOB: Building on the formulated
MDP framework, the GS-based GD association strategy,
and the QVPO algorithm, we propose the QAGOB method
to tackle the joint optimization problem in the considered
satellite-AAV-enabled joint MEC-DC system. Fig. 2 illustrates
the schematic of the proposed QAGOB method. the GS-based
GD association strategy is embedded within the RL frame-
work, serving as a dedicated module for handling discrete
device association. This module cooperates with the diffusion
model to interact with the environment and compute a uniﬁed
reward. Ultimately, this design overcomes critical challenges
in the MDP formulation, such as the design of the hybrid ac-
tion space. Moreover, by leveraging the intrinsic multi-modal
exploration capabilities of diffusion models [52], the capability
of online RL algorithms to navigate the optimal decisions
in high-dimensional continuous control environments can be
enhanced.
The detailed steps of the proposed QAGOB approach are
elaborated in Algorithm 2. Speciﬁcally, during each time slot,
the algorithm ﬁrst observes the initial state and samples ς
candidate the actions from the policy network via its denoising
process, selects action at with the highest Q-value using Eq.
(29), and stores the state-action pair in Rd. Concurrently, GD
association matrix X(t) is calculated via Algorithm 1 and is
applied with at to interact with the environment, observes
the reward rt and next state st+1, and stores the transition
(st, at, rt, st+1). For policy updates, the QAGOB samples
Nπ weighted state-action pairs from Rd and Nu uniform
exploration samples, selects the highest-weight action amax,
and optimizes the policy network by minimizing the combined
loss from Eqs. (26) and (28). The critic networks are updated
using the TD targets derived from the diffusion policy, while
the target networks are softly updated to stabilize training.
2) Computational Complexity Analysis: In this part, we
analyze the computational complexity of the QAGOB during
the training and execution phases.
Training Phase: The computational complexity of the train-
ing process mainly consists of two parts, which are the action
sampling and network update, respectively.
• Action Sampling: During the action sampling phase, the
actor network generates actions via the reverse diffusion
in each time slot, and the complexity of interacting with
the environment during training phase is O(ETV ), where
E denotes the number of episodes, T represents the
number of time slots per episode, and V is the complexity
of interacting with environment. Furthermore, the com-
plexity of generating actions using the diffusion-based
actor network is O(ETN|ϕ|), where N is the number of
denoising steps, and |ϕ| is the number of parameters in
the actor network. Consequently, the complexity in the
action sampling part is O(ET(V + N|ϕ|)) [34], [36].
• Network Parameter Update: For the network update
phase, the computational complexity mainly comes from
the parameter updates of the actor network, the two critic
networks, and their respective target networks. Since the
parameters of the target network are of the same as the
original network, the computational complexity of this


--- Page 13 ---
13
phase is O(2ET/d|ϕ| + 2ET(|θ1| + |θ2|)) [57], where
d represents the update frequency of the actor network,
|θ1| and |θ2| denotes the number of parameters of the two
critic networks, respectively.
Therefore, the total computational complexity of the training
phase is O(ET(V + (N + 2/d)|ϕ| + 2(|θ1| + |θ2|)).
Execution Phase: In the execution phase, the computational
complexity mainly stems from the back propagation of the
diffusion-based actor network generating the actions according
to the current state. Thus, the computational complexity of
the execution phase is O(ETN|ϕ|) [35]. This complexity is
signiﬁcantly lower than that during the online training phase,
making it feasible to deploy the algorithm on AAVs or other
mobile computing units.
VI. SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
QAGOB algorithm in addressing the considered optimization
problem and verify its effectiveness under different settings.
A. Simulation Conﬁguration
In this section, the detailed descriptions of the simulation
platform, system parameter settings, and benchmarks are pro-
vided. In addition, the details about the components of the
algorithm can be found in Appendix B.
1) Simulation Platform: Our simulations are conducted on
a workstation equipped with an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090
GPU with 24 GB of memory and a 32-core 13th Gen Intel(R)
Core(TM) i9-13900K processor with 128 GB of RAM. The
operating system on the workstation is Ubuntu 22.04.3 LTS,
and we utilize PyTorch 2.2.1 with CUDA 11.8 for all the DRL-
based algorithms.
2) System
Parameter
Settings:
In
our
simulation,
a
square area of size 3000 × 3000 m2 is considered, where
(xmin, ymin)
=
(−1500, −1500) and (xmax, ymax)
=
(1500, 1500). The numbers of the AAVs and GDs are 4 and
30, respectively, and the maximum number of the served GDs
of each AAV is N max
g
= 4. Furthermore, the locations of the
GDs are randomly distributed within the area, while the initial
positions of the AAVs are set to (−750, −750), (−750, 750),
(750, −750), and (750, 750), respectively, in order to prevent
the severe interference and collision tendencies at the begin-
ning. Moreover, the altitudes of the AAVs and the satellite
are 100 m and 800 km [58], respectively. In addition, the
safe distance between the AAVs is 50 m, and the maximum
moving speed of an AAV is 50 m/s [45]. For MEC, the task
size follows a Poisson distribution with the parameter λMEC,
namely Lg,k ∼P(λMEC)×105 bits. Similarly, for the DC, the
generated data size in time slot t is Dg(t) ∼P(λDC) × 104
bits. Besides, the remaining parameter settings and training
conﬁgurations are presented in Tables II and III, respectively.
3) Benchmarks:
To evaluate
the performance of the
QAGOB in addressing the considered optimization problem,
we compare it with the following approaches:
• Random Strategy: The random strategy determines the
random AAV movement distances and directions, ofﬂoad-
ing decisions, and bandwidth allocation actions in each
TABLE II
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameters
Value
Task density coefﬁcient δf
0.1
Poisson distribution rate λMEC, λDC
6, 10
Length of deadline for each task Dm,f
[10, 30] s
Max tolerance time limit T max
f
[0.75, 1.75] s
Noise power spectrum density n0
−174 dBm/Hz [59]
Excessive propagation losses ηLoS, ηNloS
0.1, 21 [8]
Transmit power pmax
g
, pmax
v
, pmax
s
0.3 [20], 0.5 [60], 20 [61] W
Antenna gains Gv, Gs
105, 105 [61]
Transmission rate threshold Rth
1 Mbps
Bandwidth Bv, Bs
5 MHz [62], 1 MHz [32]
Required CPU cycles per bit data C
1000 cycles/bit
Effective switching capacitance κ
8.2 × 10−9 J/cycle [51]
CPU computing capability ωv, ωs
8, 20 GHz [63]
Rain attenuation Frain
6 dB [61], [64]
TABLE III
TRAINING CONFIGURATIONS
Parameters
Value
Denoising steps for actor Nmax
g
10
Network structure for critic
[256, 128]
Total episodes E
3000
Time step in each episode T
300
Discount factor γ
0.9
Target soft update coefﬁcient τ
0.005
Learning rate for actor
3 × 10−4
Learning rate for critic
3 × 10−2
Replay buffer size
106
Entropy regularization coefﬁcient
0.02
Batch size
256
time slot. Additionally, the AAV-GD association matrix
in each time slot is assigned random values within a rea-
sonable range. This strategy is employed as a benchmark
to measure the performance of other methods.
• Greedy Strategy: The greedy strategy selects the nearest
GD for the AAV to approach during its movement and
prioritizes associating with the nearest GD within the al-
lowable service capacity range. Moreover, the ofﬂoading
decisions and bandwidth allocation actions are randomly
sampled through a uniform distribution.
• Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [65]: PPO is an
efﬁcient DRL algorithm, which constrains the magnitude
of policy updates to enhance the stability. Moreover, PPO
employs online learning, generating data directly from
the current policy without the need for experience replay,
thereby reducing computational complexity.
• Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) [66]: SAC is a DRL algorithm
based on the maximum entropy framework, which in-
troduces an entropy regularization term to encourage
the policy diversity, thereby promoting the exploration.
Furthermore, SAC uses a twin Q-network to reduce
the overestimation of Q-values and automatically adjusts
the target entropy to avoid the excessive or insufﬁcient
exploration.
• Diffusion Model-Enhanced Twin-Delayed Deep Deter-
ministic (DM-TD3) [34]: This paper proposes a DM-TD3
algorithm, which replaces the traditional MLP structure
in the actor network of the original TD3 algorithm with
a diffusion model to enhance the action exploration
capability of the original TD3 algorithm, thereby optimiz-


--- Page 14 ---
14
 AAV com puti ng energy
 
 
 
 
 
 AAV m ov em ent energy
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3. Comparison results of QAGOB approach and benchmarks. (a) Average E2E delay. (b) Collected data volume. (c) AAV energy consumption.
12.70
77.72
64.24
56.24
84.15
92.32
12.55
81.69
37.76
50.56
85.61
97.53
Random
Greedy
DM-TD3
PPO
SAC
QAGOB
0
20
40
60
80
100
 MEC task com pletion rate (%)
 DC rate (%)
MEC task completion rate (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
 DC rate (%)
Fig. 4.
Comparison results of MEC task completion rate and DC rate of
QAGOB approach and benchmarks.
ing the AAV trajectory, GD scheduling, and proportion
of data transmission duration in order to minimize the
age of information (AoI) of the GDs and the energy
consumption of the AAVs.
B. Simulation Results
This section provides the simulation results of the proposed
QAGOB approach as well as the above-mentioned benchmark
methods, including the comparison results, convergence re-
sults, AAV trajectory results, and performance analysis of the
QAGOB under the different environment conﬁgurations and
algorithm parameters. In addition, we provide comparative
results for satellite and GD energy consumption, as well as
comparative results with separately optimized MEC and DC,
which can be found in Appendix C.1 and Appendix C.2,
respectively.
1) Comparison Results: This part compares the perfor-
mance of the proposed QAGOB approach with other methods
in addressing the considered optimization problem. Speciﬁ-
cally, Figs. 3(a), (b), and (c) respectively illustrate the average
E2E delay of the system, the amount of collected data, and
the energy consumption of AAVs. In addition, Fig. 4 shows
the performance of the system in terms of the MEC task
completion rate and DC rate.
As shown in Fig. 3(a), the proposed QAGOB method
achieves the lowest average E2E delay. This result demon-
strates the effectiveness of our proposed method in ensuring
MEC performance in terms of delay. Additionally, we observe
that the DM-TD3 method performs worse than the random
strategy in addressing the considered optimization problem.
This may be because directly replacing the actor network with
a diffusion model may not be stable enough when dealing
with different problems, which may face the challenges in
learning the high-quality actions and exploration performance,
thus being prone to falling into the local optimum.
As can be observed from Fig. 3(b), the proposed QAGOB
achieves superior data collection performance, accumulating
13.99% more stored data than the second-best method within
the speciﬁed time. While the greedy baseline demonstrates
competent performance through the nearest-GD selection strat-
egy, both SAC and QAGOB show better performance. This
may be because SAC employs a maximum entropy strategy,
which can explore better policies. Meanwhile, the QAGOB
can not only facilitate exploration based on the entropy-
regularized strategy but also learns better policies from the
high-quality actions from the Q-weighted policies. As a result,
the QAGOB can collect more stored data while ensuring the
MEC performance.
From Fig. 3(c), it can be seen that the proposed QAGOB
approach achieves lower AAV energy consumption than the
SAC and DM-TD3 methods after optimization (80.04% and
82.23% of their values, respectively), and the QAGOB obtains
the lowest AAV movement energy consumption. Although the
PPO, greedy, and random methods result in lower AAV energy
consumption than that achieved by the QAGOB approach,
these methods are signiﬁcantly worse than the QAGOB ap-
proach in terms of the average E2E delay and the amount of
collected data. Moreover, the second-lowest AAV movement
energy consumption is 9.2% higher than that of the QAGOB
approach. This may be because the QAGOB approach, when
considering the trade-off between the ofﬂoading computing
tasks to the satellite to save the AAV computing energy and
performing computations on the AAV to reduce delay, chooses
to perform most of the MEC tasks on the AAV and minimizes
the AAV movement energy consumption to ensure the joint


--- Page 15 ---
15
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Total rewards (×103)
Episode
 DM-TD3
 PPO
 SAC
 QAGOB
Fig. 5. Reward curves of QAGOB approach and benchmarks.
optimization of the MEC performance of the system and the
AAV energy consumption.
Additionally, the results in Fig. 4 demonstrate the effec-
tiveness of the proposed QAGOB and benchmark algorithms
in terms of the MEC task completion rate and DC rate. It is
evident that the QAGOB method achieves the highest MEC
task completion rate and DC rate, showcasing its superior
performance, which optimizes the average E2E delay and the
amount of data collected while covering the vast majority of
MEC tasks and DC data. In conclusion, the proposed QAGOB
approach demonstrates superior performance in jointly op-
timizing the average E2E delay, the amount of collected
data, and the AAV energy consumption, outperforming the
benchmark algorithms.
2) Converge Results: In this part, the convergence perfor-
mance of the QAGOB approach is investigated, along with the
analysis of the convergence results of the QAGOB method and
other benchmarks.
Fig. 5 illustrates the convergence performance of the
QAGOB method compared with other DRL algorithms and
diffusion model-based algorithms. It can be observed that the
reward values obtained by the QAGOB method converge more
rapidly and exhibit a consistently upward trend, with higher
total rewards than that of the other benchmarks, demonstrating
superior convergence performance. This may be attributed
to the fact that the proposed algorithm can quickly learn
the effective strategies through the Q-weighted high-quality
actions and the multi-modal policy investigation in the early
stage, and continuously explore better actions based on the
inherent exploration capability of diffusion models and the
entropy regularization term in the proposed approach.
3) AAV Trajectory Results: This part represents the AAV
trajectory optimization result during the training of the
QAGOB approach. It can be seen from the Fig. 6 that all
AAVs move within the speciﬁed area and near the locations
where the GDs are clustered. Moreover, the four AAVs adopt
a strategy of keeping a distance from other AAVs to avoid
collisions as well as severe interference. This may be due
to the algorithm has learned effective strategies from the
environment and the proposed reward functions to ﬁnd a
X
15001000500 0
500
1000
1500
Y
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
Z
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
start
start
start
start
GDs
AAV1
AAV2
AAV3
AAV4
Fig. 6. AAV movement trajectory (The start and end points are marked with
text and red stars, respectively).
balance among the three optimization objectives, which can
not only ensure a high MEC and DC service coverage rate
and the service performance for MEC and DC services but
also saves a signiﬁcant amount of the propulsion energy since
long-distance movements are not required.
4) Impact of Parameter and Environmental Settings: In
this part, we evaluate the performance of the QAGOB under
the different algorithm parameters and environmental settings,
including the effects of the number of the denoising steps and
the maximum service capacity of the AAVs.
Effect of Denoising Steps: The number of denoising steps is
a crucial parameter in diffusion models and can signiﬁcantly
affect the performance of the results. Speciﬁcally, a sufﬁcient
number of denoising steps can effectively process noise and
generate high-quality samples. However, excessive denoising
steps will increase the training time [35]. Therefore, it is
necessary to compare the performance of the QAGOB method
under the different numbers of the denoising steps and select
the appropriate parameters. As can be seen from Fig. 7,
increasing the number of denoising steps initially improves
algorithm performance, but subsequently leads to degradation,
with optimal performance achieved when n = 10. Notably,
the worst performance occurs when n = 1 and n = 25.
This may be because too few denoising steps do not provide
sufﬁcient capability to generate effective solutions, whereas
excessive steps lead to overﬁtting of the noise patterns, thereby
degrading the quality of the generated actions.
Effect of Maximum Service Capacity of AAVs: We evaluate
the impact of the maximum AAV service capacity N max
g
on
the QAGOB approach, as N max
g
inherently involves a trade-
off between inter-cell interference and resource utilization.
As shown in Fig. 8, the reward ﬁrst increases and then
decreases with N max
g
, peaking signiﬁcantly at N max
g
= 4.
This trend is attributed to several factors. Speciﬁcally, when
N max
g
is small, the AAV–GD channels suffer almost no co-
channel interference, and the data rate is high. Thus, both
task-completion and data-collection ratios are relatively large.
However, most GDs remain unserved, and thus the total reward
are very low. Conversely, as N max
g
grows, each AAV can serve
more GDs, and resource utilization improves. However, when


--- Page 16 ---
16
 n=25
Fig. 7.
Comparison results of reward curves of QAGOB with different
denoising steps.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Total rewards (×103)
Episode
 Nmax
g
=1 
 Nmax
g
=7
 Nmax
g
=4 
 Nmax
g
=10
Fig. 8.
Comparison results of reward curves of QAGOB with different
maximum service capacity of AAVs.
N max
g
exceeds a certain threshold, the excessive number of
GDs within the same AAV coverage area causes severe co-
channel interference between GDs, resulting in a signiﬁcant
drop in the effective communication rate of each GD. This
directly degrades overall system performance. Consequently,
N max
g
= 4 offers the best trade-off between system throughput
and service quality.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper has investigated a satellite-AAV-assisted joint
MEC-DC system and has formulated a joint optimization
problem to simultaneously minimize MEC delay and AAV
energy consumption while maximizing collected data. We have
reformulated the problem as an MDP with a transformed
action space and have proposed the QAGOB method. This
approach has been designed to leverage diffusion models to
achieve real-time, feasible policies with multi-modal explo-
ration and enhanced training stability. Simulation results have
demonstrated that QAGOB has signiﬁcantly outperformed
DRL and diffusion-based benchmarks, achieving near-optimal
results with high convergence robustness and efﬁciency. Ad-
ditionally, while improving the energy consumption of the
AAVs, QAGOB can achieve an 11.48% reduction in MEC
delay and a 13.99% increase in the amount of collected data.
Compared to optimizing the MEC and DC separately, the joint
optimization reduces MEC latency by 10.13%, increases the
amount of the collected data by 28.93%, and reduces the AAV
movement energy consumption by 4.65%.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Park and Y. Choi, “Applications of unmanned aerial vehicles in mining
from exploration to reclamation: A review,” Minerals, vol. 10, no. 8, p.
663, 2020.
[2] G. Coulby, A. K. Clear, O. Jones, and A. Godfrey, “Low-cost, multi-
modal environmental monitoring based on the Internet of Things,” Build.
Environ., vol. 203, p. 108014, 2021.
[3] G. Sun, L. He, Z. Sun, Q. Wu, S. Liang, J. Li, D. Niyato, and V. C. M.
Leung, “Joint task ofﬂoading and resource allocation in aerial-terrestrial
UAV networks with edge and fog computing for post-disaster rescue,”
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, pp. 8582–8600, 2024.
[4] J. Li, G. Sun, Q. Wu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, A. Jamalipour, and V. C. M.
Leung, “Collaborative ground-space communications via evolutionary
multi-objective deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Com-
mun., vol. 42, pp. 3395–3411, 2024.
[5] Z. Song, Y. Hao, Y. Liu, and X. Sun, “Energy-efﬁcient multiaccess
edge computing for terrestrial-satellite Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet
Things J., vol. 8, pp. 14 202–14 218, 2021.
[6] Z. Jia, M. Sheng, J. Li, D. Zhou, and Z. Han, “Joint HAP access and
LEO satellite backhaul in 6G: Matching game-based approaches,” IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, pp. 1147–1159, 2021.
[7] J. Huang, A. Wang, G. Sun, J. Li, J. Wang, H. Du, and D. Niyato, “Dual
AAV cluster-assisted maritime physical-layer secure communications via
collaborative beamforming,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 12, no. 9, pp.
12 589–12 607, 2025.
[8] J. Chen, X. Cao, P. Yang, M. Xiao, S. Ren, Z. Zhao, and D. O. Wu,
“Deep reinforcement learning based resource allocation in multi-UAV-
aided MEC networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, pp. 296–309,
2023.
[9] J. Li, G. Sun, L. Duan, and Q. Wu, “Multi-objective optimization for
UAV swarm-assisted IoT with virtual antenna arrays,” IEEE Trans. Mob.
Comput., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4890–4907, 2024.
[10] Z. Jia, M. Sheng, J. Li, D. Niyato, and Z. Han, “LEO-satellite-assisted
UAV: Joint trajectory and data collection for Internet of remote Things
in 6G aerial access networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, pp. 9814–
9826, 2021.
[11] Y. Yang, W. Ma, W. Sun, J. He, Y. Fu, C. Yuen, and Y. Zhang,
“Diffusion-based multi-agent reinforcement learning for semantic vehic-
ular edge computing,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., 2025, Early Access.
[12] S. Gu, Y. Wang, N. Wang, and W. Wu, “Intelligent optimization of avail-
ability and communication cost in satellite-UAV mobile edge caching
system with fault-tolerant codes,” IEEE Trans. on Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
vol. 6, pp. 1230–1241, 2020.
[13] Y. K. Tun, G. D´an, Y. M. Park, and C. S. Hong, “Joint UAV deployment
and resource allocation in THz-assisted MEC-enabled integrated space-
air-ground networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 24, pp. 3794–
3808, 2025.
[14] X. Lin, A. Liu, C. Han, X. Liang, K. Pan, and Z. Gao, “LEO satellite
and UAVs assisted mobile edge computing for tactical Ad-Hoc network:
A game theory approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, pp. 20 560–
20 573, 2023.
[15] Y.-H. Chao, C.-H. Chung, C.-H. Hsu, Y. Chiang, H.-Y. Wei, and C.-T.
Chou, “Satellite-UAV-MEC collaborative architecture for task ofﬂoading
in vehicular networks,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[16] C. Lei, W. Feng, P. Wei, Y. Chen, N. Ge, and S. Mao, “Edge information
hub: Orchestrating satellites, UAVs, MEC, sensing and communications
for 6G closed-loop controls,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, pp.
5–20, 2025.
[17] F. Pervez and L. Zhao, “Efﬁcient queue-aware communication and
computation optimization for a MEC-assisted satellite-aerial-terrestrial
network,” IEEE Internet Things J., pp. 1–1, 2025, Early Access.
[18] M. Luglio, M. Marchese, F. Patrone, C. Roseti, and F. Zampognaro,
“Performance evaluation of a satellite communication-based MEC ar-
chitecture for IoT applications,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst.,
vol. 58, pp. 3775–3785, 2022.
[19] G. Zhang, X. Wei, X. Tan, Z. Han, and G. Zhang, “AoI minimization
based on deep reinforcement learning and matching game for IoT
information collection in SAGIN,” IEEE Trans. Commun., pp. 1–1, 2025,
Early Access.
[20] S. Zhang, T. Cai, D. Wu, D. Schupke, N. Ansari, and C. Cavdar, “IoRT
data collection with LEO satellite-assisted and cache-enabled UAV:
A deep reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 73, pp. 5872–5884, 2024.
[21] Z. Gao, A. Liu, X. Xu, X. Liang, C. Han, and X. Liu, “Sum data
minimization in LEO satellite-UAV integrated multi-tier computing


--- Page 17 ---
17
networks: A game-theoretic multiple access approach,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 72, pp. 1701–1715, 2024.
[22] J. Liu, X. Zhao, P. Qin, S. Geng, Z. Chen, and H. Zhou, “Learning-based
multi-UAV assisted data acquisition and computation for information
freshness in WPT enabled space-air-ground PIoT,” IEEE Trans. Network
Sci. Eng., vol. 11, pp. 48–63, 2024.
[23] D. S. Lakew, A.-T. Tran, N.-N. Dao, and S. Cho, “Intelligent
self-optimization for task ofﬂoading in LEO-MEC-assisted energy-
harvesting-UAV systems,” IEEE Trans. Network Sci. Eng., vol. 11, pp.
5135–5148, 2024.
[24] C. Lu, J. Sheu, and C. Hsieh, “An energy optimization algorithm for
UAV-assisted satellite mobile edge computing system,” in Proc. IEEE
WCNC, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[25] Z. Yin, N. Cheng, Y. Song, Y. Hui, Y. Li, T. H. Luan, and S. Yu,
“UAV-assisted secure uplink communications in satellite-supported IoT:
Secrecy fairness approach,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, pp. 6904–
6915, 2024.
[26] S. Wang, Z. Fei, J. Guo, Q. Cui, S. Durrani, and H. Yanikomeroglu,
“Energy-efﬁciency optimization for multiple access in NOMA-enabled
space–air–ground networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10, pp.
15 652–15 665, 2023.
[27] Y. Chen, B. Ai, Y. Niu, H. Zhang, and Z. Han, “Energy-constrained
computation ofﬂoading in space-air-ground integrated networks using
distributionally robust optimization,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70,
pp. 12 113–12 125, 2021.
[28] Z. Hu, F. Zeng, Z. Xiao, B. Fu, H. Jiang, H. Xiong, Y. Zhu, and
M. Alazab, “Joint resources allocation and 3D trajectory optimization
for UAV-enabled space-air-ground integrated networks,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 72, pp. 14 214–14 229, 2023.
[29] F. Chai, Q. Zhang, H. Yao, X. Xin, R. Gao, and M. Guizani, “Joint
multi-task ofﬂoading and resource allocation for mobile edge computing
systems in satellite IoT,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, pp. 7783–
7795, 2023.
[30] C. Zhou, W. Wu, H. He, P. Yang, F. Lyu, N. Cheng, and X. Shen,
“Deep reinforcement learning for delay-oriented IoT task scheduling in
SAGIN,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 20, pp. 911–925, 2021.
[31] Y. Lyu, Z. Liu, R. Fan, C. Zhan, H. Hu, and J. An, “Optimal computation
ofﬂoading in collaborative LEO-IoT enabled MEC: A multiagent deep
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Trans. Green Commun. Netw.,
vol. 7, pp. 996–1011, 2023.
[32] S. Zhang, A. Liu, C. Han, X. Liang, X. Xu, and G. Wang, “Multi-
agent reinforcement learning-based orbital edge ofﬂoading in SAGIN
supporting Internet of remote Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 10,
pp. 20 472–20 483, 2023.
[33] S. Guo and X. Zhao, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement learning based
transmission latency minimization for delay-sensitive cognitive satellite-
UAV networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 71, pp. 131–144, 2023.
[34] S. Liang, M. Yin, W. Xie, Z. Sun, J. Li, J. Wang, and H. Du, “UAV-
enabled secure data collection and energy transfer in IoT via diffusion-
model-enhanced deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 12, pp. 13 455–13 468, 2025.
[35] C. Zhang, G. Sun, J. Li, Q. Wu, J. Wang, D. Niyato, and Y. Liu, “Multi-
objective aerial collaborative secure communication optimization via
generative diffusion model-enabled deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 24, pp. 3041–3058, 2025.
[36] H. Du, Z. Li, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, H. Huang, and S. Mao,
“Diffusion-based reinforcement learning for edge-enabled AI-generated
content services,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, pp. 8902–8918,
2024.
[37] J. Wang, C. Zhao, J. He, G. Sun, W. Yuan, D. Niyato, L. Zhu, and
T. Xiang, “Security-aware joint sensing, communication, and comput-
ing optimization in low altitude wireless networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.01451, 2025.
[38] Z. Ding, G. Li, Y. Wang, C. Du, Z. Ye, L. Liang, L.-C. Tang,
and G. Chen, “Ultrafast response and threshold adjustable intelligent
thermoelectric systems for next-generation self-powered remote IoT ﬁre
warning,” Nano-Micro Lett., vol. 16, no. 1, 2024.
[39] C. Ding, A. Zhou, X. Ma, N. Zhang, C.-H. Hsu, and S. Wang, “Towards
diversiﬁed IoT image recognition services in mobile edge computing,”
IEEE Trans. on Cloud Comput., vol. 11, pp. 666–677, 2023.
[40] X. Guo, B. Li, D. Zhai, and R. Zhang, “Performance analysis and
optimization of a UAV-enabled two-way relaying network under FSMH,
NC, and PNC schemes,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 8, pp. 17 802–
17 816, 2021.
[41] G. Zheng, C. Xu, M. Wen, and X. Zhao, “Service caching based aerial
cooperative computing and resource allocation in multi-UAV enabled
MEC systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 10 934–
10 947, 2022.
[42] J. Li, L. Yang, Q. Wu, X. Lei, F. Zhou, F. Shu, X. Mu, Y. Liu, and P. Fan,
“Active ris-aided noma-enabled space- air-ground integrated networks
with cognitive radio,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 1, pp.
314–333, 2025.
[43] Y. Liao, Y. Song, and D. Song, “Joint UAVs deployment and resource
allocation for AoI-aware RIS-assisted UAV-USV MEC network,” IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput., 2025, Early Access.
[44] S. A. Kanellopoulos, C. I. Kourogiorgas, A. D. Panagopoulos, S. N.
Livieratos, and G. E. Chatzarakis, “Channel model for satellite com-
munication links above 10GHz based on Weibull distribution,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 568–571, 2014.
[45] C. Zhan, H. Hu, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, and S. Mao, “Multi-UAV-enabled
mobile-edge computing for time-constrained IoT applications,” IEEE
Internet Things J., vol. 8, no. 20, pp. 15 553–15 567, 2021.
[46] D. Wei, J. Ma, L. Luo, Y. Wang, L. He, and X. Li, “Computation ofﬂoad-
ing over multi-UAV MEC network: A distributed deep reinforcement
learning approach,” Comput. Networks, vol. 199, p. 108439, 2021.
[47] H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Ni, J. Xiong, and J. Wei, “Joint optimization
on trajectory, computation and communication resources in information
freshness sensitive MEC system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73,
no. 3, pp. 4162–4177, 2024.
[48] B. Han, V. Sciancalepore, Y. Xu, D. Feng, and H. D. Schotten,
“Impatient queuing for intelligent task ofﬂoading in multiaccess edge
computing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, pp. 59–72, 2023.
[49] S. Yu, X. Gong, Q. Shi, X. Wang, and X. Chen, “EC-SAGINs: Edge-
computing-enhanced space–air–ground-integrated networks for Internet
of vehicles,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, pp. 5742–5754, 2022.
[50] W. Lee and T. Kim, “Multiagent reinforcement learning in controlling
ofﬂoading ratio and trajectory for multi-UAV mobile-edge computing,”
IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 3417–3429, 2024.
[51] H. Jiang, X. Dai, Z. Xiao, and A. Iyengar, “Joint task ofﬂoading
and resource allocation for energy-constrained mobile edge computing,”
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 4000–4015, 2023.
[52] H. Du, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Li, D. Niyato, J. Kang,
Z. Xiong, S. Cui, B. Ai, H. Zhou, and D. I. Kim, “Enhancing deep
reinforcement learning: A tutorial on generative diffusion models in
network optimization,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 26, pp. 2611–
2646, 2024.
[53] K. Paster, S. A. McIlraith, and J. Ba, “You can’t count on luck: Why
decision transformers and RvS fail in stochastic environments,” in Proc.
NeurIPS, S. Koyejo, S. Mohamed, A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, K. Cho,
and A. Oh, Eds., 2022.
[54] C. Chi, Z. Xu, S. Feng, E. Cousineau, Y. Du, B. Burchﬁel, R. Tedrake,
and S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action
diffusion,” Int. J. Robotics Res., vol. 44, no. 10-11, pp. 1684–1704, 2025.
[55] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,”
in Proc. NeurIPS, vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6840–6851.
[56] S. Ding, K. Hu, Z. Zhang, K. Ren, W. Zhang, J. Yu, J. Wang,
and Y. Shi, “Diffusion-based reinforcement learning via Q-weighted
variational policy optimization,” arXiv preprint, vol. abs/2405.16173,
2024.
[57] Z. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Chen, H. Fu, Z. Tong, and C. Jiang, “Diffusion-
based reinforcement learning for cooperative ofﬂoading and resource
allocation in multi-UAV assisted edge-enabled metaverse,” IEEE Trans.
Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 7, pp. 11 281–11 293, 2025.
[58] C. Huang, G. Chen, P. Xiao, Y. Xiao, Z. Han, and J. A. Chambers, “Joint
ofﬂoading and resource allocation for hybrid cloud and edge computing
in SAGINs: A decision assisted hybrid action space deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 5, pp.
1029–1043, 2024.
[59] Y. Gao, Z. Ye, and H. Yu, “Cost-efﬁcient computation ofﬂoading in
SAGIN: A deep reinforcement learning and perception-aided approach,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 3462–3476, 2024.
[60] M. Zhao, Y. Xiao, J. Yao, T. Wang, J. Lee, and T. Q. S. Quek,
“Up-downlink AoI-driven multi-source data collection in UAV-assisted
wireless sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 1178–1192, 2025.
[61] Q. Xu, Z. Su, D. Fang, and Y. Wu, “Hierarchical bandwidth allocation
for social community-oriented multicast in space-air-ground integrated
networks,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 1915–1930,
2023.
[62] Y. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Wu, J. Huang, and X. S. Shen, “Multi-user task
ofﬂoading in UAV-assisted LEO satellite edge computing: A game-
theoretic approach,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 24, no. 1, pp.
363–378, 2025.


--- Page 18 ---
18
[63] W. Zhu, X. Deng, J. Gui, H. Zhang, and G. Min, “Cost-effective task
ofﬂoading and resource scheduling for mobile edge computing in 6G
space-air-ground integrated network,” IEEE Internet Things J., p. Early
Access, 2025.
[64] Y. Qin, Y. Yang, F. Tang, X. Yao, M. Zhao, and N. Kato, “Differentiated
federated reinforcement learning based trafﬁc ofﬂoading on space-air-
ground integrated networks,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 11 000–11 013, 2024.
[65] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal
policy
optimization
algorithms,”
arXiv
preprint,
vol.
abs/1707.06347, 2017.
[66] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, K. Hartikainen, G. Tucker, S. Ha, J. Tan,
V. Kumar, H. Zhu, A. Gupta, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-
critic algorithms and applications,” arXiv preprint, vol. abs/1812.05905,
2018.
Boxiong Wang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees
in Software Engineering from Jilin University, in
2021 and 2024, respectively. He is currently pur-
suing the Ph.D. degree in the College of Computer
Science and Technology at Jilin University, and is
also a joint Ph.D. student at the Beijing Zhongguan-
cun Academy. His current research focuses on AAV
networks, mobile edge computing, and optimization.
Hui Kang received the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees
from Jilin University in 1996 and 2007, respectively.
She is currently a Professor with the College of
Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University.
Her research interests include grid computing, infor-
mation integration, and distributed computing.
Jiahui Li received his B.S. in Software Engineering,
and M.S. and Ph.D. in Computer Science and Tech-
nology from Jilin University, Changchun, China,
in 2018, 2021, and 2024, respectively. He was a
visiting Ph.D. student at the Singapore University of
Technology and Design (SUTD). He currently serves
as an assistant researcher in the College of Computer
Science and Technology at Jilin University. His
current research focuses on integrated air-ground
networks, UAV networks, wireless energy transfer,
and optimization.
Geng Sun (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree in communication engineering from Dalian
Polytechnic University, and the Ph.D. degree in com-
puter science and technology from Jilin University,
in 2011 and 2018, respectively. He was a Visiting
Researcher with the School of Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
USA. He is a Professor in the College of Com-
puter Science and Technology at Jilin University.
Currently, he is working as a visiting scholar at the
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. He has published over 100 high-quality
papers, including IEEE TMC, IEEE JSAC, IEEE/ACM ToN, IEEE TWC,
IEEE TCOM, IEEE TAP, IEEE IoT-J, IEEE TIM, IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE
GLOBECOM, and IEEE ICC. He serves as the Associate Editors of IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE Transactions on Communica-
tions, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on Network and Service
Management and IEEE Networking Letters. He serves as the Lead Guest
Editor of Special Issues for IEEE Transactions on Network Science and
Engineering, IEEE Internet of Things Journal, IEEE Networking Letters.
He also serves as the Guest Editor of Special Issues for IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing, IEEE Communications Magazine, and IEEE Open
Journal of the Communications Society. His research interests include Low-
altitude Wireless Networks, UAV communications and Networking, Mobile
Edge Computing (MEC), Intelligent Reﬂecting Surface (IRS), Generative AI
and Agentic AI, and deep reinforcement learning.
Zemin Sun (Member, IEEE) received a BS degree in
Software Engineering, an MS degree and a Ph.D de-
gree in Computer Science and Technology from Jilin
University, Changchun, China, in 2015, 2018, and
2022, respectively. She was a visiting Ph.D. student
at the University of Waterloo. She currently serves
as an assistant researcher in the College of Computer
Science and Technology at Jilin University. Her
research interests include vehicular networks, edge
computing, and game theory.
Jiacheng Wang received the Ph.D. degree from
the School of Communication and Information
Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China. He is cur-
rently a Research Associate in computer science and
engineering with Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore. His research interests include wireless
sensing, semantic communications, and metaverse.
Dusit Niyato (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor in the
College of Computing and Data Science, at Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. He received
B.Eng. from King Mongkuts Institute of Technology
Ladkrabang (KMITL), Thailand and Ph.D. in Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering from the University
of Manitoba, Canada. His research interests are in
the areas of mobile generative AI, edge intelligence,
decentralized machine learning, and incentive mech-
anism design.
Shiwen Mao (Fellow, IEEE) is a Professor and the
Earle C. Williams Eminent Scholar Chair, and the
Director of the Wireless Engineering Research and
Education Center, Auburn University, Auburn, AL,
USA. His research interest includes wireless net-
works, multimedia communications, and smart grid.
He received the IEEE ComSoc MMTC Outstanding
Researcher Award in 2023, the IEEE ComSoc TC-
CSR Distinguished Technical Achievement Award in
2019, and the NSF CAREER Award in 2010. He is
a co-recipient of the 2022 Best Journal Paper Award
of IEEE ComSoc eHealth Technical Committee, the 2021 Best Paper Award
of Elsevier/Digital Communications and Networks (KeAi), the 2021 IEEE
Internet of Things Journal Best Paper Award, the 2021 IEEE Communications
Society Outstanding Paper Award, the IEEE Vehicular Technology Society
2020 Jack Neubauer Memorial Award, the 2018 ComSoc MMTC Best Journal
Paper Award and the 2017 Best Conference Paper Award, the 2004 IEEE
Communications Society Leonard G. Abraham Prize in the Field of Commu-
nications Systems, and several ComSoc technical committee and conference
best paper/demo awards. He is the Editor-in-Chief of IEEE TRANSACTIONS
ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING. He is a
Distinguished Lecturer of IEEE Communications Society and the IEEE
Council of RFID.


--- Page 19 ---
1
Supplemental Material
Low-Altitude Satellite-AAV Collaborative Joint Mobile Edge Computing and Data Collection via
Diffusion-based Deep Reinforcement Learning
✦
APPENDIX A
DISCUSSION
ABOUT
ALTERNATIVE
MULTI-
OBJECTIVE APPROACHES
This part discusses the applicability and challenges of al-
ternative multi-objective optimization methods compared
to the weighted sum approach, such as Pareto optimality,
hierarchical optimization, and dynamic weight adjust-
ment.
The Pareto optimality framework offers a theoreti-
cally rigorous alternative for multi-objective optimiza-
tion, while posing signiﬁcant computational and practical
challenges. Speciﬁcally, this approach does not predeﬁne
weights but instead computes a set of Pareto optimal solu-
tions, where any improvement in one objective necessarily
leads to a deterioration in at least one other. Within this
framework, multi-objective DRL algorithms can gener-
ate a complete Pareto frontier, providing decision-makers
with a comprehensive perspective on trade-offs and grant-
ing them the ﬂexibility to select optimal strategies on-
line. However, multi-objective DRL signiﬁcantly increases
computational overhead and training complexity. Further-
more, in our proposed QAGOB method, which generates
Q-value-based actions through a diffusion model, the core
challenge remains how to integrate multiple potentially
conﬂicting Q-value signals into the denoising process of
the diffusion model.
Hierarchical optimization approaches establish strict
priority rankings among objectives, which prove effective
for scenarios with rigid quality-of-service requirements
but may be poorly suited for problems with deeply cou-
pled objectives. For instance, this methodology would pri-
oritize maintaining all tasks within their maximum toler-
able delay thresholds, subsequently optimize DC volume
subject to these temporal constraints, and ﬁnally address
energy minimization within the remaining feasible space.
Such hierarchical structuring proves particularly effective
in scenarios with strict quality-of-service requirements,
such as time-sensitive tasks like ﬁre warning systems.
However, in our joint optimization problem, the objec-
tives exhibit deep coupling. Speciﬁcally, reducing latency
may require the AAV to ﬂy closer to the target, while
collecting more data extends hover time, thereby increas-
ing energy consumption. Consequently, strict hierarchical
separation may yield suboptimal solutions that fail to
fully leverage the trade-offs between objectives. Further-
more, converting one objective into a hard constraint
sharply reduces the feasible solution space, potentially
making it difﬁcult for the algorithm to ﬁnd viable solu-
tions.
Instead of the ﬁxed weights used in this paper, dy-
namic weight tuning methods can rebalance the three
objectives in real time. For instance, the energy weight
coefﬁcient can be increased when the AAV battery is
low, or the delay penalty coefﬁcient can be raised during
urgent missions. This mechanism offers greater ﬂexibility
than static weights. However, designing dynamic weights
inherently poses a complex control or optimization prob-
lem. It requires deﬁning explicit adjustment rules or learn-
ing a weight adjustment strategy, which increases system
complexity and introduces additional hyperparameters.
In
summary,
although
other
multi-objective
ap-
proaches like Pareto optimality are theoretically more
comprehensive, weighted summation is widely adopted
in practical engineering applications due to its sim-
plicity, interpretability, and ease of implementation. For
the proposed diffusion-based DRL framework, which al-
ready exhibits high computational complexity, employing
weighted summation is a pragmatic choice to ensure the
trainability and convergence of the algorithm.
APPENDIX B
ALGORITHM DETAILS
In this section, we present some algorithmic details about
the network architecture of the actor-critic component. As
can be seen from Fig. 2 in the main text, the proposed
QAGOB method mainly consists of a diffusion-based
actor network, two critic networks, the target networks
of actors and critics, and two replay buffers. The speciﬁc
details are as follows:
•
Diffusion-based
Actor
Network:
In
the
QAGOB
method, the core of the actor-network is a diffusion
model, rather than a conventional multi-layer per-
ceptron (MLP). At each time step t, the state st is


--- Page 20 ---
197.13
136085.94
134052.56
1952.14
60702.62
23.79
GD transmission
AAV movement
AAV computation
Satellite transmission
Satellite computation
Satellite offload rate
0
20k
40k
60k
80k
100k
120k
140k
Energy (J)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Satellite offload rate (%)
Fig. 1: Satellite ofﬂoad ratio and energy consumption
of GD transmission, AAV movement, AAV computation,
satellite transmission, and satellite computation.
encoded as a state vector and injected into multiple
layers of the internal network of the diffusion
model as conditional input. Through an iterative
denoising process, it generates the ﬁnal action from
a fully random noise vector. This diffusion process
captures dependencies from state to action and
explores more complex and diverse multimodal
action distributions compared to a single forward
pass through an MLP, thereby generating high-
quality actions.
•
Twin Critic Network: During the policy improve-
ment process, a double critic network is employed
to reduce excessive estimation bias. Each critic
network adopts a MLP architecture and indepen-
dently updates its own parameters using the same
optimization target. During the training process,
the minimum Q-value estimate from the two critic
networks is utilized.
•
Target Networks: Each critic network and actor net-
work has its own corresponding target network,
which has an identical architecture to its online
network. However, the parameters of the target
network are not updated directly via gradient de-
scent. Instead, they are slowly copied from the
online network through a soft update mechanism,
providing a slowly changing and relatively stable
optimization target. This signiﬁcantly enhances the
stability of the training process.
•
Replay Buffer and Diffusion Buffer: The QAGOB
approach employs two types of replay buffers.
On the one hand, the main replay buffer stores
transitions {st, at, rt, st+1} obtained through in-
teractions with the environment. When updating
the critic network, a batch of transitions is ran-
domly sampled from this buffer to compute the
temporal difference target and the mean squared
error of the critic network. On the other hand,
the diffusion buffer is speciﬁcally designed for the
diffusion actor network, which stores high-quality
state-action pairs to enhance the training efﬁciency
of the diffusion actor network.
 Joi nt MEC-DC
Fig. 2: Reward curves of joint MEC-DC and separated
MEC-DC framework.
APPENDIX C
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this work, we further provide some additional simula-
tion results about the energy management of the satellite
and GDs, as well as the comparison results between the
joint optimization and separate optimization of MEC and
DC.
C.1
Energy Analysis of The Satellite and GDs
In this part, we discuss the energy consumption of the
satellite and GDs.
Fig. 1 illustrate the energy consumption of all the
components in the considered system, as well as the
ofﬂoad rate of the MEC tasks to the satellite. As can be
seen, the energy consumed by GDs during transmission
is far less than that of the AAVs and the satellite, and
the energy consumption of the satellite accounts for less
than 20% of the total. In contrast, the movement and
computation energy consumption of the AAVs dominate
the system. Additionally, we observed that only 23.79%
of MEC tasks are further ofﬂoaded to the satellites, indi-
cating that the system strategy tends to process tasks on
the AAVs in order to reduce E2E latency. Therefore, the
energy consumption of the AAVs is the primary decision-
making factor in the considered system, which affects the
performance bottleneck of the system.
C.2
Comparison with The Separated MEC and DC
This part compares the performance of the joint MEC-
DC optimization with the separated MEC and DC opti-
mization, including the convergence results, comparison
results, and trajectory results, respectively.
Fig. 2 shows the training rewards of the QAGOB
method under the joint MEC-DC framework and the sepa-
rate MEC and DC framework. It can be observed that the
reward level achieved through the joint optimization is
signiﬁcantly higher than that of the separate optimization
baseline. This is likely because the optimization variables
(such as AAV trajectory planning, resource allocation,
energy management, and device association) are coupled
between the MEC and DC systems, which means that op-
timizing one objective separately may degrade the other


--- Page 21 ---
0.4773
0.5311
92.32
85.00
326028.66
190601.76
1024.42
794.53
97.53
75.68
136889.97
143572.87
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Average E2E delay (s)
(b)
(c)
(d)
0
20
40
60
80
100
MEC task completion rate (%)
0
75k
150k
225k
300k
375k
AAV total energy (J)
 Joint MEC-DC 
 Separated MEC and DC
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Collected data volume (Mb)
(a)
0
20
40
60
80
100
DC rate (%)
(e)
(f)
0
50k
100k
150k
200k
AAV movement energy (J)
Fig. 3: Comparison results of joint MEC-DC and separated
MEC-DC framework.
X
15001000500 0
500
1000
1500
Y
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
Z
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
start
start
start
start
GDs
AAV1
AAV2
AAV3
AAV4
(a)
X
15001000500 0
500
1000
1500
Y
1500
1000
500
0
500
1000
1500
Z
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
start
start
start
start
GDs
AAV1
AAV2
AAV3
AAV4
(b)
Fig. 4: The AAV movement trajectory, the start and end
points are marked with text and red stars, respectively.
(a) Joint MEC-DC optimization framework. (b) Separate
MEC-DC optimization framework. (AAV1 and AAV2 are
MEC-AAV, AAV3 and AAV4 are DC-AAV).
objective, leading to suboptimal solutions. In contrast,
joint optimization takes both objectives into account and
learns a strategy that achieves an appropriate trade-off,
thereby maximizing the overall utility of the system.
Fig. 3 exhibits the system performance under joint
and separate frameworks, including average E2E latency,
MEC task completion rate, AAV energy consumption,
amount of collected data, DC task completion rate, and
AAV movement energy consumption. As shown in the
ﬁgure, the joint optimization framework outperforms sep-
arate optimization in both E2E latency and data collec-
tion amount. While maintaining higher task completion
rates, joint optimization also achieves lower movement
energy consumption. This suggests that joint optimization
captures conﬂicts and dependencies between objectives
to ﬁnd globally optimal trade-off strategies. Additionally,
AAVs can collect data during MEC idle periods, maximiz-
ing resource utilization efﬁciency.
Figs. 4a and 4b present the visualized trajectories of
AAVs under the joint MEC-DC optimization framework
and the separate optimization framework, respectively.
It can be observed that the two frameworks guide the
AAVs to adopt distinctly different mobility strategies.
Under the joint optimization framework, all AAVs execute
moderate short-distance movements across a wide area,
effectively balancing the requirement of MEC for low-
latency service with the requirement of DC for broad data
coverage. In contrast, under the separate optimization
framework, MEC-AAVs tend to make minor positional
adjustments within localized small areas to ensure the
real-time performance of computation tasks, while DC-
AAVs are required to ﬂy over long distances across large
areas in order to maximize DC. Although each type of
AAV performs optimally with respect to its individual
objective, the strategies are disjointed and lack synergistic
coordination, resulting in fragmented resource utilization
and overall inefﬁciency.
In summary, compared to the separate optimization of
MEC and DC, the joint optimization better handles the
conﬂicts and interdependencies between the two objec-
tives. It achieves synergistic coordination between MEC
and DC objectives at the strategic level and signiﬁcantly
enhances overall service efﬁciency at the system level.
