--- Page 1 ---
1
ComAgent: Multi-LLM based Agentic AI Empowered Intelligent
Wireless Networks
Haoyun Li, Ming Xiao, Senior Member, IEEE, Kezhi Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Robert Schober, Fellow,
IEEE, Dong In Kim, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Yong Liang Guan, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Emerging wireless networks such as the sixth-
generation (6G) mobile systems are expected to operate over
highly heterogeneous infrastructures with rapidly evolving ser-
vice demands, thereby increasing the dependence on large-
scale, constraint-coupled, cross-layer optimization for network
design and operation. However, the trend leads to a funda-
mental bottleneck: Converting high-level intents into math-
ematically consistent formulations, implementable algorithms,
and reproducible simulations remains predominantly human-
driven, time-intensive, and error-prone. While large language
models (LLMs) provide a natural-language interface for intent
interpretation and rapid prototyping, monolithic LLM-based
pipelines are often limited by insufficient domain grounding,
weak constraint awareness, and a lack of execution-based ver-
ification and self-correction. These limitations motivate a shift
towards agentic AI, where problem-solving is realized through
iterative decomposition, explicit planning, tool-integrated exe-
cution, and reflection driven by feedback. In this paper, we
present ComAgent, a multi-LLM based agentic AI framework
that coordinates specialized agents for literature searching, plan-
ning, coding, and solution scoring within a closed-loop Percep-
tion–Planning–Action–Reflection cycle, turning user intents into
solver-ready formulations and reproducible simulation pipelines
while continuously self-correcting logical and feasibility errors.
We demonstrate the efficacy of ComAgent through two distinct
evaluations. In a non-trivial beamforming optimization case
study, ComAgent autonomously perceives the problem, designs
an algorithm, and generates solutions that achieve a performance
comparable to that of expert-designed baselines. Furthermore, on
a diverse set of generic wireless tasks, ComAgent outperforms
monolithic LLMs. The numerical results demonstrate the poten-
tial of the proposed agentic AI framework for various emerging
wireless networks.
Index Terms—Large language models, agentic AI systems,
wireless networks, and optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Emerging wireless networks such as the sixth-generation
(6G) are envisioned as highly heterogeneous and integrated
infrastructures. Key enablers include space-air-ground inte-
grated networks (SAGIN), ultra-massive multi-input-multi-
H. Li and M. Xiao are with the Division of Information Science and
Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm 10044, Sweden
(e-mail: {haoyunl, mingx}@kth.se). K. Wang is with the Department of
Computer Science, Brunel University of London, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8
3PH (e-mail: kezhi.wang@brunel.ac.uk). Robert Schober is with the Insti-
tute for Digital Communications, Friedrich-Alexander-University Erlangen-
Nurnberg (FAU), 91054 Erlangen, Germany (e-mail: robert.schober@fau.de).
Dong In Kim is with the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, South Korea (e-mail:
dongin@skku.edu). Yong Liang Guan is with Continental-NTU Corporate
Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: EYL-
Guan@ntu.edu.sg).
output (MIMO) base stations (BS), reconfigurable intelli-
gent surfaces (RIS), simultaneous wireless information and
power transfer (SWIPT), integrated sensing and communica-
tion (ISAC), and edge intelligence [1]. Furthermore, service
demands are shifting from best-effort connectivity to intent-
driven applications such as immersive extended reality (XR),
autonomous systems, and large-scale Internet of Things (IoT),
which impose stringent and often conflicting requirements on
data rate, latency, reliability, positioning accuracy, and energy
efficiency. The strong coupling across layers and domains
poses unprecedented design challenges for resource alloca-
tion, topology control, sensing–communication co-design, and
cross-layer management.
Meanwhile, the rapid expansion in scale and diversity
exposes the fundamental limitations of conventional design
workflows. Traditional optimization methods require manu-
ally designed models and problem-specific algorithms that
exploit specific structures for problem decomposition and non-
convexity transformation. However, the complexity of real-
world environments and applications results in challenging
optimization problems that are high-dimensional, strongly
non-convex, and even multi-objective, involving mixed dis-
crete–continuous decisions and complex coupling constraints.
Each new scenario typically requires significant expert knowl-
edge to redesign mathematical formulations and tailored al-
gorithms. This workflow substantially restricts the scalabil-
ity and flexibility of dynamically changing wireless network
environments. Although data-driven deep learning (DL) and
reinforcement learning (RL) methods can alleviate modeling
burdens to certain degrees, they remain restricted by the grow-
ing complexity and volume of the required training data, high
computational demands, and overfitting risks. These methods
require scenario-specific datasets and expert knowledge of
networks to formulate optimization tasks, making them time-
and resource-consuming to adapt to new tasks and network
configurations [2]. Consequently, the main bottleneck is the
growing reliance on human domain expertise and the special-
ized custom algorithm design required to develop end-to-end
solutions.
On the other hand, large language models (LLMs) present
a paradigm shift for network design, transitioning from rigid
mathematical optimization to flexible, semantic-aware control.
Leveraging superior generalization, reasoning, and in-context
learning capabilities [3], LLMs operate directly on high-level
textual specifications, bypassing the need for explicit mathe-
matical modeling, which is common in traditional methods.
Unlike specialized algorithms that require retraining, LLMs
exhibit zero- or few-shot adaptation to new tasks via in-context
arXiv:2601.19607v1  [cs.AI]  27 Jan 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
examples. Thus, LLMs can unify heterogeneous network
functions, such as configuration generation, optimization, and
troubleshooting, within a single instruction-driven interface
[4], [5]. This facilitates an end-to-end network management
framework in which natural language directives autonomously
drive the synthesis of network configurations and control al-
gorithms, significantly streamlining complex network orches-
tration. However, integrating monolithic LLMs directly into
wireless optimization loops presents fundamental challenges.
LLMs are not native numerical optimizers, lack gradient
information, struggle with the high-precision, complex-valued
arithmetic essential for physical-layer optimization, and often
provide no convergence guarantees for typical non-convex
problems. Furthermore, a single generic model cannot access
dynamic operator-specific knowledge bases or evolving wire-
less network standards, leading to hallucinations or constraint
violations. This monolithic approach is also untenable for
real-time edge applications, as specialization across diverse
tasks (e.g., retrieval, decomposition, and verification) incurs
prohibitive latency and resource overheads.
These observations motivate a paradigm shift from chat-
style LLM assistance to agentic AI, where LLMs are em-
bedded into an autonomous, tool-augmented, feedback-driven
decision loop [6]. In an agentic AI system, intelligence is
not only reflected by text generation, but also by iterative
task decomposition, explicit planning, tool invocation (e.g.,
solvers, simulators, retrieval engines), and reflection based
on execution feedback. The agentic loop is particularly well
aligned with wireless optimization workflows since action
naturally corresponds to running code and invoking opti-
mization modules, while reflection corresponds to diagnosing
infeasibility, correcting modeling errors, and revising solution
strategies under physical constraints and numerical feedback.
Motivated by this perspective, we present ComAgent, a
multi-LLM agentic AI framework that targets end-to-end
wireless optimization as an autonomous workflow rather than
a standalone model query, as shown in Fig. 1. The pro-
posed framework coordinates specialized agents, including
Literature, Planning, Coding, and Scoring Agents, within a
recursive cognitive cycle to transform high-level intents into
rigorous mathematical formulations and executable simulation
code. By anchoring decisions in retrieved domain knowl-
edge, enforcing structured task decomposition, and leveraging
scoring-based feedback for iterative self-correction, ComAgent
aims to ensure constraint satisfaction, physical feasibility, and
implementation fidelity throughout the optimization pipeline.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework
through representative evaluations. In a non-trivial MIMO
SWIPT beamforming case study, ComAgent autonomously
perceives the task, designs a solution strategy, and gener-
ates executable implementations that achieve performance
comparable to expert-designed baselines. Furthermore, on a
generic test set of diverse wireless tasks, the proposed agentic
framework achieves a substantially higher solution success
rate than a single LLM, indicating improved robustness and
generalization under heterogeneous problem settings. These
results suggest that the key value of LLMs for future wireless
networks may lie in enabling autonomous orchestration that
bridges intent understanding, mathematical rigor, and code-
centric validation in a unified closed-loop system.
II. THE LANDSCAPE OF LLM-DRIVEN OPTIMIZATION:
PROGRESS AND GAPS
A. Recent advances in LLM-enabled wireless optimization
The integration of LLMs has emerged as a completely
new paradigm for intelligent network management, enabling a
shift from rigid data-driven DL pipelines to flexible, semantic-
aware control. Nevertheless, applying monolithic LLMs di-
rectly to high-precision and non-convex wireless optimization
problems remains fundamentally challenging. In particular,
LLMs are not native numerical optimizers and lack internal
mechanisms to guarantee convergence or to satisfy complex,
domain-specific constraints. This limits their reliability for
engineering-grade closed-loop optimization. This core limi-
tation has inspired two primary approaches to harness the
capabilities of LLMs for complex wireless optimization.
The first category involves hybrid frameworks that embed
an LLM as a heuristic component within a traditional, human-
designed algorithmic pipeline. For instance, the authors of [7]
proposed the use of an LLM as a black-box solver for the in-
tractable combinatorial optimization of user association while
relying on conventional convex optimization methods, in-
cluding alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM),
majorization minimization (MM), and fractional programming
(FP) for numerical beamforming design. Similarly, the authors
in [8] integrated an LLM as a generative search operator into a
multi-objective evolutionary algorithm tasked with producing
novel candidate solutions. The key progress of these methods
lies in augmenting classical solvers with LLM reasoning to
improve adaptability and reduce manual trial-and-error.
Meanwhile, multi-agent architectures have been explored to
decompose complex network management tasks by domain,
mimicking the division of labor in an operational team. For
instance, the authors in [9] introduced LaMA-SON, a system
with specialized agents for discrete network functions, such
as traffic, quality of service (QoS), and security. The authors
in [10] designed a similar multi-agent system for situational
awareness in zero-trust SAGINs, with agents focused on
threat assessment and decision-making. Other works empha-
size the cognitive architecture itself, such as [11], which
proposed a general framework inspired by human cognitive
steps (perception, memory, and planning), and [12], which
leveraged retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to improve
inter-agent communication efficiency. These studies represent
important progress toward semantically driven network opera-
tions, where agents monitor, classify, and execute operational
logic in a scalable manner.
B. Open challenges toward end-to-end agentic optimization
copilots
Despite the above progress, a critical limitation of the
proposed hybrid schemes is that LLMs typically function as
subordinate modules constrained within rigid, predetermined
algorithmic pipelines. As a result, they cannot autonomously
reorganize the workflow, redesign the solution strategy, or


--- Page 3 ---
3
MIMO Network
Satellite Network
Low-Altitude 
Network 
IoT Network
How to optimize
beamforming in low-
altitude networks?
How to design the IoT
resource allocation?
How to schedule edge
computing tasks?
Wireless Scenarios
Literature
Agent
Local Knowledge
Base
Stage I: Knowledge Acquisition
Planning
Instructor
Stage II: Plan Formulation
Data
Instructor
Stage III: Data Preparation
Stage IV: Simulation Generation
Planning
Agent
‘‘‘
’’’
‘‘‘
’’’
Solution Plan
ü
Problem understanding
ü
Mathematical modeling
ü
Algorithm design
ü
Experiment design
ü
…
Coding Agent
Data Memory
Generate
Data
Coding Agent
Scoring Agent
Successful execution
Feasible solution
Physical meaning
Constraint satisfaction
Score (0-1)
Self-refinement
Beamforming
Design
Power
Allocation
Task
Offloading
Path
Planning
Network
Optimization
User Queries
User
Perception
Planning
Action
Reflection
Multi-LLM Based Agentic AI Framework
Ask
Solution
…
Fig. 1: Framework of ComAgent: A multi-LLM based agentic AI system.
validate feasibility when the problem context changes. Mean-
while, existing multi-agent systems are primarily designed
for high-level network management automation rather than
mathematically grounded optimization. Although they enable
semantic monitoring and decision support, they are generally
not designed to translate intent into rigorous formulations and
executable solvers under physical constraints.
A notable attempt in [13] has begun to narrow this gap
by applying a generative agent for problem formulation to
specify the mathematical objective, while relying on a separate
deep RL solver to obtain solutions. While promising, this
design still exposes a structural disconnect between formu-
lation and solution generation, and it lacks a unified mecha-
nism for execution-grounded verification. In practical wireless
optimization, the decisive bottleneck often lies not only in
determining the objective function, but also in producing cor-
rect and reproducible implementations that satisfy constraints
and remain physically meaningful after numerical execution.
These observations highlight the absence of a single integrated
framework that unifies knowledge grounding, problem formu-
lation, solution planning, code generation, and execution-based
validation within a closed loop, thereby serving as a true end-
to-end optimization copilot.
Inspired by these insights, this paper proposes a multi-LLM
agentic AI architecture that autonomously manages the entire
optimization workflow from conception to solution. Unlike
prior studies that apply LLMs as subordinate components
or isolated formulators, the proposed framework mimics the
feedback-driven process of a human research expert. It co-
ordinates specialized agents (e.g., literature-surveying, plan-
ning, coding, and scoring agents) to autonomously perceive
a natural-language task, formulate the optimization problem,
generate numerical simulation code, and, most critically, it-
eratively execute and verify the solution for correctness,
feasibility, and physical reasonability. In this manner, the
proposed approach bridges the gap between manual high-level
design exploration and the growing need for autonomous,
code-centric validation in next-generation dynamic wireless
networks.
III. AGENTIC AI FRAMEWORK AND METHODOLOGY
In this section, we describe the architectural framework and
operational methodology of the proposed multi-LLM agentic
AI system. Different from using an LLM as a stand-alone text
generator, our goal is to construct an optimization copilot that
is explicitly tailored for wireless network optimization, where
decisions should be numerically precise, constraint-intensive,
and physically meaningful. In emerging wireless networks
(e.g., ISAC, SWIPT, RIS, SAGIN, low-altitude networks, and
edge intelligence), the optimization pipeline is often the main
bottleneck: New intents should be translated into rigorous
models, feasible algorithms, executable code, and verifiable
outputs. Therefore, the proposed framework is designed to
close this gap by coupling intent understanding with code-
centric execution and physics-aware verification in a unified
closed loop.
A. A communication-oriented agentic AI architecture
Unlike conventional static LLM pipelines, our framework
functions as an autonomous cognitive system governed by a
recursive Perception–Planning–Action–Reflection cycle that is
instantiated as a communication-oriented controller that aligns
with the lifecycle of wireless optimization, from problem
interpretation to solver execution and feasibility checking.
Perception: Perception serves as the system interface for
state awareness, operating continuously rather than as a sin-
gular initialization step. From a wireless network perspective,
perception must jointly capture semantic intents (e.g., QoS
targets, sensing accuracy, energy harvesting requirements, and
latency budgets) and engineering states (e.g., channel state


--- Page 4 ---
4
information (CSI), statistical channel models, topology, re-
source budgets, and protocol constraints). At the macro level,
it parses the user intent into explicit design constraints such
as beamforming objectives, power allocation requirements,
and energy guarantees. At the micro level, specialized agents
monitor the execution environment and interpret diverse feed-
back, including retrieval relevance, solver infeasibility reports,
numerical instability, and simulation mismatches. This multi-
layered perception keeps the workflow grounded in both
the communication objective and the evolving runtime state,
mitigating open-loop hallucinations.
Planning: Planning constitutes the core reasoning engine,
executing task decomposition recursively across abstraction
levels. For wireless network design, planning must translate
an intent into a solvable and verifiable optimization pipeline,
rather than only producing a formal objective. On a systemic
scale, it orchestrates a workflow that breaks a complex task
into stages such as channel and system modeling, variable and
constraint specification, algorithm selection, baseline construc-
tion, and evaluation protocol definition. On an atomic scale,
agents decide the sequence of tool invocations (e.g., convex
solvers and simulation scripts) and derive intermediate for-
mulations to handle non-convex couplings. This hierarchical
planning enables structured exploration in high-dimensional
design spaces typical for wireless networks, e.g., mixed dis-
crete and continuous decisions, multi-objective trade-offs, and
coupled constraints.
Action: Action represents the capacity to interact with
and manipulate the external environment, transforming the
LLM from a passive generator into an active executor. For
communication tasks, action corresponds to tool-integrated op-
erations such as literature retrieval, solver calls, dataset gener-
ation, simulation execution, and baseline reproduction. Action
is crucial because the correctness of wireless optimization
is established through executable validation under physical
constraints (e.g., power budgets, harvested-energy thresholds,
signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) feasibility, sens-
ing metrics, and numerical stability). Each executed action
yields empirical feedback that is ingested by perception to
trigger the next cycle of analysis and refinement.
Reflection: Reflection acts as an active critic that identifies
hallucinations, logical inconsistencies, and feasibility viola-
tions, and iteratively refines strategies and actions. In wireless
network optimization, reflection must be physics-aware. That
is, it checks whether constraints are satisfied, whether outputs
remain physically meaningful (e.g., rank conditions are satis-
fied or appropriately relaxed, and power and energy constraints
are met), and whether the implemented code faithfully follows
the planned algorithm. The feedback-driven reflection bridges
the probabilistic nature of LLM generation and the rigorous
precision required by wireless designs, turning the agent into
a resilient, self-correcting orchestrator.
B. End-to-end workflow instantiation for network optimization
Based on the above agentic loop, we implement the pro-
posed framework as a four-stage workflow that matches typical
wireless network design practices: Knowledge acquisition,
plan formulation, data preparation, and simulation generation.
The key objective is to produce solver-ready models and
execution-verified results under communication constraints,
rather than only generating plausible descriptions.
1) Knowledge acquisition: As illustrated in Fig. 2, Stage I
serves as the knowledge grounding module for network
optimization. The Literature Agent first parses the natural-
language request and identifies the task type and evaluation
targets, such as SWIPT beamforming, ISAC co-design, RIS
configuration, or SAGIN resource management. It then ex-
tracts the essential modeling elements that determine feasibil-
ity and performance, including channel assumptions, antenna
settings, hardware constraints, and task-specific metrics.
The agent leverages external tools, including the Semantic
Scholar Search API and web browsers, to retrieve relevant
papers and baselines. Instead of a single search-and-summarize
step, we adopt an iterative filtering process. The agent issues
multiple queries, examines candidate abstracts and key sec-
tions, and refines the candidate list based on alignment with
the target scenario and constraints. This design is important
for wireless optimization because small modeling differences,
such as the SWIPT energy harvesting model or the ISAC
sensing metric, can lead to incompatible formulations and
misleading comparisons.
After retrieval, the Literature Agent ranks the selected
papers by scenario relevance and extracts the most useful com-
ponents, including standard problem formulations, commonly
used constraints, and representative solution methods. The
resulting literature knowledge, together with the original user
query, is stored in the System Memory and directly supports
the next stage.
2) Plan formulation:
Stage II translates the grounded
knowledge into a solver-ready optimization plan. A Planning
Instructor acts as the coordinator and guides the Planning
Agent through iterative refinement. To enhance the reason-
ing capabilities, agents apply advanced prompting strategies,
including chain-of-thought (CoT), reasoning-action (ReAct),
and plan-and-solve (PS) methodologies [4]. Specifically, CoT
prompting elicits explicit intermediate reasoning steps from
LLMs, which can enhance performance for complex reasoning
tasks but also increase inference cost and may expose unstable
or biased internal rationales. ReAct integrates natural-language
reasoning with external tool use and environment interaction in
an interleaved loop, enabling the model to iteratively plan, act
(e.g., query tools), observe outcomes, and update its reasoning
based on feedback. PS first instructs the model to generate a
high-level solution plan and then prompts it to carry out this
plan step by step, thereby improving global coherence and
reducing errors compared with purely incremental, token-by-
token solution generation.
The process starts by retrieving the user query and the
literature knowledge from the System Memory. The Planning
Agent then specifies the system model and design objectives
in a form that can be implemented, including optimization
variables, constraints, and performance metrics. For our tasks,
this step explicitly addresses practical requirements, such as
power budgets, SINR guarantees, sensing accuracy targets, and
energy harvesting thresholds. The agent also selects a solution


--- Page 5 ---
5
Consider a MIMO wireless downlink SWIPT network 
scenario where one base station (BS) simultaneously 
serves multiple information receivers (IR) and energy 
receivers (ER). Suppose that the BS, each IR and ER are 
equipped with a uniform linear array (ULA) with multiple 
antennas, and the channels between the BS and IR or 
ER are dominated by shadowed Rician fading links. 
Assuming a linear radio-frequency energy harvesting 
model, your task is to optimize the BS beamforming 
design to maximize the total sum-rate of all IRs while 
guaranteeing the minimum harvested energy of each ER.
…
Literature
Agent
[R1]: This paper studies a multi-user multiple-input single-output (MISO) downlink 
system for simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT), in which 
a set of single-antenna mobile stations (MSs) receive information and energy 
simultaneously via power splitting (PS) from …
[R2]: This paper studies the joint transceiver design and power splitting (JTDPS) for 
a downlink multiuser multiple-input multiple-output (MU-MIMO) simultaneous 
wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) system. Aiming to minimize the 
transmit power by jointly optimizing the …
[RN]: This paper proposes a linear transceiver design algorithm for weighted sum-rate 
maximization that is based on iterative minimization of weighted mean-square error 
(MSE). The proposed algorithm only needs local channel knowledge and converges 
to a stationary point of the weighted sum-rate maximization …
Summarized references
Tool Use
Planning
Agent
Hello! I‘m excited to work with you on this MIMO 
wireless downlink SWIPT network optimization 
problem. This is a challenging beamforming design 
problem that involves balancing information 
transmission and energy harvesting objectives.
1. Are you familiar with the key concepts involved 
here? 2. What are your initial thoughts on how we 
should mathematically formulate this problem? 3. 
Have you considered what makes this problem 
challenging from an optimization perspective? (Hint: 
Think about the nature of the sum-rate objective 
function)
Please share your thoughts on these questions, and 
we'll work together to develop a comprehensive plan 
for solving this problem!
MIMO SWIPT beamforming optimization
Searching
Collecting
Ranking
Planning
Instructor
……
1. **My familiarity with key concepts:**
Yes, I‘m familiar with MIMO systems and 
beamforming. In SWIPT networks, the BS 
transmits signals that serve dual purposes: 
conveying information to IRs and providing energy 
to ERs …
2. **Initial problem formulation thoughts:**
- **Optimization variable:** The beamforming 
vectors/matrices at the BS. If we have K IRs, we’d 
have beamforming vectors w_k …
3. **Optimization challenges:**
The sum-rate objective with log(1+SINR) is non-
convex;The SINR expressions have beamforming 
vectors in both numerator and denominator, 
creating coupling …
Could you guide me on which approach would be 
most suitable for this specific problem structure?
**COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR MIMO SWIPT BEAMFORMING OPTIMIZATION**
**PHASE 1: MATHEMATICAL MODELING**
**1.1 System Model:** BS with N-antenna ULA serving K IRs and J ERs …
**1.2 Performance Metrics:** SINR at IR k …, Harvested power at ER j …
**Challenge:** Non-convex due to log-sum-rate objective and SINR coupling in numerator/denominator
**PHASE 2: OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM DESIGN**
**2.1 Semidefinite Relaxation (SDR):** Introduce matrix variables: W_k = w_k w_k^H, with rank-one constraint 
rank(W_k) = 1 …
**2.2 Reformulated Problem (P1-SDR):** maximize    ∑_{k=1}^K r_k subject to …
**PHASE 3: IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS**
**3.1 Algorithm Pseudocode:** ……
**PHASE 4: BASELINE ALGORITHMS**
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
。。。。。。
Instruction
Planning
Perception
Stage I: Knowledge Acquisition
User Query
Subtask 1
Subtask 2
Subtask 3
Subtask 4
Coding
Agent
Example ERROR:
cvxpy.error.DCPError: 
Problem does not follow DCP 
rules XXXXXX
Prev. Code
New Code
Replace
Edit
Code Scoring
Scoring
Agent
Coding
Agent
Hello! I'm ready to help you prepare the data for 
the MIMO-SWIPT beamforming optimization 
experiment. Let me clarify the system parameters 
and data requirements with you.
Based on the problem description, we need to 
generate:
1. **Channel data** for both Information 
Receivers (IRs) and Energy Receivers (ERs)
2. **System parameters** including:
   - Number of BS antennas (N_t)
   - Number of IRs (K) and their antenna count 
(N_r)
   - Number of ERs (J) and their antenna count 
(N_e)
   - Path loss coefficients
   
 
 
 
 
 
…….
Data
Instructor
Thank you for the context! I understand this is a 
MIMO-SWIPT beamforming optimization problem. 
Before I start generating the data preparation 
code, let me confirm a few key parameters with 
you:
**System Configuration Questions:**
1. **Array sizes**: Would you like me to use 
standard dimensions like:
   - BS antennas (N_t): 4 or 16?
   - IR count (K): 2-5 users?
   - ER count (J): 2-3 users?
   - Antennas per IR (N_r): 3 or 8?
   - Antennas per ER (N_e): 3 or 8?
2. **Channel parameters**:
   - Should I generate random angles uniformly 
distributed (e.g., θ_k, φ_k ∈ [-π/3, π/3])?
 
 
 
 
 
……
Presented is the result of the phase [data preparation]: import numpy as np
# System Parameters
M = 4  # Number of BS antennas
K = 2  # Number of Information Receivers (IRs)
J = 2  # Number of Energy Receivers (ERs)
N_r = 3  # Number of antennas per IR
N_e = 3  # Number of antennas per ER
# Physical Parameters
f_c = 28e9  # Carrier frequency: 28 GHz
c = 3e8  # Speed of light
wavelength = c / f_c  # Wavelength
d = wavelength / 2  # Antenna spacing (λ/2)
# Power Parameters
P_total = 19.95  # Total BS transmit power budget: 19.95 Watts (43 dBm)
noise_power = 1e-8  # Noise power: -50 dBm ≈ 1e-8 Watts
E_min = 0.5e-7  # Minimum energy harvesting threshold per ER
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
。。。。。。
Instruction
Planning
Stage II: Plan Formulation
Stage III: Data Preparation
Stage IV: Simulation Generation
You are a scoring agent who serves as an 
expert reward model. You can read a solution 
plan, research code, and code output, and 
you determine how well the plan is followed, 
how the code is built, whether the code 
executes successfully, and whether the result 
is valid. You then assign the code a score 
from 0 to 1 as a float. You must structure your 
score exactly in the following way: ```SCORE 
<score here> ```where SCORE is just the 
word score, <score here> is a floating point 
number between 0 and 1 representing how 
well the model followed the plan, built the 
code, and got the proper output
Outlined in the following text is the solution 
plan that the wireless communication 
engineer was tasked with building: 
{outlined_plan}
The following text is the solution code that the 
model produced: {code}
 
 
 
 
 
……
You are a wireless communication engineer and 
you will be writing the code for a wireless 
communication optimization problem.
You are given a wireless communication 
optimization problem described, where the plan is 
described as follows: {self.plan}
Your goal is to produce code that obtains final 
results for an experiment. You should make sure 
you are implementing everything outlined in the 
plan. Make sure you do not write functions, only 
loose code.
Your code should run the experiment outlined in the 
plan for a single code. Your code should strictly 
satisfy all constraints of the problem.
You cannot pip install new libraries, but many 
libraries already work. Using print statements is 
useful for figuring out what is wrong and 
understanding your code better.
 
 
 
 
 
……
Code
Generation
Code
Repair
Self-Refinement
Feedback
Code
Execution
Agent Prompt
Agent Prompt
Agent Dialogue
Agent Dialogue
Agent Dialogue
Agent Dialogue
Fig. 2: Operational Breakdown of the ComAgent Framework. A detailed example workflow that demonstrates the autonomous
execution of a case study on MIMO SWIPT beamforming optimization across four distinct stages.
route that fits the problem structure and numerical properties.
The Instructor reviews the draft plan to identify missing


--- Page 6 ---
6
constraints, ambiguous definitions, or steps that are difficult
to implement. The Planning Agent revises the plan based on
this feedback, and the loop repeats until the plan is internally
consistent and implementation-oriented. As shown in Fig. 2,
the final output is a structured execution chain that decomposes
the original task into linked subtasks, covering formulation, al-
gorithm design, baseline construction, and experiment settings.
The design ensures that downstream stages operate on clear
and verifiable targets rather than informal descriptions.
3) Data preparation: Stage III builds the empirical foun-
dation for the simulation and enforces consistency between
the plan and the executable setup. The Data Instructor su-
pervises the Coding Agent to generate or collect data that
matches the adopted wireless model, which includes channel
realizations, topology generation, parameter settings, and task-
specific data when needed. The stage begins with the Data
Instructor retrieving the user query and the finalized plan
from the System Memory. The Instructor then requests a
data-preparation strategy from the Coding Agent and checks
whether the strategy matches the plan, including channel
models, antenna configurations, and scenario parameters. After
validation, the Coding Agent uses external tools, such as
Python scripts for synthetic data generation or API calls for
public datasets, to construct a local dataset.
To avoid silent mismatches that frequently break wireless
simulations, the Data Instructor performs iterative checks
during data generation. It verifies code execution, dimensional
consistency, and basic sanity of generated samples, such as
path-loss trends and power normalization. If issues occur, the
Coding Agent revises the script based on the feedback and
repeats the process until the dataset is consistent with the plan.
The validated dataset is then stored for use in Stage IV.
4) Simulation generation: Stage IV is the execution and
validation engine of the framework, as shown in Fig. 2. The
Coding Agent converts the solution plan and prepared dataset
into executable simulation code in a sandbox workspace.
The implementation follows a modular structure so that the
system model, solver, baselines, and evaluation metrics can
be checked independently. During coding, the agent keeps the
implementation aligned with the plan and records modifica-
tions to improve traceability.
To emphasize communication relevance, validation is not
limited to code execution. The Scoring Agent checks whether
the implementation satisfies wireless constraints and whether
the produced results are physically meaningful. The evaluation
follows two feedback branches.
• Error handling branch: If the simulation fails to com-
pile or execute, the Scoring Agent captures the specific
error signal (e.g., syntax errors or runtime exceptions)
and reports it to the Coding Agent. The Coding Agent
then performs self-reflection to diagnose the root cause
and rectify the issue in the subsequent iteration.
• Wireless validity branch: Upon successful compilation,
the Scoring Agent evaluates feasibility and result con-
sistency. Typical checks include constraint satisfaction,
numerical stability, and whether key metrics behave as
expected under parameter changes, for example, rate
versus transmit power. The agent employs an LLM-based
reward model to compute a quantitative score ranging
from 0 to 1. Higher scores indicate greater alignment with
the initial task requirements and physical constraints.
Based on the structured feedback, comprising both the
quantitative score and qualitative analysis, the Coding Agent
reflects on the current implementation and iteratively refines
the code to maximize the reward. This closed-loop refine-
ment is essential for wireless network optimization tasks,
where minor implementation errors or missing constraints
can produce results that seem reasonable but violate physical
limits. By coupling execution feedback with wireless-specific
validity checks, Stage IV turns the agentic loop into a practical
tool for generating reproducible and communication-ready
simulations.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION: FROM AUTONOMOUS
DESIGN TO ROBUST GENERALIZATION
In this section, we present two case studies to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed multi-LLM agentic AI sys-
tem. The Claude-4.5-Sonnet is chosen as the base model for
all agents.
A. Case study 1: MIMO SWIPT beamforming optimization
To demonstrate the autonomous end-to-end orchestration
capability of our framework, we task the system with a
non-trivial MIMO SWIPT beamforming optimization problem
specifically designed by a human expert, which considers a
MIMO wireless downlink SWIPT network that simultaneously
serves K information receivers (IR) and J energy receivers
(ER) under shadowed Rician fading channels to maximize the
total sum-rate of all IRs while guaranteeing the minimum har-
vested energy of each ER. The detailed process of employing
the proposed multi-LLM agentic AI system to solve the task
is as follows.
The process begins with a user query using natural language
for the MIMO SWIPT beamforming task as follows:
User
Query: Consider a MIMO wireless downlink
SWIPT network scenario where one base station (BS)
simultaneously serves multiple information receivers (IR)
and energy receivers (ER). Suppose that the BS, IR, and
ER are equipped with a uniform linear array (ULA) with
multiple antennas, and the channels between the BS and
IR or ER are subject to shadowed Rician fading links.
Assuming a linear radio-frequency energy harvesting
model, your task is to optimize the BS beamforming
design to maximize the total sum-rate of all IRs while
guaranteeing the minimum harvested energy of each ER.
1) Autonomous end-to-end solution: To process the user
query, the Literature Agent first anchors the task in exist-
ing research by retrieving and filtering key references on
MIMO SWIPT from external repositories. Leveraging the
domain knowledge, the Planning Agent does not merely
copy and paste formulas but autonomously collaborates with
the Planning Instructor to translate high-level intent into a
rigorous mathematical framework. Recognizing the inherent


--- Page 7 ---
7
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
Fig. 3: An example 2D channel gain map with the BS located
at the origin.
non-convexity of the SWIPT beamforming problem, the Plan-
ning Agent strategically decomposes the task into a logical
chain: starting from channel modeling, proceeding to algo-
rithm design (specifically transforming non-convex constraints
via semidefinite relaxation (SDR) and successive convex ap-
proximation (SCA) techniques), and concluding with baseline
selection for comparative analysis. A critical insight observed
during the experiment is that the Planning Agent demonstrates
expert-level reasoning. Recognizing that the coupling between
beamforming vectors and energy harvesting constraints ren-
ders the problem highly non-convex, the agent does not
blindly attempt gradient descent. Instead, it autonomously
formulates the problem using SDR and SCA to handle the
rank-1 constraints, as shown in Fig. 2, which verifies that the
agent possesses mathematical reasoning and efficiently utilizes
domain knowledge derived from the Knowledge Acquisition
stage.
The execution phase is orchestrated through a tight feedback
loop between the Coding and Scoring Agents. Guided by the
Coding Instructor, the Coding Agent generates a simulation
environment. Then, following the solution plan, the Coding
Agent generates simulation scripts. Crucially, the Scoring
Agent acts as an expert critic, which evaluates the generated
solution not only on syntax correctness but also on physical
feasibility, and ensures that the semantic constraints, such as
the minimum harvested energy threshold and BS transmit
power budget, are strictly satisfied. Through this iterative
Perception-Planning-Action-Reflection cycle, the system au-
tonomously identifies and rectifies logical errors in the beam-
forming algorithm, refining the code until it converges to a
physically valid and optimized solution.
2) Performance verification: In this case study, the multi-
LLM agentic AI system generates the simulation code, in-
cluding the system parameter settings, algorithm design, and
baseline implementations. Specifically, there are K = 2 IRs
and J = 2 ERs randomly and uniformly distributed in a two-
dimensional (2D) rectangular region of 30 m × 30 m. The sys-
tem operates at a carrier frequency of fc = 28 GHz. The BS is
37
39
41
43
45
47
49
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
Agentic framework-based beamforming
Traditional WMMSE beamforming [14]
ZF beamforming
Fig. 4: Average sum-rate versus transmit power Pmax.
4
8
12
16
20
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
40
44
48
Agentic framework-based beamforming
Traditional WMMSE beamforming [14]
ZF beamforming
Fig. 5: Average sum-rate versus the number of antennas M.
equipped with M = 4 antennas and is deployed at a height of
h = 5 m. Each IR and ER is equipped with Nr = Ne = 3 an-
tennas with half-wavelength antenna spacing. The large-scale
channel attenuation follows L(d) = L0 + 10α log10(d/d0)
with a reference distance of d0 = 1 m, a path-loss factor
of L0 = 30 dB, and a path-loss exponent of α = 3.5. The
shadowing is modeled as lognormal with a standard deviation
of σsh = 6 dB, and the small-scale fading is modeled as
Rician with a factor of Krician = 6 dB. The receiver noise
power is set to σ2 = −50 dBm, the maximum transmit
power is Pmax = 43 dBm, and the minimum harvested
energy requirement is Emin = 0.5 × 10−7 W. To evaluate
the optimality of this agent-generated solution, we compare it
with two distinct benchmarks: the weighted minimum mean-
squared-error (WMMSE) algorithm [14], which represents a
traditional expert-level iterative solution, and the zero-forcing
(ZF) beamforming. The simulations are repeated multiple
times with different random seed settings and averaged.
Fig. 3 shows an example 2D channel gain map of shadowed
Rician fading channels generated by the agentic AI framework.
It is shown that our proposed framework accurately captures
the features of the fading channels rather than simplifying


--- Page 8 ---
8
them as line-of-sight links. Fig. 4 illustrates the average
achievable sum-rate performance versus the maximum trans-
mit power Pmax. It is shown that the performance of the
agentic framework-based beamforming is comparable to that
of the traditional WMMSE algorithm. This alignment indicates
that the code generated by the Coding Agent successfully
implements the sophisticated iterative logic required to balance
signal strength against inter-user interference. Furthermore, the
agent-generated solution consistently outperforms the ZF base-
line. We further investigate the impact of the spatial degrees of
freedom (DoF) on system performance in Fig. 5, which depicts
the average sum-rate versus the number of transmit antennas
M. As M increases, the system performance improves signif-
icantly. The results show that the agent-generated algorithm
effectively exploits the additional spatial DoF to generate
sharper beams. Even in high-dimensional settings, the agentic
AI solution maintains its performance advantage over ZF and
is comparable to the WMMSE benchmark. These results show
that the proposed multi-LLM framework can autonomously
explore the design space, select appropriate mathematical tools
(e.g., SDR/SCA), and generate robust code that converges to
expert-level solutions without human intervention.
B. Case study 2: Generalization and robustness across tasks
To rigorously evaluate the adaptability of the proposed
framework across diverse wireless use cases, we established
a generic test set comprising 25 specifically human-expert-
designed optimization tasks extracted from [15], ranging from
classical resource allocation to emerging technologies, such
as non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) and RIS. We
compared the proposed agentic AI framework with two base-
lines: 1) a single LLM with standard input-output prompting,
and 2) a single LLM plus PS strategy, which explicitly
prompts the model to generate a plan before coding but
lacks iterative environmental feedback. For a fair comparison,
the Claude-4.5-Sonnet is chosen as the base LLM, and the
model temperature is set to 1.0. The maximum number of
attempts per task is set to 3. The performance is quantified
using six comprehensive metrics: 1) Problem Formulation
Rate, defined as the proportion of tasks in which the system
explicitly constructs mathematical models before coding; 2)
Code Generation Rate, the ratio of tasks yielding executable
scripts; 3) Code Execution Rate, the percentage of generated
scripts that run without syntax errors; 4) Solution Solved Rate,
the fraction of tasks in which the final output satisfies all
constraints and is physically meaningful; 5) 1st-Try Success
Rate, indicating zero-shot capability; and 6) Average Attempt
Times, representing the mean number of iterations required
per task.
The comparative results reveal significant performance dis-
parity of different methods, as summarized in Table I. The
single LLM baseline exhibited a 0% Problem Formulation
Rate, characterizing a leap-to-code failure mode where mathe-
matical modeling is bypassed. This lack of structural reasoning
resulted in a catastrophic Code Execution Rate of 24% and a
low Solution Solved Rate of 24%, as the generated scripts
were often syntactically incorrect or logically flawed, such as
ignoring physical power budget constraints.
The Single LLM plus PS approach improved performance
by enforcing a reasoning step, achieving a 56% Formulation
Rate and raising the Solution Solved Rate to 56%. However, its
static nature limits robustness. Without feedback, it struggled
to recover from initial errors, as evidenced by a 1st-Try
Success Rate of 20% and higher Average Attempt Times of
2.44 compared to the agentic AI framework.
In contrast, the agentic AI framework demonstrated supe-
rior autonomy and efficiency. It achieved a 100% Problem
Formulation Rate, ensuring that every simulation script was
mathematically grounded. Crucially, the closed-loop feedback
mechanism allowed the system to self-correct effectively,
yielding the highest Solution Solved Rate of 72%, 1st-Try
Success Rate of 32%, and lowest Average Attempt Times
of 2.12. This indicates that the proposed multi-LLM agen-
tic architecture does not merely plan but actively adapts,
transforming the LLM from a static generator into a robust,
high-precision, and autonomous copilot for complex wireless
optimization tasks.
V. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Although the proposed multi-LLM agentic AI framework
successfully automates specific wireless optimization tasks,
transitioning this copilot into a fully autonomous controller
for real-world wireless networks introduces practical engineer-
ing challenges. In operational network environments, systems
must move beyond solving static problems to manage dynamic
infrastructures. This section outlines the key architectural
evolution required for next-generation agentic AI systems.
A. From task-based execution to continuous operation
Currently, our framework operates in a one-shot mode in
which agents receive a query, execute a plan, and terminate
once the solution is generated. Although effective for offline
optimization, this episodic workflow must evolve into a con-
tinuous service to handle the persistent nature of live wireless
networks, where objectives and decision contexts constantly
evolve. Future architectures should require agents to maintain
a persistent state, continuously monitor network key perfor-
mance indicators, and dynamically trigger the Planning Agent
only when the performance deviates from the targets. This shift
transforms the system from a static tool for generating solution
plans into a dynamic control loop capable of real-time policy
maintenance and intent reconciliation, ensuring that the system
can detect deviations without deriving the entire reasoning
chain from scratch.
B. Balancing reasoning capabilities with real-time latency
The current framework relies on extensive interactions and
feedback loops between agents, such as the debate between
the Planning and Instructor agents, which introduces com-
putational latency that is incompatible with millisecond-level
wireless control tasks. A hierarchical control architecture is
necessary to bridge the gap between the slow inference speed
of large models and the strict timing requirements of the
physical layer. Future multi-LLM agentic AI systems should


--- Page 9 ---
9
TABLE I: Performance comparison on the generic test set
Metric
Single LLM
Single LLM + PS
Agentic AI Framework
Problem Formulation Rate
0.00% (0/25)
56.00% (14/25)
100.00% (25/25)
Code Generation Rate
100.00% (25/25)
100.00% (25/25)
100.00% (25/25)
Code Execution Rate
24.00% (6/25)
88.00% (22/25)
100.00% (25/25)
Solution Solved Rate
24.00% (6/25)
56.00% (14/25)
72.00% (18/25)
1st-Try Success Rate
4.00% (1/25)
20.00% (5/25)
32.00% (8/25)
Avg. Attempt Times
2.88
2.44
2.12
function as a high-level control plane for intent understanding
and strategic planning while delegating time-critical execu-
tion to lightweight, specialized small models or conventional
controllers. This architecture ensures that the comprehensive
reasoning of agents enhances network management without
becoming a bottleneck for signal processing latency, allowing
the system to maintain stability even when the control alter-
nates between components with different response times.
C. Coordination scalability in distributed architectures
As the framework scales to support large and complex
networks, the coordination cost of exchanging lengthy prompts
and feedback between agents becomes a critical bottleneck.
Relying on a centralized orchestrator for all communications
creates a single-point-of-failure bottleneck and high signal-
ing overhead, whereas fully decentralized approaches risk
inconsistency. To address the challenge, future systems must
adopt adaptive agent topologies in which agents form dynamic
subgroups based on task requirements rather than maintaining
global connectivity. Furthermore, optimizing communication
protocols to exchange structured data or compact tokens
instead of full natural language text will be essential to ensure
efficient collaboration as network complexity increases, and
prevent coordination overhead from negating the benefits of
multi-agent intelligence.
D. Long-term memory and lifelong adaptation
In the current case studies, the proposed framework relies on
the Literature Agent to retrieve knowledge anew for each task,
lacking a mechanism to retain long-term experience across
sessions. Since wireless environments are nonstationary and
dynamic, this leads to inefficient duplication of efforts for
recurring optimization problems. Future research should be
able to integrate long-term experiential memory, distinct from
temporary system memory, to archive valid solution templates
and failure cases. By retrieving validated strategies directly
from this historical archive, the Planning Agent can bypass
time-consuming design loops for familiar scenarios, enabling
the system to progressively adapt and improve its robustness
over its operational lifecycle, rather than remaining perpetually
reactive.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed ComAgent, a multi-LLM based agentic AI
framework designed to autonomously navigate the complex
design space of emerging wireless networks, addressing the
complexity limitations of traditional manual optimization.
By orchestrating specialized agents like Literature, Plan-
ning, Coding, and Scoring Agents through a proposed re-
cursive Perception-Planning-Action-Reflection cognitive cy-
cle, the framework effectively mitigated the hallucination and
reasoning deficits inherent in monolithic LLMs. Extensive
case studies, including MIMO SWIPT beamforming and a
generic optimization test set, validated that the system not
only automated the end-to-end workflow, from mathematical
modeling to simulation implementation, but also achieved a
solution quality comparable to expert-designed baselines. Con-
sequently, this paper established a foundational multi-LLM
agentic AI architecture for intent-driven network management,
paving the way for future self-evolving and zero-touch 6G
network systems.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Xiao, Z. Ye, M. Wu, H. Li, M. Xiao, M. S. Alouini, A. Al-Hourani, and
S. Cioni, “Space-air-ground integrated wireless networks for 6G: Basics,
key technologies, and future trends,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol.
42, no. 12, pp. 3327–3354, Dec. 2024.
[2] Z. Fei, B. Li, S. Yang, C. Xing, H. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “A survey
of multi-objective optimization in wireless sensor networks: Metrics,
algorithms, and open problems,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 19,
no. 1, pp. 550–586, 1st Quart., 2017.
[3] Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Big ai models for 6G wireless
networks: Opportunities, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Wirel.
Commun., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 164-172, Oct. 2024.
[4] H. Zhou et al., “Large language model (LLM) for telecommunications: A
comprehensive survey on principles, key techniques, and opportunities,”
IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1955–2005, Jun. 2025.
[5] Y. Wang et al., “Large model based agents: State-of-the-art, cooperation
paradigms, security and privacy, and future trends,” IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutor., early access, 2025.
[6] F. Jiang et al., “Large language model enhanced multi-agent systems for
6G communications,” IEEE Wirel. Commun., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 48–55,
Dec. 2024.
[7] H. Li, M. Xiao, K. Wang, R. Schober, D. In Kim, and Y. Liang Guan,
“Joint user association and beamforming design for ISAC networks with
large language models,” IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 6, pp. 7620–
7644, Sep. 2025.
[8] H. Li, M. Xiao, K. Wang, D. I. Kim, and M. Debbah, “Large language
model based multi-objective optimization for integrated sensing and
communication in UAV networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol.
14, no. 4, pp. 979–983, Apr. 2025.
[9] A. Qayyum, A. Albaseer, J. Qadir, A. Al-Fuqaha and M. Abdallah, “LLM-
driven multi-agent architectures for intelligent self-organizing networks,”
IEEE Netw., early access, 2025.
[10] X. Cao et al., “Exploring llm-based multi-agent situation awareness
for zero-trust space-air-ground integrated network,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2230–2247, Jun. 2025.
[11] J.
Tong
et
al.,
“Wirelessagent:
Large
language
model
agents
for
intelligent
wireless
networks,”
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01074.
[12] G.
Liu
et
al.,
“Wireless
agentic
ai
with
retrieval-augmented
multimodal
semantic
perception,”
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23275.


--- Page 10 ---
10
[13] R. Zhang et al., “Generative ai agents with large language model for
satellite networks via a mixture of experts transmission,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 3581-3596, Dec. 2024.
[14] Q. Shi et al., “An iteratively weighted MMSE approach to distributed
sum–utility maximization for a MIMO interfering broadcast channel,”
IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4331–4340, Sep. 2011.
[15] Y. Liu et al., “A survey of recent advances in optimization methods for
wireless communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42, no. 11,
pp. 2992–3031, Nov. 2024.
