--- Page 1 ---
Reasoning-Driven Design of Single Atom Catalysts 
via a Multi-Agent Large Language Model 
Framework 
Dong Hyeon Mok1, Seoin Back2,3,4,*, Victor Fung5,* and Guoxiang Hu6,7,* 
1Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Institute of Emergent Materials, 
Sogang University, Seoul 04107, Republic of Korea 
2KU-KIST Graduate School of Converging Science and Technology, Korea University, Seoul 
02841, Republic of Korea 
3Department of Integrative Energy Engineering, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of 
Korea 
4Institute for Multiscale Matter and Systems (IMMS), Ewha Womans University, Seoul 03760, 
Republic of Korea 
5 School of Computational Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, 
GA 30332, USA. 
6 School of Materials Science and Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 
30332, USA. 
7 School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, 
USA. 
 
AUTHOR INFORMATION 
Corresponding Author 
E-mail: sback@korea.ac.kr, victorfung@gatech.edu, emma.hu@mse.gatech.edu  
Keywords 
Large Language Model, Single Atom Catalyst, Oxygen Reduction Reaction, Materials 
Discovery, Scientific Agent 
 


--- Page 2 ---
Abstract 
 
Large language models (LLMs) are becoming increasingly applied beyond natural 
language processing, demonstrating strong capabilities in complex scientific tasks that 
traditionally require human expertise. This progress has extended into materials discovery, 
where LLMs introduce a new paradigm by leveraging reasoning and in-context learning, 
capabilities absent from conventional machine learning approaches. Here, we present a Multi-
Agent-based Electrocatalyst Search Through Reasoning and Optimization (MAESTRO) 
framework in which multiple LLMs with specialized roles collaboratively discover high-
performance single atom catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. Within an autonomous 
design loop, agents iteratively reason, propose modifications, reflect on results and accumulate 
design history. Through in-context learning enabled by this iterative process, MAESTRO 
identified design principles not explicitly encoded in the LLMs’ background knowledge and 
successfully discovered catalysts that break conventional scaling relations between reaction 
intermediates. These results highlight the potential of multi-agent LLM frameworks as a 
powerful strategy to generate chemical insight and discover promising catalysts. 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 3 ---
1. Introduction 
 
Identifying new materials that deliver high catalytic activity, selectivity, and long-term 
stability has remained a significant and ongoing scientific challenge, with major implications 
for improving energy efficiency, lowering industrial costs, and enabling more sustainable 
chemical processes. Over time, materials discovery strategies have evolved beyond purely 
experimental approaches and first-principles simulations, such as density functional theory 
(DFT) calculations1-3, with machine learning (ML) becoming one of the dominant paradigms 
in the field4-9. Early ML-based approaches primarily relied on high-throughput screening10-13, 
in which large datasets were generated in advance and property prediction models were used 
to filter promising candidates, thereby reducing the computational and experimental cost of 
subsequent validation. However, as the chemical search space expanded and performance 
requirements became increasingly demanding, such screening-based strategies encountered 
limitations related to data availability, computational cost, and scalability14, 15. To address these 
challenges, inverse design strategies were introduced, in which materials are designed starting 
from target properties rather than discovered through forward searches16-19. Approaches based 
on global optimization20, 21 and generative models22-24 have demonstrated notable success in 
the efficient discovery of promising materials. Despite these advances, data-driven methods 
remain inherently constrained by their training dataset25, 26. While they can discover novel 
materials within established structure-property relationships, they often lack explanatory power 
regarding why a particular material is selected and struggle to identify materials governed by 
unknown physical mechanisms outside the learned domain. As a result, the discovery of 
fundamentally new, physics-driven design principles has largely remained dependent on human 
intuition and intervention. 
 
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) offer a fundamentally different 
avenue for inverse design. Originally developed for natural language processing, LLMs trained 
on massive text corpora have demonstrated a capacity for human-like reasoning27-29. In 
chemistry and materials science, LLMs have begun to move beyond simple data mining toward 
roles involving experimental planning30, synthesis guidance31, simulation tool orchestration32 
and chemically informed decision-making tasks that were previously exclusive to human 
experts33-36. Crucially, LLMs possess the capability for in-context learning, whereby they adapt 
their reasoning based on prior interactions and accumulated context without explicit parameter 
updates37. This enables LLMs to acquire task-specific principles and uncover new insights not 


--- Page 4 ---
explicitly encoded in their background knowledge, particularly when embedded within 
iterative decision-making loops38. Furthermore, recent research has shifted from assigning 
multiple roles to a single LLM toward multi-agent frameworks, whereby several LLM-based 
agents, each specialized for a specific task, interact and collaborate39, 40. Such systems provide 
a natural foundation for complex scientific workflows that require hypothesis formulation, 
reflection and memory. 
 
In this work, we investigate whether an LLM-based multi-agent framework can be 
successfully applied to heterogeneous electrocatalysis, a relatively narrow yet intrinsically 
complex domain. While LLMs have recently been employed in catalyst-related studies for task 
such as data mining41, synthesis planning42, property prediction43 and catalyst generation44, 
approaches that explicitly leverage LLM reasoning to design high-performance catalysts 
remain scarce compared to other systems. To address this gap, we develop a Multi-Agent-based 
Electrocatalyst Search Through Reasoning and Optimization (MAESTRO) framework in 
which multiple LLM agents collectively design active and stable single atom catalysts (SACs) 
for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) (Figure 1). Within this framework, agents iteratively 
propose structural modifications, reflect on outcomes and summarize design history, while 
rapid property evaluation is enabled by a machine learning force field (MLFF) serving as a 
surrogate for DFT45. 
 
Applying the MAESTRO framework, we demonstrate that the agents can 
autonomously formulate hypotheses regarding catalyst modification strategies and 
progressively improve both activity and stability through iterative reasoning. Notably, the 
framework identifies SACs that surpass the theoretical activity limit imposed by conventional 
scaling relations between reaction intermediates46. Detailed analysis reveals that this 
enhancement originates from the selective stabilization of a specific intermediate via hydrogen 
bonding, a mechanism previously reported in several studies. Importantly, this discovery does 
not emerge in the absence of in-context learning, providing strong evidence that the proposed 
framework enables agents to acquire new physics and design principles through accumulated 
history and iterative reasoning. These results highlight the MAESTRO framework as a 
promising optimization strategy for electrocatalyst discovery, capable of navigating complex 
design spaces and uncovering nontrivial relationships between structure and property beyond 
conventional discovery schemes. 
 
 


--- Page 5 ---
2. Results 
2.1 MAESTRO Framework 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the MAESTRO framework and the exploration-exploitation search 
strategy. Starting from an initial catalyst structure and its associated properties, LLM-based 
agents and predefined tools iteratively perform reasoning, modification, evaluation, reflection 
and summarization according to their designated roles for a fixed number of cycles. The design 
run is divided into two phases, an exploration phase and an exploitation phase. Upon 
completion of the exploration phase, a summary report is generated by the agent. 
 
 
The MAESTRO framework operates as an iterative design loop composed of four 
nodes, design, calculation, reflection and summary, managed by four agents, Design, Reflect, 
Summary and Exploration report, along with predefined tools. The primary objective of this 
loop is to minimize the ORR overpotential (η), which serves as a measure of the catalytic 
activity of the SAC, while simultaneously maximizing the dissolution potential (Udiss) to ensure 
electrochemical stability.  


--- Page 6 ---
 
The design loop initiates by loading an initial SAC structure and evaluating its 
overpotential and dissolution potential using a MLFF surrogate model. The resulting geometric 
and catalytic data are then formatted and passed to the design agent within the design node. 
Leveraging structural images and formatted metadata, the design agent formulates a hypothesis 
to identify specific modifications, and the underlaying physical reasons, that could effectively 
tune binding energies to reduce the overpotential. The design agent is authorized to modify five 
distinct geometric components of the SAC: the center metal atom, first coordination shell, 
second shell, axial ligand and functional groups. The available modification types and options 
are summarized in Table 1. 
Table 1. Geometric components of the SAC accessible to the design agent, including 
modification types and available chemical options. Specifically, axial ligands are introduced 
perpendicular to the surface, positioned beneath the binding site, while functional groups are 
added to the second coordination shell of the carbon support. 
Geometric Components 
Modification Types 
Atom / Molecule Options 
Center metal atom 
Substitute 
Pt, Pd, Ir, Ru, Fe, Co, Mn, 
Cu, Ni, Cr, V, Ti, Mo, Na, Ta, 
Ag, Au, Zn, Sn, Bi 
First coordination shell 
Substitute, Add, Remove 
H, C, O, N, S 
Second coordination shell 
Substitute 
C, P, B, S, N 
Axial ligand 
Substitute, Add, Remove 
*O, *OH 
Functional group 
Substitute, Add, Remove 
*COC, *COH, *CO 
 
The proposed modification is forwarded to the modification tool, which verifies 
whether the suggested change is applicable to the given SAC. If the modification is deemed 
unsuitable, the workflow returns to the design agent for a new proposal. This includes case in 
which the agent proposes invalid modifications, such as hallucinated modification type not 
included in the list or attempts to substitute non-existent elements. If accepted, the modification 
is applied, and the resulting structure is passed to the calculation node. Here, the overpotential 
and dissolution potential of the modified SAC are calculated using the MLFF. If the geometry 
optimization fails to converge within 100 optimization steps under a force threshold of 0.05 
eV/Å, the failed structure and associated metadata are returned to the design agent. Upon 
successful convergence, the calculated properties are forwarded to the reflection node.  
In the reflection node, the reflection agent evaluates the effectiveness of the proposed 


--- Page 7 ---
modification by comparing the catalytic activity and stability before and after the change. 
Based on this comparison, it provides feedback categorizing the modification as successful or 
unsuccessful. This feedback, along with the proposed modification, the underlying reasoning, 
and the calculated results, is passed to the summary node and formatted as design history. While 
the most recent history is stored in full, previous entries are condensed by the summary agent 
to maintain context efficiency (Figure S2). Finally, the accumulated design history, the 
modified SAC structure and its performance metrics are fed back to the design agent to initiate 
the next iteration. 
To ensure sufficiently broad exploration, the agents are guided by an exploration-
exploitation strategy. During the first half of the process, the exploration phase, the primary 
objective is to expand the design space rather than minimize the overpotential. Accordingly, 
the design agent is instructed to structurally diverse and distinct types of modifications without 
prioritizing improvements in overpotential or dissolution potential. The reflect agent provides 
feedback which prioritizes the discovery of unique structural configurations. 
At the midpoint of the design agent, the workflow transitions to the exploitation phase, 
where optimization proceeds under the original objective of minimizing overpotential while 
maintaining stability. During this transition, an exploration report agent generates a one to two 
page report summarizing the modifications explored and their corresponding effects (Figure 
S6). This report distills actionable insights to guide the subsequent optimization. The 
exploration report serves as a persistent reference for the design agent throughout the remainder 
of the loop.  
In this study, the primary results were obtained using GPT-4.1-mini as the LLM29, 
Universal Models for Atoms (UMA) as the MLFF surrogate model47, and FeN4 as the initial 
catalyst structure. However, the framework is modular and additional experiments using 
alternative models and starting materials were also conducted. Detailed agent prompts, catalyst 
specifications and implementation details are provided in Supplementary Note A.  
 
2.2 Validation of MLFF and LLM components 


--- Page 8 ---
 
Figure 2. Pre-validation of MLFF and LLM components. (a-c) Parity plots comparing DFT-
calculation and MLFF-prediction results for (a) energies per atom, (b) atomic forces and (c) 
binding energies. (d) An example of the reasoning and modification proposed by the design 
agent, together with the resulting structure and the changes in Gibbs free energy and d-band 
center induced by the suggested modification. (e) Corresponding changes in the electronic 
density of states (DOS) following the modification. Dashed lines indicate the d-band centers 
of the metal atoms, which shift toward positive values (closer to the Fermi level) upon the 
substitution of a second-shell carbon atom with nitrogen. 
 
Before deploying the MAESTRO framework, we conducted a pre-validation study to 
ensure the reliability of both the tools and the LLM for the SAC system. Since the UMA 
employed as the MLFF in this study was not trained on SAC data, and no publicly available 
SAC dataset existed for meaningful fine-tuning, we constructed a custom SAC dataset to 
validate the extrapolation capabilities of UMA. The performance of the pre-trained UMA was 
evaluated using this out-of-distribution (OOD) dataset, which contains DFT calculated energies, 
forces and binding energies for various structures and their adsorbed intermediates. As shown 
in Figures 2a and 2b, UMA with ‘OC20’ domain showed Mean Absolute Errors (MAEs) for 
DFT energies per atom and atomic forces of 8.83 meV/atom and 47.73 meV/Å, respectively. 
These values are comparable to the MAEs reported by Wood et al for OOD catalysts47 (Figure 
S3). Furthermore, 0.346 eV MAE for binding energy was deemed acceptable, especially 


--- Page 9 ---
considering the complete absence of SACs in the pre-training set and the consistent directional 
bias of the prediction error. This systematic behavior indicates that UMA can reliably capture 
relative changes in binding strength, making it a suitable surrogate model for DFT within the 
design loop. Detailed information regarding the pre-validation datasets and MLFF performance 
is provided in Supplementary Note B. 
 
Regarding the LLM, we validated whether the modification proposed by the model 
could effectively steer binding energies in the intended direction and whether the underlying 
reasoning was physically sound. The target was to achieve a binding energy of 2.46 eV for the 
*O intermediate. As shown in Figure 2d, the LLM successfully suggested a modification that 
shifted the *O binding energy from the initial structure toward the desired target. Specifically, 
the LLM hypothesized that N substitution would decrease the electron density of the center 
metal atom. This hypothesis was confirmed by density of states (DOS) calculations, which 
showed a clear shift of electronic density, quantified by the reduction of d-band center position, 
of the Fe center after substitution48, 49. While the correspondence between the intended and 
realized binding energy changes and their associated reasoning was not perfect in every case, 
it was correct in the majority of instances. Representative examples of unsuccessful suggestions 
are provided in Figure S5.  
These pre-validation results demonstrate that UMA can function as a practical 
surrogate for DFT in evaluating the stability and catalytic activity of SACs for ORR without 
additional fine-tuning. Moreover, the LLM demonstrates a meaningful understanding of 
structure-property relationships of the SACs, enabling it to propose chemically interpretable 
modifications that systematically guide the energies toward target values. 
 
2.3 Performance Evaluation of Overall Framework 


--- Page 10 ---
 
Figure 3. Performance and behavior of the MAESTRO framework across different strategies. 
(a) Representative example of the ORR overpotential change during a design run, illustrating 
the transition from the exploration phase to the exploitation after the 50th modification. The red 
dashed line denotes the running minimum overpotential. (b) Corresponding Pareto front 
obtained from the same run, where the red point highlighting the most active catalyst 
discovered. (c) Evolution of overpotential and (d) dissolution potential, averaged over 10 
independent design runs using “history + exploration” strategy. (e) Comparison of overall 
design performance across different strategies. (f) Evolution of catalyst complexity during the 
design run for each strategy, where higher value indicates a larger number of modifications 
relative to the initial SAC structure. 
 
 
The objective of the design run is to minimize the ORR overpotential while 
simultaneously preserving or increasing the dissolution potential. To systematically evaluate 
the performance of our framework, we employed four metrics. 
1) Average overpotential: The mean ORR overpotential obtained across all design runs, 
excluding the exploration phase. For strategies without an explicit exploration phase, 
this was computed over the latter half of each design run. 
2) Minimum overpotential: The average of the lowest overpotential achieved during each 
individual design run. 
3) Hypervolume: The average volume of the Pareto front, representing the joint 
optimization space spanned by limiting potential and dissolution potential. A larger 
volume indicates superior discovery performance in terms of both activity and stability. 
4) Active-point volume: The average Pareto volume of the catalyst with the lowest 


--- Page 11 ---
overpotential, representing the combined activity and stability of the most promising 
candidate discovered. 
To benchmark the performance of the proposed “history + exploration” strategy, which 
introduces an exploration phase to prioritize a global search before exploitation, we defined 
three baseline strategies: 1) The history strategy performs only exploitation without a preceding 
exploration phase, thereby isolating the effect of broadening the design space before focused 
optimization. 2) The historyless strategy relies solely on the LLM’s background knowledge 
and does not incorporate information from previous modification steps, highlighting the impact 
of in-context learning from accumulated design history. 3) The random strategy applies purely 
random modifications without LLM guidance, serving as a lower-bound reference.  
Figure 3a and 3b present a representative design run, illustrating the gradual changes of 
overpotential and the corresponding Pareto front of the discovered catalysts. During the 
exploration phase, the overpotential exhibits large fluctuations as the framework broadly 
samples the design space. The exploratory behavior was further confirmed by the higher 
number of unique modifications performed during this phase, compared not only to the 
subsequent exploitation phase, but also to design runs of other strategies without exploration 
(Figure S7). In contrast, during the exploitation phase, the overpotential converges toward a 
narrow range, indicating focused optimization. The progression of the minimum overpotential, 
denoted by the red line and markers, reaches its optimum during this phase. The Pareto plot 
highlights the intrinsic trade-off between activity and stability. Although the most active 
catalyst identified in this run shows slightly lower stability, it still surpasses the reference FeN4 
catalyst in both metrics. 
Figure 3c and 3d summarize the average results over 10 independent design runs. Both 
graphs reveal a clear trend, where the overpotential gradually decreases while the dissolution 
potential increases following the transition to the exploitation phase (Figure S8). These 
observations demonstrate that the MAESTRO framework can effectively identify highly active 
SACs while maintaining or even improving their electrochemical stability. The origin of this 
enhanced discovery performance lies in the expansion of the accessible design space through 
the exploration phase and in the in-context learning enabled by the design history (Figure 3e). 
Our strategy exhibits the best performance in terms of both the average overpotential and the 
minimum overpotential. Notably, even the “history” strategy consistently outperforms the 
“historyless” approach in average overpotential, underscoring the importance of leveraging 


--- Page 12 ---
accumulated design history.  
In contrast, the hypervolume and active-point volume metrics show comparable values 
across the different strategies. This behavior arises because these metrics can be 
disproportionately influenced by high stability values, which are generally easier to achieve 
than low overpotentials. Therefore, maintaining Pareto volume metrics comparable to other 
strategies while simultaneously achieving lower overpotentials provides strong evidence that 
the framework effectively mitigates the activity-stability trade-off. Finally, the moderate level 
of catalyst complexity, defined by the number of modifications applied to the initial structure, 
indicates that our strategy maintains a balanced search behavior (Figure 3f). The design agent 
neither diverges excessively into chemically unrealistic structures nor becomes trapped in a 
narrow, suboptimal region of the design space.  
2.4 Impact of In-context Learning 
 
Figure 4. (a) Linear scaling relations among ΔG*OH, ΔG*O and ΔG*OOH. (b) Corresponding 
volcano plot using ΔG*OH as the activity descriptor. The red dashed line indicates the theoretical 
lower limit for overpotential 0.36 V imposed by the scaling relations. (c) Frequency of scaling 
relation violations observed during the design loop, averaged over 10 independent design runs 
for each strategy.  
 
 
To elucidate the origin behind the good observed performance within the MAESTRO 
framework, we investigated how in-context learning from design history influences the design 
process. We collected the binding energies of 2,017 unique catalysts from a total 4,000 
structures generated across four discovery strategies, where each strategy was evaluated over 
10 independent  design runs consisting of 100 modification steps each. We then analyzed the 
linear scaling relations among the binding energies of the three ORR intermediates, *OOH, *O 
and *OH. This analysis confirmed the presence of well-defined linear scaling relations between 


--- Page 13 ---
ΔG*O and ΔG*OH, as well as between ΔG*OOH and ΔG*OH in the SAC system (Figure 4a). 
Furthermore, by deriving a volcano plot using ΔG*OH as the descriptor, we identified a 
theoretical minimum overpotential of about 0.36 V (Figure 4b). This value represents the 
lowest overpotential achievable by uniformly strengthening or weakening the binding energies 
of all intermediates while remaining on the scaling relations, without selectively modulating 
individual intermediates (Figure S9). 
 
As we confirmed in Figure 2, the LLM possesses background chemical knowledge 
that enables it to propose modifications to control binding strengths as intended. Consistently, 
in Figure 3, the historyless strategy, which relies only on this background knowledge, exhibited 
a minimum overpotential exceeding 0.36 V. This observation indicates that strategies achieving 
overpotentials below 0.36 V must have been acquired through leveraging in-context learning 
from prior design steps. Specifically, such strategies learn to selectively tune the binding energy 
of specific intermediates, thereby breaking the inherent scaling relations rather than merely 
shifting all binding energies in tandem50. This effect can be observed in observing the frequency 
of achieving overpotentials below lower limit (Figure 4c). Across 10 design runs, both the 
random and historyless strategies achieved this value fewer than once on average, indicating 
that breaking the scaling relations in these cases occurs only sporadically by chance. In contrast, 
strategies with in-context learning from history broke these relations more than three times on 
average out of 100 modification steps. These results demonstrate that in-context learning from 
modification history plays a decisive role in overcoming fundamental scaling constraints 
(Figure S10), despite the higher token consumption compared to strategies without in-context 
learning (Figure S11). 
 
2.5 Revealing Catalyst Design Principles 


--- Page 14 ---
 
Figure 5. (a) Representative modification process to design promising catalysts by breaking 
scaling relations and lower limit of overpotential. Scaling break and overpotential optimization 
occur sequentially. (b) Representation of one of high-performance catalyst structures 
discovered during the design runs, together with a comparison of MLFF-predicted and DFT-
calculated performance metrics. Data includes Gibbs free binding energies, overpotential (η) 
and dissolution potentials (Udiss) for each candidate. Other examples can be found in Figure 
S12 and S13.  
 
 
To elucidate the mechanism underlying the observed scaling relation breaking and the 
successful design of high-performance catalysts, we analyzed a representative designed 
catalyst in detail. Figure 5a shows an example of a catalyst achieving an overpotential of 0.31 
V, surpassing the scaling-based lower limit of 0.36 V. During the design run, the design agent 
introduces surface oxygen functional groups (*COC or *COH). These surface oxygen species 
are observed to form H-bonds with the H atoms of *OH and *OOH intermediates, thereby 
stabilizing both species. As a result, only the ΔG*O is selectively increased, leading to a break 
in the scaling relations between ΔG*OH and ΔG*O. After inducing this scaling break, the agent 
retains the surface oxygen and subsequently explores first and second shell modifications, 
searching for configurations that further reduce the overpotential within the altered scaling 
landscape. Through this sequential process, the MAESTRO framework is able to design 
catalysts with overpotentials below 0.36 V. Importantly, this scaling break from selective H-


--- Page 15 ---
bonds was confirmed not only at the MLFF but also through explicit DFT level. We performed 
DFT calculations on 11 catalysts with MLFF-predicted overpotentials below 0.36 V, selected 
from the minimum overpotential candidates obtained from each of the 10 design runs starting 
from FeN4 and CuN4. Among these, six unique catalysts have DFT-calculated overpotentials 
below 0.36 V, five of which were confirmed to feature surface oxygen forming H-bonds with 
ORR intermediates (Figure 5b). 
The stabilization of intermediates via selective H-bonding, the resulting scaling break 
and the associated enhancement in catalytic performance have been reported in multiple prior 
studies51-55. Therefore, the framework does not introduce a fundamentally new design principle. 
However, as shown in Figure 4c, the agents without in-context learning lack the intrinsic 
ability to break scaling relations, indicating that these principles were not already present in 
their background knowledge, but were gained from experimentation. Indeed, through this 
exploration-exploitation strategy and in-context learning enabled by the design loop, the agents 
successfully rediscovered a valid design principle that existed outside their prior knowledge56. 
This result demonstrates that the MAESTRO framework has the capacity not only to optimize 
catalysts but also to potentially uncover novel catalyst design principles beyond those explicitly 
provided by human inputs. 
  
 
3. Discussion 
3.1 LLM, Starting State and Hyperparameter Tuning 
 
We have demonstrated that the MAESTRO framework operates successfully using 
GPT-4.1-mini as the LLM and FeN4 as the initial catalyst. We further examined how the choice 
of LLM, the starting SAC structure and key hyperparameters, including the LLM temperature 
and the number of recent design histories retained in short-term memory, affect the overall 
performance. 
 
First, when the LLM was replaced with GPT-5-mini while all other conditions were 
kept identical, the agents exhibited slightly more detailed reasoning and feedback. However, 
the overall performance remained comparable to that obtained with GPT-4.1-mini. This 
observation indicates that GPT-5-mini possesses background knowledge similar to that of GPT-
4.1-mini and that, in both cases, the ability to overcome scaling relations must be acquired 
through in-context learning during the design loop rather than being directly encoded in the 


--- Page 16 ---
model (Figure S14a).  
We also investigated the effect of the starting material by initializing design runs with 
SACs containing other central metal atoms. In all cases, the average minimum overpotential 
achieved fell below 0.36 V, the limit dictated by the volcano plot. Moreover, each design run 
broke the scaling relations more than twice on average, demonstrating that our strategy is robust 
with respect to the choice of the initial metal center (Figure S14b). Among the starting 
structures, the design run initiated form PtN4 exhibited the best overall performance, except for 
the average overpotential. This behavior can be attributed to the intrinsically high initial 
overpotential of PtN4, which allows for broader exploration to the energy landscape during the 
exploration phase. 
Finally, we evaluated the sensitivity of the framework to the temperature settings by 
performing 10 design runs across a range from 0.2 to 1.8. The results indicate that, provided 
the temperature remains within a moderate range, the overall discovery performance is largely 
comparable to the default setting of 1.0. In contrast, extreme values, such as 0.2 or 1.8, lead to 
a noticeable performance degradation (Figure S15). 
3.2 Limitations and Future Directions 
 
The types of SAC modifications employed in this study focus on fine-tuning the local 
environment of the active site by element substitution, atom addition/removal, and the 
introduction of functional groups or ligands. Although this approach expands the accessible 
design space, catalysts identified through such localized modifications may pose challenges for 
experimental synthesis. In particular, experimentally reproducing an identical local atomic 
environment remains difficult in practice, even when the designed structures satisfy 
electrochemical stability criteria. As a result, direct experimental validation of some discovered 
catalysts may be non-trivial. In subsequent studies, the inclusion of better metrics for 
synthesizability or even synthesizability predictions will facilitate bridging the gap to 
experimental validation.  
 
Furthermore, this study is limited to the discovery of ORR catalyst within the SAC 
system. This choice was made to establish a proof-of-concept for agent-based catalyst 
discovery, leveraging SACs as a platform in which the active site is spatially confined and 
structural complexity is relatively low. Despite these simplifications, the results demonstrate 
that the framework is capable of selectivity modulating the binding energies of multiple 


--- Page 17 ---
intermediates while simultaneously managing activity, stability and structural complexity. 
These capabilities suggest that the framework can be extended to more complex systems, such 
as dual atom catalysts (DACs) or to reactions like CO2 reduction, where the independent 
control of intermediate energies is even more critical.57 
 
4. Conclusions 
 
 In this work, we proposed the MAESTRO framework and demonstrated that iterative 
interactions among specialized agents within an optimization loop can progressively enhance 
both catalytic activity and stability. Notably, the catalysts identified by the framework break 
the theoretical lower limit of ORR overpotential imposed by the conventional scaling relations. 
These findings indicate that the accumulation of design history, combined with agent-driven 
reasoning and self-reflection, can reveal new physical principles not explicitly encoded in the 
LLM’s background knowledge. Overall, our results suggest that the MAESTRO framework 
serves not only as an effective catalyst optimization tool but also as a means of autonomously 
generating novel chemical insights, significantly reducing the need for human intervention in 
the discovery of next-generation catalysts. 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 18 ---
5. Methods 
5.1 Large Language Models 
A large language model (LLM) is a transformer-based autoregressive generative model 
trained on large-scale text corpora58. By learning statistical and semantic patterns in language, 
an LLM is capable of performing complex reasoning, planning and decision-making tasks that 
resemble human cognitive processes. In this study, unless otherwise specified, all LLM-based 
agents were implemented using OpenAI’s GPT-4.1-mini model with default temperature and 
top-p settings. The detailed personas and system prompt templates assigned to each agent are 
provided in Supplementary Note 1. 
5.2 Machine Learning Force Field 
 
Machine learning force field (MLFF) models serve as surrogate models for density 
functional theory (DFT) calculations. They are trained on large DFT dataset to predict energy 
and atomic forces based on the geometry and stoichiometry of materials45. These models 
typically interpret materials as graphs, where atoms are treated as nodes characterized by 
elemental features and interatomic bonds are encoded as edges containing geometric 
information. In this study, we employed the Universal Models for Atoms (UMA) as the MLFF47. 
UMA is based on eSEN59, an equivariant graph neural network that represents the atomic 
environment using spherical harmonic embedding and propagates information through 
multiple message passing layers. UMA is trained as a general-purpose model across diverse 
material domains and incorporates a Mixture of Linear Expert (MoLE) architecture to enhance 
flexibility and inference efficiency60. For geometry optimization and energy prediction of the 
SACs, we utilized the pretrained UMA model corresponding to the ‘OC20’ domain61, which is 
specifically weighted toward heterogenous catalyst systems.  
5.3 DFT Calculations 
 
We performed DFT calculations using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP, 
version 5.4.4)62, 63 to pre-validate MLFF performance and to evaluate SAC structures 
discovered by the catalyst design framework. To ensure consistency, the same DFT setting used 
to generate the UMA training data were adopted. The projected-augmented wave (PAW) 
pseudopotential method64 was employed in conjunction with the generalized gradient 
approximation 
revised 
Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof 
(GGA-RPBE) 
exchange-correlation 
functional65. All structures were fully relaxed until the total energy and atomic forces converged 


--- Page 19 ---
to within 10-4 eV and 0.05 eV/Å, for forces, respectively. A plane wave kinetic energy cutoff 
of 350 eV was applied. Monkhorst-Pack k-point mesh66 was configured as (3 × 3 × 1). 
5.4 Gibbs free energy, Overpotential and Dissolution Potential 
Binding Gibbs free energies were evaluated using the computational hydrogen 
electrode (CHE) approach67, in which the chemical potential of a proton-electron pair (H+ + e-) 
is referenced to ½H2 (g) at 0 VRHE under standard conditions. Baded on this framework, the 
Gibbs free energies for the adsorption of *O, *OH and *OOH intermediates were computed as 
follows:  
∆GO* = EO* −Eslab −EH2O −EH2+ ∆(ZPE+ ∫CpdT -TS)  
∆GOH* = EOH* −Eslab −EH2O −
1
2 EH2+ ∆(ZPE+ ∫CpdT -TS)  
∆GOOH* = EOOH* −Eslab+2EH2O −
3
2 EH2+ ∆(ZPE+ ∫CpdT -TS) 
Here, E*O , E*OH  and E*OOH  denoted the DFT total energies of the surface with the 
corresponding adsorbed intermediates, while EH2 and EH2O are DFT energies of gas phase 
H2 and H2O molecules, respectively. Zero-point energies (ZPE) corrections, enthalpic 
contribution ( ∫CpdT ), and entropic contribution terms (TS) were calculated using the 
Harmonic oscillator approximation for adsorbed species (*O, *OH, *OOH) and the Ideal gas 
approximations for gas molecules (H2, H2O), as implemented in Atomic Simulation 
Environment (ASE)68. The correction values are given in Table S8. 
The theoretical overpotentials of ORR (ηORR) was determined from Gibbs free energy 
changes of the four elementary proton-electron transfer steps in the associative ORR pathway:  
∆G1 = ∆G*OOH −  ∆GO2 +  eU 
∆G2 = ∆GO* −  ∆G*OOH +  eU 
∆G3 = ∆G*OH −  ∆G*O +  eU 
∆G4 = ∆GH2O −  ∆G*OH +  eU 
The limiting potential (UL) is defined as the maximum potential at which all reaction steps 
become thermodynamically favorable (∆Gi(UL) ≤ 0 eV). The overpotential is the difference 


--- Page 20 ---
between the standard equilibrium potential for ORR (1.23 V) and the limiting potential, 
calculated as follows: 
UL = −max[ΔG1, ΔG2, ΔG3, ΔG4]/e 
ηORR = 1.23 −UL  
 
The dissolution potential of the SAC (Ud) is an electrochemical stability, describing 
the tendency of the metal center to dissolve under ORR conditions. It is calculated as the 
difference between the binding energy of the metal atom to the carbon support (Eb) and the 
standard dissolution potential of the corresponding bulk metal (U0) in aqueous solution (pH = 
0), as follows: 
Eb = ESAC-M − ESAC − μM 
Ud = U0  − Eb / (e × Ne)  
where ESAC-M, ESAC are the DFT total energies of the carbon support with and without the metal 
atom, respectively. μM is the chemical potential of the metal atom, e is elementary charge and 
Ne is the number of electrons involved in the metal dissolution process.  
 
Code Availability 
The code developed in this work and relevant information can be found in GitHub 
(https://github.com/ahrehd0506/Catalyst-Design-Agent) 
 
Supporting Information 
Details of prompt template, Details of pre-validation for MLFF and LLM, Example of 
exploration summary report and reasoning of the agents, Additional metrics for design 
framework, Metrics for strategies with various starting materials, parameter and LLM model. 
Acknowledgements 
D.H.M. acknowledges the support from Korea Institute for Advancement of Technology (KIAT) 
grant funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE), Korea Government (RS-
2024-00436106, Human Resource Development Program for Industrial Innovation). S.B. 


--- Page 21 ---
acknowledges the support from the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grants 
funded by the Korea government (MSIT and MOE) (RS-2024-00448287, RS-2025-16063688, 
RS-2025-00513832, and RS-2025-02214715), and the generous supercomputing time provided 
by the Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI). G.H. acknowledges 
support from the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant # CBET-2442223. This work 
used NCSA Delta CPU at University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign through allocation 
MAT250081 from the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem: Services & 
Support (ACCESS) program, which is supported by U.S. National Science Foundation grants 
#2138259, #2138286, #2138307, #2137603, and #2138296. 
 
 
 


--- Page 22 ---
References 
(1) Ceder, G.; Chiang, Y.-M.; Sadoway, D.; Aydinol, M.; Jang, Y.-I.; Huang, B. Identification 
of cathode materials for lithium batteries guided by first-principles calculations. Nature 1998, 
392 (6677), 694–696. 
(2) Greeley, J.; Jaramillo, T. F.; Bonde, J.; Chorkendorff, I.; Nørskov, J. K. Computational high-
throughput screening of electrocatalytic materials for hydrogen evolution. Nat. Mater. 2006, 5 
(11), 909–913. 
(3) Vitos, L.; Korzhavyi, P. A.; Johansson, B. Stainless steel optimization from quantum 
mechanical calculations. Nat. Mater. 2003, 2 (1), 25–28. 
(4) Butler, K. T.; Davies, D. W.; Cartwright, H.; Isayev, O.; Walsh, A. Machine learning for 
molecular and materials science. Nature 2018, 559 (7715), 547–555. 
(5) Ong, S. P. Accelerating materials science with high-throughput computations and machine 
learning. Comp. Mater. Sci. 2019, 161, 143–150. 
(6) Choudhary, K.; DeCost, B.; Chen, C.; Jain, A.; Tavazza, F.; Cohn, R.; Park, C. W.; 
Choudhary, A.; Agrawal, A.; Billinge, S. J. Recent advances and applications of deep learning 
methods in materials science. npj Comp. Mater. 2022, 8 (1), 59. 
(7) Esterhuizen, J. A.; Goldsmith, B. R.; Linic, S. Interpretable machine learning for knowledge 
generation in heterogeneous catalysis. Nat. Catal. 2022, 5 (3), 175–184. 
(8) Back, S.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Ceriotti, M.; Gryn'ova, G.; Grzybowski, B.; Gu, G. H.; Hein, 
J.; Hippalgaonkar, K.; Hormázabal, R.; Jung, Y. Accelerated chemical science with AI. Digital 
Discovery 2024, 3 (1), 23–33. 
(9) Alberi, K.; Nardelli, M. B.; Zakutayev, A.; Mitas, L.; Curtarolo, S.; Jain, A.; Fornari, M.; 
Marzari, N.; Takeuchi, I.; Green, M. L. The 2019 materials by design roadmap. J. Phys. D Appl. 
Phys. 2018, 52 (1), 013001. 
(10) Ludwig, A. Discovery of new materials using combinatorial synthesis and high-
throughput characterization of thin-film materials libraries combined with computational 
methods. npj Comp. Mater. 2019, 5 (1), 70. 
(11) Aykol, M.; Kim, S.; Hegde, V. I.; Snydacker, D.; Lu, Z.; Hao, S.; Kirklin, S.; Morgan, D.; 
Wolverton, C. High-throughput computational design of cathode coatings for Li-ion batteries. 
Nat. Commun. 2016, 7 (1), 13779. 
(12) Yohannes, A. G.; Lee, C.; Talebi, P.; Mok, D. H.; Karamad, M.; Back, S.; Siahrostami, S. 
Combined high-throughput DFT and ML screening of transition metal nitrides for 
electrochemical CO2 reduction. ACS Catal. 2023, 13 (13), 9007–9017. 
(13) Pyzer-Knapp, E. O.; Suh, C.; Gómez-Bombarelli, R.; Aguilera-Iparraguirre, J.; Aspuru-
Guzik, A. What is high-throughput virtual screening? A perspective from organic materials 
discovery. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2015, 45 (1), 195–216. 
(14) Elton, D. C.; Boukouvalas, Z.; Fuge, M. D.; Chung, P. W. Deep learning for molecular 
design—a review of the state of the art. Mol. Syst. Des. Eng. 2019, 4 (4), 828–849. 
(15) Peng, J.; Schwalbe-Koda, D.; Akkiraju, K.; Xie, T.; Giordano, L.; Yu, Y.; Eom, C. J.; 
Lunger, J. R.; Zheng, D. J.; Rao, R. R. Human-and machine-centred designs of molecules and 
materials for sustainability and decarbonization. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2022, 7 (12), 991–1009. 
(16) Sanchez-Lengeling, B.; Aspuru-Guzik, A. Inverse molecular design using machine 
learning: Generative models for matter engineering. Science 2018, 361 (6400), 360–365. 
(17) Noh, J.; Gu, G. H.; Kim, S.; Jung, Y. Machine-enabled inverse design of inorganic solid 
materials: promises and challenges. Chem. Sci. 2020, 11 (19), 4871–4881. 
(18) Zunger, A. Inverse design in search of materials with target functionalities. Nat. Rev. Chem. 
2018, 2 (4), 0121. 
(19) Fung, V.; Zhang, J.; Hu, G.; Ganesh, P.; Sumpter, B. G. Inverse design of two-dimensional 


--- Page 23 ---
materials with invertible neural networks. npj Comp. Mater. 2021, 7 (1), 200. 
(20) Oganov, A. R.; Pickard, C. J.; Zhu, Q.; Needs, R. J. Structure prediction drives materials 
discovery. Nat. Rev. Mater. 2019, 4 (5), 331–348. 
(21) Doll, K.; Schön, J.; Jansen, M. Structure prediction based on ab initio simulated annealing 
for boron nitride. Physical Review B—Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 2008, 78 (14), 
144110. 
(22) Zeni, C.; Pinsler, R.; Zügner, D.; Fowler, A.; Horton, M.; Fu, X.; Wang, Z.; Shysheya, A.; 
Crabbé, J.; Ueda, S. A generative model for inorganic materials design. Nature 2025, 639 
(8055), 624–632. 
(23) Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; 
Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.; Potapenko, A. Highly accurate protein structure 
prediction with AlphaFold. nature 2021, 596 (7873), 583–589. 
(24) Joshi, C. K.; Fu, X.; Liao, Y.-L.; Gharakhanyan, V.; Miller, B. K.; Sriram, A.; Ulissi, Z. W. 
All-atom diffusion transformers: Unified generative modelling of molecules and materials. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.03965 2025. 
(25) Li, Q.; Miklaucic, N.; Hu, J. Out-of-Distribution Material Property Prediction Using 
Adversarial Learning. J. Phys. Chem. C 2025, 129 (13), 6372–6385. 
(26) Li, K.; Rubungo, A. N.; Lei, X.; Persaud, D.; Choudhary, K.; DeCost, B.; Dieng, A. B.; 
Hattrick-Simpers, J. Probing out-of-distribution generalization in machine learning for 
materials. Commun. Mater. 2025, 6 (1), 9. 
(27) Wei, J.; Wang, X.; Schuurmans, D.; Bosma, M.; Xia, F.; Chi, E.; Le, Q. V.; Zhou, D. Chain-
of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 
2022, 35, 24824–24837. 
(28) Huang, J.; Chang, K. C.-C. Towards reasoning in large language models: A survey. In 
Findings of the association for computational linguistics: ACL 2023, 2023; pp 1049–1065. 
(29) Achiam, J.; Adler, S.; Agarwal, S.; Ahmad, L.; Akkaya, I.; Aleman, F. L.; Almeida, D.; 
Altenschmidt, J.; Altman, S.; Anadkat, S. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2303.08774 2023. 
(30) Yoshikawa, N.; Skreta, M.; Darvish, K.; Arellano-Rubach, S.; Ji, Z.; Bjørn Kristensen, L.; 
Li, A. Z.; Zhao, Y.; Xu, H.; Kuramshin, A. Large language models for chemistry robotics. 
Autonomous Robots 2023, 47 (8), 1057–1086. 
(31) M. Bran, A.; Cox, S.; Schilter, O.; Baldassari, C.; White, A. D.; Schwaller, P. Augmenting 
large language models with chemistry tools. Nat. Mach. Intell. 2024, 6 (5), 525–535. 
(32) Chaudhari, A.; Ock, J.; Barati Farimani, A. Modular large language model agents for 
multi-task computational materials science. 2025. 
(33) Jablonka, K. M.; Ai, Q.; Al-Feghali, A.; Badhwar, S.; Bocarsly, J. D.; Bran, A. M.; 
Bringuier, S.; Brinson, L. C.; Choudhary, K.; Circi, D. 14 examples of how LLMs can 
transform materials science and chemistry: a reflection on a large language model hackathon. 
Digital Discovery 2023, 2 (5), 1233–1250. 
(34) Zhang, D.; Jia, X.; Tran, H. B.; Jang, S. H.; Zhang, L.; Sato, R.; Hashimoto, Y.; Sato, T.; 
Konno, K.; Orimo, S.-i. “DIVE” into hydrogen storage materials discovery with AI agents. 
Chem. Sci. 2026. 
(35) Xin, H.; Kitchin, J. R.; López, N.; Schweitzer, N. M.; Artrith, N.; Che, F.; Grabow, L. C.; 
Gunasooriya, G. K. K.; Kulik, H. J.; Laino, T. Roadmap for transforming heterogeneous 
catalysis with artificial intelligence. Nat. Catal. 2026, 1–10. 
(36) Takahara, I.; Mizoguchi, T.; Liu, B. Accelerated inorganic materials design with generative 
AI agents. Cell Reports Physical Science 2025, 6 (12). 
(37) Chiang, Y.; Hsieh, E.; Chou, C.-H.; Riebesell, J. LLaMP: Large language model made 
powerful for high-fidelity materials knowledge retrieval and distillation. arXiv preprint 


--- Page 24 ---
arXiv:2401.17244 2024. 
(38) Jia, S.; Zhang, C.; Fung, V. LLMatDesign: Autonomous Materials Discovery with Large 
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13163 2024. 
(39) Zhang, Y.; Sun, R.; Chen, Y.; Pfister, T.; Zhang, R.; Arik, S. Chain of agents: Large 
language models collaborating on long-context tasks. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2024, 37, 
132208–132237. 
(40) Liang, T.; He, Z.; Jiao, W.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Wang, R.; Yang, Y.; Shi, S.; Tu, Z. 
Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate. In 
Proceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, 
2024; pp 17889–17904. 
(41) Wei, C.; Shi, Y.; Mu, W.; Zhang, H.; Qin, R.; Yin, Y.; Yu, G.; Mu, T. Large Language 
Models Assisted Materials Development: Case of Predictive Analytics for Oxygen Evolution 
Reaction Catalysts of (Oxy) hydroxides. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering 2025, 13 
(14), 5368–5380. 
(42) Lin, J.; Zhao, D.; Lu, S.; Li, R.; Xu, X.; Wang, Z.; Li, W.; Ji, Y.; Zhang, C.; Shi, L. 
Conversational Large-Language-Model Artificial Intelligence Agent for Accelerated Synthesis 
of Metal–Organic Frameworks Catalysts in Olefin Hydrogenation. ACS Nano 2025. 
(43) Ock, J.; Guntuboina, C.; Barati Farimani, A. Catalyst energy prediction with CatBERTa: 
unveiling feature exploration strategies through large language models. ACS Catal. 2023, 13 
(24), 16032–16044. 
(44) Mok, D. H.; Back, S. Generative pretrained transformer for heterogeneous catalysts. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2024, 146 (49), 33712–33722. 
(45) Unke, O. T.; Chmiela, S.; Sauceda, H. E.; Gastegger, M.; Poltavsky, I.; Schutt, K. T.; 
Tkatchenko, A.; Muller, K.-R. Machine learning force fields. Chemical Reviews 2021, 121 (16), 
10142–10186. 
(46) Kulkarni, A.; Siahrostami, S.; Patel, A.; Nørskov, J. K. Understanding catalytic activity 
trends in the oxygen reduction reaction. Chemical reviews 2018, 118 (5), 2302–2312. 
(47) Wood, B. M.; Dzamba, M.; Fu, X.; Gao, M.; Shuaibi, M.; Barroso-Luque, L.; 
Abdelmaqsoud, K.; Gharakhanyan, V.; Kitchin, J. R.; Levine, D. S. UMA: A Family of 
Universal Models for Atoms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.23971 2025. 
(48) Nørskov, J. K.; Abild-Pedersen, F.; Studt, F.; Bligaard, T. Density functional theory in 
surface chemistry and catalysis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2011, 108 
(3), 937–943. 
(49) Jiao, S.; Fu, X.; Huang, H. Descriptors for the evaluation of electrocatalytic reactions: d‐
band theory and beyond. Advanced Functional Materials 2022, 32 (4), 2107651. 
(50) Huang, Z.-F.; Song, J.; Dou, S.; Li, X.; Wang, J.; Wang, X. Strategies to break the scaling 
relation toward enhanced oxygen electrocatalysis. Matter 2019, 1 (6), 1494–1518. 
(51) Craig, M. J.; Coulter, G.; Dolan, E.; Soriano-López, J.; Mates-Torres, E.; Schmitt, W.; 
García-Melchor, M. Universal scaling relations for the rational design of molecular water 
oxidation catalysts with near-zero overpotential. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1), 4993. 
(52) Matheu, R.; Ertem, M. Z.; Benet-Buchholz, J.; Coronado, E.; Batista, V. S.; Sala, X.; 
Llobet, A. Intramolecular proton transfer boosts water oxidation catalyzed by a Ru complex. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137 (33), 10786–10795. 
(53) Baran, J. D.; Gronbeck, H.; Hellman, A. Analysis of Porphyrines as Catalysts for 
Electrochemical Reduction of O2 and Oxidation of H2O. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136 (4), 
1320–1326. 
(54) Yang, L.; Zhang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Deng, L.; Luo, Q.; Li, X.; Jiang, J. Promoting Oxygen 
Reduction Reaction on Carbon‐Based Materials by Selective Hydrogen Bonding. 
ChemSusChem 2023, 16 (16), e202300082. 


--- Page 25 ---
(55) Zou, H.; Shu, S.; Yang, W.; Chu, Y.-c.; Cheng, M.; Dong, H.; Liu, H.; Li, F.; Hu, J.; Wang, 
Z. Steering acidic oxygen reduction selectivity of single-atom catalysts through the second 
sphere effect. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15 (1), 10818. 
(56) Pérez-Ramírez, J.; López, N. Strategies to break linear scaling relationships. Nat. Catal. 
2019, 2 (11), 971–976. 
(57) Pedersen, A.; Barrio, J.; Li, A.; Jervis, R.; Brett, D. J.; Titirici, M. M.; Stephens, I. E. Dual‐
metal atom electrocatalysts: theory, synthesis, characterization, and applications. Advanced 
Energy Materials 2022, 12 (3), 2102715. 
(58) Vaswani, A.; Shazeer, N.; Parmar, N.; Uszkoreit, J.; Jones, L.; Gomez, A. N.; Kaiser, Ł.; 
Polosukhin, I. Attention is all you need. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2017, 30, 6000– 6010. 
(59) Fu, X.; Wood, B. M.; Barroso-Luque, L.; Levine, D. S.; Gao, M.; Dzamba, M.; Zitnick, C. 
L. Learning smooth and expressive interatomic potentials for physical property prediction. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12147 2025. 
(60) Jacobs, R. A.; Jordan, M. I.; Barto, A. G. Task decomposition through competition in a 
modular connectionist architecture: The what and where vision tasks. Cognitive science 1991, 
15 (2), 219–250. 
(61) Chanussot, L.; Das, A.; Goyal, S.; Lavril, T.; Shuaibi, M.; Riviere, M.; Tran, K.; Heras-
Domingo, J.; Ho, C.; Hu, W. Open catalyst 2020 (OC20) dataset and community challenges. 
ACS Catal. 2021, 11 (10), 6059–6072. 
(62) Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J. Efficiency of ab-initio total energy calculations for metals and 
semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set. Comp. Mater. Sci. 1996, 6 (1), 15–50. 
(63) Kresse, G.; Hafner, J. Ab initio molecular dynamics for open-shell transition metals. Phys. 
Rev. B 1993, 48 (17), 13115. 
(64) Hammer, B.; Hansen, L. B.; Nørskov, J. K. Improved adsorption energetics within density-
functional theory using revised Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof functionals. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59 
(11), 7413. 
(65) Kresse, G.; Joubert, D. From ultrasoft pseudopotentials to the projector augmented-wave 
method. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 59 (3), 1758. 
(66) Monkhorst, H. J.; Pack, J. D. Special points for Brillouin-zone integrations. Phys. Rev. B 
1976, 13 (12), 5188. 
(67) Nørskov, J. K.; Rossmeisl, J.; Logadottir, A.; Lindqvist, L.; Kitchin, J. R.; Bligaard, T.; 
Jonsson, H. Origin of the overpotential for oxygen reduction at a fuel-cell cathode. J. Phys. 
Chem. B 2004, 108 (46), 17886–17892. 
(68) Larsen, A. H.; Mortensen, J. J.; Blomqvist, J.; Castelli, I. E.; Christensen, R.; Dułak, M.; 
Friis, J.; Groves, M. N.; Hammer, B.; Hargus, C. The atomic simulation environment—a 
Python library for working with atoms. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2017, 29 (27), 273002. 
 
 
 


--- Page 26 ---
Supplementary Information 
Supplementary Note A. Details of Prompt Template 
A.1 System Prompt 
Four discovery strategies were implemented within Multi-Agent-based Electrocatalyst 
Search Through Reasoning and Optimization (MAESTRO) framework: history + exploration, 
history, historyless and random. Except random strategy, which relies on stochastic 
modification selection, other strategies utilized LLM-based agents. For the LLM-based 
strategies, both the design and reflect agents operate under strategy specific configurations. In 
particular, their system prompts, which govern overall behavior throughout the entire design 
loop, differ depending on the selected strategy (Table S1 and S2). The summary and 
exploration report agent do not employ strategy specific prompt variations at the system or 
input prompt level. Instead, their participation in the framework is determined solely by the 
chose strategy. Specifically, the summary agent is deactivated for strategies that do not utilize 
design history, while the exploration report agent is deactivated for strategies that do not 
include exploration phase (Table S3).  
A.2 Output Format 
The design and reflect agents employ fixed and structured output formats to ensure 
robust interaction throughout the design loop. These output formats remain identical across all 
discovery strategies. If an agent generates a response that deviates from the prescribed format, 
for example due to hallucinated or malformed outputs, the response is returned to the agent 
together with explicit feedback describing the formatting error. When an agent repeatedly 
produces invalid outputs beyond a predefined threshold, the corresponding design run is 
automatically terminated.  
The output of the design agent consists of the selected modification type, the associated 
parameters and the reasoning underlying the proposed change. The reflect agent produces 
structured feedback that evaluates both the proposed modification and the resulting 
performance. Based on this reflection, the agent recommends the next catalyst to be modified 
by selecting from a set of recently modified catalysts stored in the design history. This 
recommendation mechanism functions as an “undo” operation, allowing the framework to 
revert to a previous design state when the modified catalyst diverges excessively from the target 
region or becomes trapped in repetitive modification cycles. 
A.3 Scientific Rule 
 
To ensure consistent physical interpretation across agents, all agents were instructed 
in the electrochemical convection for binding Gibbs free energy. Unlike general chemical 
context, where high energy typically indicates strong interactions, binding in electrochemistry 
is characterized by stronger binding at lower (more negative) energy value. Because LLM 
background knowledge is largely dominated by general chemistry conventions, omission of 
this distinction can lead to systematic reasoning errors. To mitigate this issue, we incorporated 
few-shot examples and terminology to enforce the correct interpretation of binding energy 
(Table S4) 


--- Page 27 ---
 
 
Table S1. System prompt templets of design agent 
Design Agent System Prompt Base 
You are an expert Computational Chemist Designer specialized in Single Atom Catalysts (SACs). 
{strategy} 
 
{scientific_rules} 
 
{output_format} 
{strategy} 
history + hxploration 
Your task: 
- To propose one well-reasoned modification for the current catalyst to reach the target property. 
- To keep the catalyst stable. The higher dissolution potential indicates higher stability. 
- To keep the catalyst from being too complex. 
 
You will be given: 
- The current catalyst description 
- Target type/value or target ranges 
- Recent modification history 
- Self-reflection of previous modification 
- A discovery strategy (exploration or exploitation) 
 
You MUST: 
- Propose exactly ONE modification in the 'modifications' list. 
- Write a hypothesis (8 to 11 sentences) explaining WHY this modification should move the system toward the target. 
- If strategy is 'exploration', DO NOT use same modifications in history. 
- If strategy is 'exploitation', MUST choose modification based on history. 
historyless 
Your task: 
- To propose one well-reasoned modification for the current catalyst to reach the target property. 
- To keep the catalyst stable. The higher dissolution potential indicates higher stability. 
- To keep the catalyst from being too complex. 
 
You will be given: 
- The current catalyst description 
- Target type/value or target ranges 
 
You MUST: 
- Propose exactly ONE modification in the 'modifications' list. 
- Write a hypothesis (8 to 11 sentences) explaining WHY this modification should move the system toward the target. 
Others 
Your task: 
- To propose one well-reasoned modification for the current catalyst to reach the target property. 
- To keep the catalyst stable. The higher dissolution potential indicates higher stability. 
- To keep the catalyst from being too complex. 
 
You will be given: 
- The current catalyst description 
- Target type/value or target ranges 
- Recent modification history 
- Self-reflection of previous modification 
 
You MUST: 
- Propose exactly ONE modification in the 'modifications' list. 


--- Page 28 ---
- Write a hypothesis (8 to 11 sentences) explaining WHY this modification should move the system toward the target. 
{output format} 
{"modifications": [{ 
      "modification_type": "$TYPE", 
      "parameters": ["$PROPERTY_1", "$PROPERTY_2"], 
      "reasoning": "$HYPOTHESIS", 
}]} 
 
$HYPOTHESIS: Your scientific reasoning. Explain why chosen modification will move the SAC toward the target value. 
$TYPE: One of the allowed modification types. 
$PROPERTY_1: The first parameter (e.g., element to remove). If the type does not require a parameter, use "None". 
$PROPERTY_2: The second parameter (e.g., new element). If the type only requires one parameter, use "None". 
 
Table S2. System prompt templets of reflect agent 
Reflect Agent System Prompt Base 
You are an expert Computational Chemist Criticism specialized in Single Atom Catalysts (SACs). 
{strategy} 
 
Your task 
1) Reflection (<= 7 sentences): 
- State whether the modification moved the catalyst toward the target or away from it, 
- If the result looks unphysical or failed, provide reflection on the modification why it was failed. 
 
2) Choose the NEXT starting catalyst (undo mechanism): 
You MUST choose exactly one source: 
- next_catalyst_type = 'recent' > continue from one of RECENT candidates 
- next_catalyst_type = 'best' > revert to BEST (global best so far) 
 
3) If you choose NEXT starting catalyst as 'recent', choose index[0..N-1] (0=oldest, N-1=most recent) 
 
Decision guidelines: 
- Choose the MOST RECENT catalyst (RECENT[N-1]) if it is physically reasonable and not  worse than other options. 
- Choose an earlier RECENT index if the most recent result is clearly unphysical, overly complex, or significantly further 
from the target than a previous recent catalyst. 
- Choose 'best' if: 
  (a) RECENT candidates show repeated unphysical/divergent behavior (ex, all target value of recent candidates is far 
from the best), OR 
  (b) BEST is clearly the most reliable and closest-to-target state among BEST vs RECENT, especially when the most 
recent step degraded the result. 
 
{output_format} 
 
{scientific_rules} 
{strategy} 
history + exploration 
You will be given: 
- The target type/value 
- The modification + hypothesis proposed by the DesignAgent 
- Catalyst description and evaluated values before/after the modification 
- Optional images of optimized structures, 
- Current catalyst complexity (higher = more complex), 
- A list of the N most recent catalysts (RECENT, chronological: 0=oldest, N-1=most recent), 
- The global best catalyst so far (BEST) with its property and complexity. 
- A discovery strategy (exploration or exploitation). 
 
Strategy-dependent decision guidelines 
1) Exploration: 


--- Page 29 ---
- Prefer continuing from RECENT catalyst that has potential to expand catalyst space and avoid choosing catalysts 
already used. 
- Never use BEST. 
 
2) Exploitation 
- Prefer reverting to BEST or RECENT catalyst with good performance when the most recent step degraded performance 
or increased complexity without benefit. 
- Continue from RECENT only if the new state is reliable and comparable to BEST (or clearly improving toward target). 
Others 
You will be given: 
- The target type/value 
- The modification + hypothesis proposed by the DesignAgent 
- Catalyst description and evaluated values before/after the modification 
- Optional images of optimized structures, 
- Current catalyst complexity (higher = more complex), 
- A list of the N most recent catalysts (RECENT, chronological: 0=oldest, N-1=most recent), 
- The global best catalyst so far (BEST) with its property and complexity. 
{output format} 
{ 
  "reflection": "<your assessment of the current modification (<=6 sentences)>", 
  "next_catalyst_type": <'recent' or 'best'> 
  "next_catalyst_index": <integer index in [0, N-1]>, 
  "next_catalyst_reason": "<4~5 sentences explaining why this catalyst is the best starting point for the next iteration and 
why didn't choose another option>" 
} 
 
Table S3. System prompt templets of summary and exploration report agent 
Summary Agent System Prompt Base 
You are a Historian of a Computational Chemist experiment specialized in Single Atom Catalysts (SACs) 
You will be given a list of modification steps (modification, results) performed by catalyst design agent. 
 
Your task is to summarize the progress into a concise paragraph. 
Present the summary while keeping the following points in mind. 
- Which modification induced an increase or decrease in Gibbs free energy (Delta G). 
- Which modification was successful or unsuccessful in achieving the target. 
- Which modification was the most critical. 
 
Keep it under 200 words. This summary will be read by the Designer to decide the next step. 
 
{scientific_rules} 
Exploration Report Agent System Prompt Base 
You are ReportAgent, an expert Computational Chemist analyst specialized in Single Atom Catalysts (SACs). 
You are invoked once after iterations of EXPLORATION and immediately before switching to EXPLOITATION. 
 
You will be given: 
- The full exploration history: each iteration's starting catalyst, applied modification (type + parameters), DesignAgent 
hypothesis, evaluator results (before/after values), ReflectionAgent assessment, and complexity. 
 
Your task: 
Write a concise, 1-page report that summarizes exploration outcomes in a way that directly improves exploitation decisions. 
This is not a narrative; it is a decision-ready technical brief. 
 
{scientific_rules} 
 
Report Requirements 
- Length: ~1 page (roughly 350~600 words). Be compact, information-dense, and structured. 
- Use clear section headers and bullet points. 


--- Page 30 ---
- Only include information supported by the provided history/results; do not invent new experiments. 
- When you mention a claim (e.g., "ligand OH lowers *OOH"), back it with at least one concrete example from history. 
- If some trend is weak or inconsistent, state that explicitly. 
 
Must-Focus Topics 
1) Modification -> Outcome Mapping 
Identify which modification types/parameters, when applied to which catalyst contexts, produced: 
- Improvement toward target vs degradation 
- Physically reasonable vs unphysical/distorted outcomes 
Summarize as "pattern statements" + 2~5 concrete example bullets each. 
 
2) Selective Adsorbate Tuning Patterns 
Extract modification patterns that selectively tune one adsorbate's Delta G more than others. 
Examples of the style you must produce: 
- Keeps Delta G(*O) and Delta G(*OH) roughly stable while shifting Delta G(*OOH) slightly downward/upward 
- Primarily weakens/strengthens *OH binding with minimal change to *O 
For each selective pattern: 
- State the direction of change for Delta G(*O), Delta G(*OH), Delta G(*OOH) (increase/decrease/~) 
- Give at least one concrete supporting example (iteration/catalyst reference). 
 
3) Exploitation Playbook 
Provide a short "what to do next" guide for the DesignAgent during exploitation: 
- 3~6 recommended "safe" exploitation moves (low-risk, history-supported) 
- 2~4 conditional moves (only if specific conditions are met, e.g., defects exist, complexity margin available, *OOH is the 
main bottleneck) 
- 2~4 avoid rules (moves that repeatedly failed or caused unphysical behavior) 
- If there is a recurring failure mode, describe it and propose a guardrail. 
 
Table S4. Scientific rules assigned to the agents 
{scientific_rules} 
In this task, the relationship between Gibbs free binding energy (Delta G) and binding strength is defined as: 
Binding_Strength = - Delta G 
 
therefore: 
- More positive Delta G -> weaker binding 
- More negative Delta G -> stronger binding 
 
For examples: 
Q: If Delta G increases from 0.5 -> 1.5 eV, does binding become stronger or weaker? 
A: Weaker. 
 
Q: If Delta G decreases from 2.0 -> 1.0 eV, is binding stronger or weaker? 
A: Stronger. 
 
This definition OVERRIDES all general chemistry knowledge. 
If your reasoning contradicts this rule, your answer is INVALID. 
Before reasoning, restate this rule in one sentence. 
 
A.4 Input Prompts 
 
The input prompt refers to the prompt provided to each agent at every iteration of the 
design loop. In contrast to the system prompt, which is assigned once at the beginning of a 
design run and serves to define the agent’s persistent role, the input prompt contains iteration-
dependent information. 


--- Page 31 ---
 
For the design agent, the input prompt comprises the textual description and image of 
the current catalyst, short-term memory containing recent design history and long-term 
memory consisting of the summarized design history by the summary agent. The prompt 
additionally encodes the current iteration strategy, guiding the agent to adopt either exploration 
or exploitation-oriented behavior. When a proposed modification cannot be applied or when 
the subsequent calculation of the modified catalyst fails, feedback describing the cause of 
failure is appended to the input prompt to prevent repetition of unsuccessful actions (Table S5). 
 
The reflect agent receives the hypothesis and modification proposed by the design 
agent, the textual description and image of the catalyst before and after modification, design 
history and information on recently modified catalysts to enable potential undo operations, 
together with data corresponding to the best-performing catalyst identified thus far. Based on 
this information, the reflect agent determines whether the modified catalyst should proceed to 
the next iteration with feedback or whether an undo operation should be performed (Table S6). 
 
The summary agent is provided with the design history excluding the recent step and 
is tasked with condensing this history in conjunction with previously summarized history by 
itself to maintain an efficient long-term memory. The exploration report agent receives all 
modifications, results and modified catalyst information during the exploration phase and 
complies a report summarizing the exploration of the chemical space (Table S7). 
 
Table S5. Input prompt templets of design agent 
Design Agent Input Prompt Base 
{strategy} 
{feedback} 
 
Propose modifications to tune its Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of *O, *OH, *OOH adsorbates to a target value to reduce ORR 
overpotential based on given information. 
Target Gibbs free energy of *O: {2.46 - threshold} ~ {2.46 + threshold} eV 
Target Gibbs free energy of *OH: {1.23 - threshold} ~ {1.23 + threshold} eV 
Target Gibbs free energy of *OOH: {3.69 - threshold} ~ {3.69 + threshold} eV 
         
Current state of catalyst is {textual description} 
The {num_recent_history} recent modificaitons, reasonings, feedbacks and self-reflections are following: 
{formatted_history}. 
The summary of modification history is {summarized_history}. 
The simplified history of previous modifications is {simplified_history}. 
{strategy} 
Exploration Phase 
Exploitation Phase 
STRATEGY: EXPLORATION 
Your primary objective is to explore uncertain but plausible 
regions of the catalyst space 
Rule:  
- You MUST not suggest the modifications alreday used in 
history 
- Just make sure the complexity doesn't exceed the 
maximum, do not care about it below that. 
 
Below is the list of modifications that alreday used: 
{modification_list} 
             
STRATEGY: EXPLOITATION 
Your primary objective is to explore uncertain but plausible 
regions of the catalyst space 
Rule:  
- Choose proper modifications to reach the target by 
referring to the Gibbs free energy change in the previous 
history and report. 
- Try to maintain complexity of catalyst moderate 
- Never suggest the failed combination of the modification 
+ current catalysts already used in history. 
 
Below is the report that summarized the exploration phase: 
{exploration_report} 


--- Page 32 ---
You must still aim toward the target, but information gain 
has priority over immediate best performance. 
Performance toward the target has priority over novelty. 
{feedback} 
If recent modification succeeds 
If recent modification fails 
- 
Your recent modifications {previous_modifications} are 
failed. 
The reason of the most recent failure is {failed_reason}. 
Please re-propose the modification based on the given 
format and information. 
NEVER suggest same modification with previous failed 
modifications 
 
Table S6. Input prompt templets of reflect agent 
Reflect Agent Input Prompt Base 
{strategy} 
         
Design agent suggested following hypothesis and modification. 
Hypothesis: {reasoning} 
Modification: {modification} 
 
After completing the modification, we obtained the following catalyst 
Before modification: {previous_catalyst_textual_description} 
After modification: {current_catalyst_textual_description} 
 
Please write a brief post-action reflection on the modification in less than five sentences, \ 
explaining how successful it was in achieving  
{2.46 - threshold} ~ {2.46 + threshold} eV for Gibbs free energy of *O  
{1.23 - threshold} ~ {1.23 + threshold} for Gibbs free energy of *OH and  
{3.69 - threshold} ~ {3.69 + threshold} for Gibbs free energy of *OOH,  
and the reasons for its success or failure.\         
 
The {num_recent_history} recent modificaitons, reasonings and feedbacks is following: 
{formatted_history}. 
The summary of history is {summarized_history} 
The simplified history of previous modifications is {simplified_history}. 
Recommended maximum value of complexity is {max_complexity}. 
 
Global best catalyst found so far is {best_catalyst_textual_description}. 
Recent catalyst list is following (oldest to newest): 
{recent_catalysts_list} 
If all target value of recent catalysts is fall apart from the best, choose 'best' 
{strategy} 
Exploration Phase 
Exploitation Phase 
STRATEGY: EXPLORATION 
Your priority is information gain and coverage of the 
catalyst space. 
- Prefer continuing from RECENT catalyst that has 
potential to expand catalyst space and avoid choose 
catalysts already used.  
- MUST explore as many catalyst + modification 
possibilities as possible. 
STRATEGY: EXPLOITATION 
Your priority is fast convergence toward the target with 
reliable, low-risk steps. 
- Recommends you judge to be the most suitable catalyst 
for the designer to achieve the target.. 
- Balance the use of RECENT and BEST. DO NOT stick to 
the BEST and select catalysts with the potential to achieve 
new BEST. 
 
Table S7. Input prompt templets of summary and exploration report agent. 
Summary Agent Input Prompt Base 
Following is recent summarized history by yourself: 


--- Page 33 ---
{summarized_history} 
And following is recent detailed history: 
{formatted_history} 
                 
Please summarize history based on given summarized and detailed history\ 
Exploration Report Agent Input Prompt Base 
Following is detailed history: 
{formatted_history} 
 
Please write the report based on history 
 
A.5 Formatting 
 
To communicate catalyst information to LLM-based agents, the catalyst structure must 
be expressed in a form compatible with natural language. However, accurately describing 
geometric details such as interatomic bonding and atomic coordinate using text alone remains 
challenging. Although several approaches for representing materials in natural language have 
been proposed1, this study focuses on the relatively simple single atom catalyst (SAC) system. 
Accordingly, we designed a textual description that encodes only the key structural features 
characteristic of SACs and energy-related properties as shown in Figure S1a. In addition, all 
LLMs employed in this work are multimodal and capable of processing image inputs. Since 
two orthogonal perspectives are sufficient to capture the full geometry of SACs, both top view 
and side view images of each catalyst and its binding configurations were provided to the 
agents alongside the textual description (Figure S1b). 
 
The design history was also formed to facilitate efficient interpretation by the LLMs. 
Two distinct history formatting methods were employed. The first format retains 
comprehensive information, including the modification type, reasoning from the design agent, 
and the feedback from the reflect agent. This formatted history serves as short-term memory. 
The second format is a condensed representation that records only the applied modification and 
their corresponding energy changes, excluding agent intervention. This simplified history 
functions as long-term memory preserving only objective state transitions. 
 


--- Page 34 ---
 
Figure S1. (a) Examples of textual description of SAC. (b) Examples of SAC image provided 
to the agents. 
 
 
Figure S2. Schematic of the formatted and simplified history representation derived from the 
information stored at each design step. 
 
 


--- Page 35 ---
Supplementary Note B. Details of Pre-validation for MLFF and LLM 
B.1 Dataset 
 
In this study, we employed pre-trained UMA as MLFF surrogate for DFT. Because 
SAC system was not included in the training data of UMA, it was necessary to assess its 
optimization reliability for SACs prior to application within the design framework. Moreover, 
as no publicly available SAC benchmark dataset suitable for this purpose exists, we constructed 
a dedicate validation dataset by performing DFT calculations on structure representative of 
those expected to emerge during the catalyst design loop. 
 
For this validation dataset, geometry optimizations were carried out for M-N4 SACs 
with nine different transitions metals (Co, Cu, Fe, Ir, Mn, Ni, Pd, Pt, Ru) as the center atom, 
considering three intermediates (*OOH, *O, *OH) as well as configurations in which an 
additional axial ligand (OH) binds simultaneously with the adsorbate. This resulted in a dataset 
comprising 3,107 optimization images, corresponding 3,107 DFT total energies, 579,057 
atomic forces and 54 binding energies. To further evaluate prediction accuracy under variations 
in the local environment of the binding site, additional datasets were generated for CoN4 
systems featuring COC or COH functional groups on the second shell of carbon support, as 
well as structures in which first shell N atom were substituted with hydrogen or removed to 
form defects. This data construction yielded an additional 420 DFT total energies and 76,098 
atomic forces. 
 
B.2 Pre-validation of MLLFF 
 
Validation was primarily performed using the UMA with the ‘OC20’ domain, which is 
weighted toward heterogenous alloy catalysis systems and was also employed in the actual 
design framework. For comparison, validation was additionally conducted using UMA with 
the ‘OMat’ domain, which is biased toward crystalline bulk materials. The results revealed that 
UMA with the ‘OMat’ domain exhibited substantially inferior prediction performance (Figure 
S3) compared to the model weighted on ‘OC20’. In contrast, the UMA with ‘OC20’ maintained 
high auccracy even for SACs with modified local environments (Figure S4) 
 
Notable, the validation datasets include systems that were absent from the UMA 
training data, such as two-dimensional materials with functional groups or defects, octahedral 
geometrics involving simultaneous ligand and adsorbate binding and *OOH adsorbate. 
Considering these out-of-distribution characteristics, the performance demonstrated by UMA 
in this study is particularly significant, supporting its suitability as a surrogate model. 
 


--- Page 36 ---
 
Figure S3. Parity plots between MLFF-predicted and DFT-calculated energies per atom, 
atomic forces and binding energies of pristine M-N4 SAC system. In this prediction, UMA with 
OMAT task is used as MLFF. 
 
 
Figure S4. Parity plots between MLFF-predicted and DFT-calculated energies per atom and 
atomic forces of modified M-N4 SAC system. In this prediction, UMA with OC20 task is used 
as MLFF. 
 
B.3 Pre-validation of LLM  
 
In most cases, the modifications proposed by the LLM induced changes in binding 
energies consistent with both the intended direction and the underlying reasoning provided by 
the model. Nevertheless, a limited number of discrepancies were observed. The first type of 
inconsistency arises from structural distortions driven by local environment effects, as 
illustrated in Figure S5a. In this case, a functional group located in the second shell migrated 
toward the metal center during MLFF-optimization. This migration destabilized the bare 
catalyst structure, increasing its DFT total energy and consequently leading to a reduction in 
the binding energy. Although the LLM correctly anticipated the change in electron density, it 
failed to predict binding energy trend due to the unforeseen structural rearrangement. 


--- Page 37 ---
 
A second source of inconsistency originates from incorrect analogies to prior cases, as 
shown in Figure S5b. Even when identical modifications are applied, the resulting binding 
energy trends can differ depending on the current condition of catalyst. In such instances, the 
LLM neglected this contextual dependence, leading to erroneous predictions for both binding 
energy and electronic density changes. 
 
To mitigate these limitations within the proposed framework, we introduced additional 
mechanisms to inform the LLM when substantial structural rearrangements occur after 
geometry optimization, such as changes in binding configurations. Furthermore, modifications 
were recorded in the design history together with updated textural descriptions of the catalyst 
structures. This approach enables LLM to associate binding energy trends with both the catalyst 
environment and the applied modification, thereby improving its contextual reasoning in 
subsequent design iterations. 
 
Figure S5. Examples of discrepancies between reasoning of the design agent and calculated 
results. (a) Case of binding site change due to movement of functional group. (b) Case of 
incorrect reference to previous observation. 
 


--- Page 38 ---
 
Figure S6. An example of exploration summary report from exploration report agent. 
 
 
Figure S7. Number of the unique modifications proposed during the 50 design steps, averaged 
over 10 independent design runs. The labels “Exploration” and “Exploitation” correspond to 
the exploration and exploitation phase of history + exploration strategy, respectively,  


--- Page 39 ---
 
 
Figure S8. Evolution of overpotential and dissolution potential averaged over 10 independent 
design runs using (a) history, (b) historyless and (c) random strategy. 
 
 
Figure S9. Evolution of the Gibbs free binding energies of *OOH, *O and *OH over 100 
design steps from a design run that failed to break the scaling relations. Shaded regions denote 
the optimal energy windows required to achieve and overpotential below 0.1 V. Because the 


--- Page 40 ---
binding energies increase and decrease concurrently according to the scaling relations, the three 
intermediates cannot simultaneously fall within their respective optimal ranges. 
 
 
 
Figure S10. An example of design and self-reflection workflow leading to a minimum 
overpotential (0.18 V). The design agent suggests a modification by leveraging accumulated 
design history to selectively tune binding energies. The reflect agent subsequently evaluates 
modification and calculation results, confirms its effectiveness and provide feedback to guide 
the next design step. 
 


--- Page 41 ---
 
Figure S11. Input and output token usage changes by progress of design run. The historyless 
strategy maintains nearly constant input token usage comparable to the initial value, whereas 
the history and history + exploration strategies exhibit a gradual increase in input token usage 
as design history accumulates. 
 
 
Figure S12. Various representative modification process to design promising catalysts by 
breaking scaling relations and lower limit of overpotential.  
 


--- Page 42 ---
 
 
Figure S13. Representation of one of high-performance catalyst structures discovered during 
the design runs, together with a comparison of MLFF-predicted and DFT-calculated 
performance metrics. Data includes Gibbs free binding energies, overpotential (η) and 
dissolution potentials (Udiss) for each candidate. 
 
 
Figure S14. Comparison of overall design performance among (a) different LLMs and (b) 
different starting SACs. The dashed line indicates lower limit of overpotential defined by the 
scaling relations. 
 


--- Page 43 ---
 
Figure S15. Minimum overpotentials averaged over 10 design runs with each temperature 
setting. The dashed line indicates lower limit of overpotential defined by the scaling relations. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 44 ---
Table S8. The Gibbs free energy correction values for adsorbates and gaseous molecules. All 
units are in eV. 
Adsorbates 
ZPE 
∫CpdT 
-TS 
Molecules 
ZPE 
∫CpdT 
-TS 
O* 
0.08 
0.03 
-0.06 
H2 
0.28 
0.09 
-0.41 
OH* 
0.37 
0.04 
-0.07 
H2O 
0.57 
0.10 
-0.67 
OOH* 
0.44 
0.05 
-0.09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- Page 45 ---
Reference 
(1) Jia, S.; Varma, A.; Manivannan, P.; Chayapathy, D.; Fung, V. Benchmarking Text 
Representations for Crystal Structure Generation with Large Language Models. In AI for 
Accelerated Materials Design-ICLR 2025. 
 
 
 
