--- Page 1 ---
1
A Quantum Internet Protocol Suite
Beyond Layering
Angela Sara Cacciapuoti and Marcello Caleffi
INVITED PAPER
Abstract—Layering, the organization principle of the network
protocols underpinning the classical Internet, is ill-suited to
the Quantum Internet, built around entanglement, which is
non-local and stateful. This paper proposes a quantum-native
organizational principle based on dynamic composition, which
replaces static layering with a distributed orchestration fabric
driven by the node local state and “in-band” control. Each node
runs a Dynamic Kernel that (i) constructs a local Plan of Actions
(PoA) of candidate steps to advance a given service intent, and
(ii) executes the PoA by composing atomic micro-protocols into
context-aware procedures, namely the meta-protocols. Quantum
packets carry an in-band control-field – the meta-header –
containing the service intent and an append-only list of action-
commit records, termed as stamps. Successive nodes exploit this
minimal, authoritative history to construct their local PoAs.
As quantum packets progress, these local commits collectively
induce a network-wide, direct acyclic graph that certifies end-to-
end service fulfillment, without requiring global synchronization
or an external controller. In contrast to classical encapsulation,
which prescribes a fixed vertical processing order, the proposed
suite enforces order by certification: dependency-aware local
scheduling decides what may run at a certain node, stamps
certify what did run and constrain subsequent planning. By em-
bedding procedural control within the quantum packet itself, the
design ensures coherence and consistency between entanglement-
state evolution and control-flow, preventing divergence between
resource state ad protocol logic, while remaining MP-agnostic
and implementation-decoupled. The resulting suite is modular,
adaptable to entanglement dynamics, and scalable. It operates
correctly with or without optional control-plane hints. Indeed,
when present, hints can steer QoS policies, without changing
semantics. We argue that dynamic composition is the organizing
principle required for a truly quantum-native Internet.
Index Terms—Quantum Internet, Quantum Internet Protocol
Suite, Internet Protocol Suite, Quantum Networking, Entangle-
ment, Addressing, Quantum Addressing, SDN, Quantum Rout-
ing, Quantum-Native functionalities, ERC-CoG QNattyNet.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Quantum Internet [1]–[8] is an entanglement-packet
switching network, fundamentally departing from the design
principles of the classical Internet [1], [2], [9]. Unlike a classi-
cal packet, which carries information from a source to a desti-
nation, an entanglement packet does not transport information.
A.S. Cacciapuoti and M. Caleffi are with the www.QuantumInternet.it
research group, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, 80125 Italy. E-mail:
angelasara.cacciapuoti@unina.it, marcello.caleffi@unina.it.
This
work
has
been
funded
by
the
European
Union
under
Horizon
Europe
ERC-CoG
grant
QNattyNet,
n.101169850
(www.QNattyNet.QuantumInternet.it).
Views
and
opinions
expressed
are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect
those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive
Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held
responsible for them.
Its role is to distribute quantum correlations across distant
nodes. These correlations can then be subsequently extended,
transformed or consumed by local operations performed at any
of the involved nodes.
The “entanglement-packet” paradigm decouples quantum-
state transfer and processing from the physical transmission
of carriers: quantum information does not flow through the
network. Rather, entanglement – as the key network resource
– is distributed and later consumed to realize, with the aid of
classical communications, distributed quantum functionalities,
including information sharing via teleportation, distributed
quantum computation and other multi-node state manipula-
tions.
In this light, the scope of the network is not to route
information, but rather to distribute, maintain, and manipulate
entanglement. Consequently, while the classical Internet is
designed for end-to-end information transfer, the Quantum
Internet is designed for end-to-end entanglement distribution,
enabling applications with no-classical counterpart [10]–[14].
This shift in network scope has profound design implications:
entanglement is not a transient data unit, but a shared resource
whose value does not reside at a single destination. Its opera-
tional utility spans across all nodes that hold it [15], thereby
defying the classic source-destination paradigm and making
entanglement an inherently stateful, “network-wide” construct.
Once all of this is acknowledged, it becomes clear that
protocol behavior and logic must be tightly coupled to the dy-
namics of entanglement itself. Indeed, as analyzed in [1], [2],
the non-local and stateful nature of entanglement requires to
maintain persistent awareness of entanglement-state evolution
across all functionalities that, under a classical perspective,
would span across the entire protocol stack. Specifically,
quantities such as coherence time and fidelity – at a first
glance perceived as physical-layer metrics – must be visible
to functionalities that, in a classical interpretation, would
belong to higher layers. For example, entanglement swapping
is conceptually associated with a network-layer mechanism,
extending connectivity across multiple hops, whereas purifi-
cation resembles a transport-layer functionality, ensuring the
reliability and quality of entangled paths. In this sense, the
descriptors of an entanglement resource – such as fidelity,
coherence budget and the identities of the nodes sharing
it (ownership) – are not mere performance indicators, but
network state variables that drive protocol logic and behavior
across all the network functionalities.
These intertwined dependencies cannot be reconciled with
a design based on static, vertically isolated layers: any rigid
separation of functionalities would fragment state variables
arXiv:2602.19998v1  [quant-ph]  23 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
TABLE I: Fundamental Conflicts Between Classical Layering and the Quantum Internet
Layering Features
Layering Design Consequence
Quantum Internet Features
Vertical and static abstraction
boundaries between
functionalities
Layers operate independently, by hiding their internal
mechanisms and states from the layers above and below.
Entanglement is non-local, stateful, and inherently
cross-layer. Its descriptors – such as fidelity, coherence
time, and partner identities – directly affect all protocol
functions.
Each layer assumes the availability of its own local
descriptors to drive protocol logic.
Entanglement descriptors are global state variables that
cannot be confined within a single layer without loss of
correctness or consistency.
Hindered inter-layer dependencies force duplication of
information and/or functionalities across layers to pre-
serve layer autonomy.
Duplication is incompatible with quantum-native func-
tioning and quantum header: cross-layer visibility can
only be achieved via classical headers and a classical
out-of-band control-plane.
Inherently classical control-plane
Control messages required per topology change cannot
scale better than linearly on Internet-like graphs.
A purely classical control-plane is unscalable: entan-
glement is non-local, so each local quantum operation
altered a shared state, requiring global updates that incur
prohibitive overhead and latency even for relatively
small entangled clusters.
that are intrinsically inseparable, by obscuring constraints that
must be handled coherently. In a nutshell, entanglement breaks
the very same principle of separation of concerns on which
layering design relies, as it constitutes an intrinsically cross-
layer resource that shapes and drives the behavior of all
network functionalities. Consequently, the dynamics of entan-
glement must remain visible, shared and actionable across the
entire protocol suite.
If one nevertheless insists on a layered design, each layer
would then be forced to maintain its own copy of the state vari-
ables governing entanglement evolution – coherence budget,
fidelity, and ownership – in order to operate correctly, while
preserving layer independence. Unfortunately, this duplication
is possible only by resorting to classical headers and a classical
out-of-band control-plane as in [16]–[18], due to the no-
cloning constraint of quantum mechanics. This has two critical
consequences. First, a layered architecture cannot support
quantum-native control [1], [2], which requires quantum head-
ers and in-band manipulation of quantum states. Second, layer-
ing fundamentally introduces severe and unprecedented scala-
bility limitations. Indeed, being entanglement both stateful and
non-local, state-dependent information must be consistently
available to all nodes sharing a given entanglement resource,
potentially across long distances. Tracking how local quantum
operations modify fidelity, coherence budget or partner identity
via a classical control-plane would therefore require continual
classical state synchronization among all involved nodes. The
resulting communication overhead grows rapidly and becomes
prohibitive even for relatively small entangled clusters. This
phenomenon is not unique to quantum networks: even in clas-
sical networks, where entanglement is absent, it is known that
the number of control messages required per topology change
cannot scale better than linearly on Internet-like graphs [19]. In
the quantum case, however, where the state of an entanglement
resource may change with every local quantum operation,
the required update rate is dramatically higher. Therefore, a
layered architecture – together with its inevitable reliance on
classical headers and out-of-band signaling – is inherently
unsustainable.
These observations – summarized in Table I – reveal that
layering cannot serve as the organizational principle for a
Quantum Internet protocol suite. A new approach is required,
one that natively integrates entanglement-state evolution into
protocol behavior, without relying on static abstraction bound-
aries, as described in the following.
A. Contributions
We propose a quantum-native organizational principle based
on dynamic composition of atomic functionalities, referred to
as micro-protocols (MPs), driven solely by local state and
in-band procedural control. Specifically, each node runs a
Dynamic Kernel that:
(i) constructs a local Plan of Actions (PoA) as a directed
acyclic graph (DAG) of candidate actions and their
dependencies to advance a given service intent (e.g.,
teleportation);
(ii) executes the subset of actions that is currently feasible,
given the node internal capabilities and policy con-
straints, by composing MPs into context-aware proce-
dures, termed meta-protocols (MePs).
The PoA is speculative and local: it reflects the node internal
state, including classical and quantum forwarding tables, co-
herence budgets, and optional hints from the control-plane via
the Entanglement Distribution Controller (EDC) [1], [2].
A key design choice is that procedural control of the
service is carried “in-band”. Specifically, quantum packets
carry a control-field – called meta-header and orthogonally
encoded with respect to the quantum payload – containing
the service intent and an append-only list of action-commit
records, termed as stamps. Successive nodes exploit this
minimal, authoritative history to construct their local PoAs,
execute feasible actions, and append new stamps at action-
commit boundaries. By embedding procedural control within
the quantum packet itself – thus, named in-band control –
the design ensures tight coherence between entanglement-state
evolution and control-flow and avoids the scalability limits of
global, purely classical procedural control.


--- Page 3 ---
3
These local commits collectively induce a network-wide
DAG that certifies end-to-end service fulfillment, without re-
quiring global synchronization or an external controller. Thus,
although each node acts autonomously, the collective effect
of local decisions is globally consistent: monotone stamps
guarantee an acyclic and verifiable execution history. The
pictorial representation of the proposed organization principle
is provided in Figs. 1 and 2.
Crucially, unlike classical encapsulation, which prescribes a
fixed processing order ruled by the vertical hierarchy among
layers, the proposed suite enforces order by certification, not
prescription. More precisely, locally at each quantum node, the
PoA DAG and execution scheduling honor dependency edges
and resource/quality guards. Globally across the network, the
monotone sequence of in-band stamps forms the authoritative
history that subsequent nodes must respect. The design is
(i) MP-agnostic – thus decoupling mechanism from imple-
mentation – (ii) modular and (iii) adaptive to entanglement
dynamics. It scales, since it avoids duplicated states and out-
of-band orchestration.
It is important to clarify that the in-band, per-packet pro-
cedural control encoded within the meta-header must not be
conflated with any external control-plane [1], [2]. Analogous
to classical protocol headers – which carry per-packet con-
trol information and are distinct from SDN-style out-of-band
control – the meta-header governs local planning/execution
and commit certification on a per-packet basis, whereas an
external control-plane via EDC may optionally supply hints1.
When present, control-plane hints are non-intrusive: they prune
conservative dependencies and enable QoS policies (e.g.,
prioritization of actions) without altering semantics. When
absent, the suite remains correct.
In a nutshell, adaptability, modularity, and service progres-
sion do not emerge from fixed vertical boundaries but rather
from the composability of atomic functions and in-band per-
packet procedural control.
By summarizing, the contributions of this paper are three-
fold:
1) It introduces dynamic composition as a quantum-native
organizational principle, by replacing layering with a
dynamic kernel that composes MPs into context-aware
procedures, i.e., the MePs.
2) It
formalizes
service
fulfillment
as
an
emergent,
network-wide DAG of action commits: local kernels
collectively construct a consistent end-to-end execution
order without centralized control.
3) It introduces an in-band meta-header, which carries a
monotone sequence of action-commit stamps, provid-
ing scalable and verifiable coordination for quantum-
stateful services, while remaining MP-agnostic and
implementation-decoupled. Optional EDC hints can en-
1Throughout this paper, “in-band” and “out-of-band” do not refer to the
physical transmission medium but rather to whether or not the procedural
control resides in the packet meta-header that carries the service intent.
Accordingly, a control message is out-of-band whenever it is not carried in the
packet meta-header, irrespective of whether it traverses classical or quantum
channels.
force QoS without altering the core semantics of the
suite.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II introduces some preliminaries utilized through the
paper. Section III presents the Dynamic Kernel suite and its
MP/MeP composition model. Section IV formalizes service
fulfillment as an emergent, network-wide DAG of action
commits, and it illustrates the suite behavior with an end-to-
end teleportation case study. Section V discusses the design
implications of the proposed suite and details how it over-
comes the limitations of layering-based approaches. Section V
also analyzes future research directions. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper.
B. Related Work
Layering, the long-standing organizational principle of the
classical Internet, achieved modularity and interoperability by
enforcing strict vertical and static abstraction boundaries be-
tween functionalities. However, it also introduced fundamental
limitations: rigidity, duplicated control logic across layers, and
hindered the expression of inter-layer dependencies. These
limitations are neither new nor subtle in classical networks:
they have been very well-recognized in the classical literature
[20]–[22].
As noted in [20], reluctance to change deployed implemen-
tations and ossified inter-layer interfaces have repeatedly led
classical designers to insert new functionality between existing
layers – “middle-layer accretions” – rather than modify the
layers themselves. In [20], the authors proposed a Role-
Based Architecture (RBA), which abandons strict layering and
organizes functionality into “roles” with role-specific headers
carried in a metadata “heap”. Ordering and access are gov-
erned by explicit processing rules rather than by encapsulation.
In a similar spirit, dynamically adaptable protocol stacks
[21], cross-layer design, and Software-Defined Networking
(SDN) [22] emerged in the classical domain to mitigate the
inefficiencies of rigid layering, allowing dynamic interactions
across protocol boundaries and – via SDN control/data plane
decoupling – programmable and policy-driven composition of
network functions. In parallel, John Day’s pioneering work
[23] (the RINA perspective) re-framed a “layer” as a scope-
bounded, repeating structure – a Distributed IPC Facility
(DIF) – rather than a fixed functional stratum, correcting a
long-standing misinterpretation of layering traceable to the
CYCLADES project led by Louis Pouzin.
In classical networks, the aforementioned shortcomings
have often been tolerable because protocol behavior is pre-
dominantly local: an operation at one node does not induce
intrinsic non-local dependencies across distant nodes. Quan-
tum networks differ fundamentally. Entanglement induces non-
local correlations, so local choices constrain remote possi-
bilities. Therefore, the limitations and inefficiency of rigid
layering become structural obstacles, as analyzed in Sec. I
and summarized in Table I. In short, conventional layering is
fundamentally incompatible with the operational requirements
of the Quantum Internet. This motivates the proposed dynamic
kernel, which preserves modularity without freezing inter-
function dependencies.


--- Page 4 ---
4
Fig. 1: Conceptual shift in the protocol-organizational principle: from static layering to dynamic composition. Each node runs
a Dynamic Kernel that, based on the node internal state and the in-band meta-header, composes atomic micro-protocols (MPs)
into context-aware meta-protocols (MePs) to advance the service intent.
Fig. 2: A quantum packet carries a control-field – called meta-header – containing the service intent and an append-only
list of action-commit records (stamps). Successive quantum nodes exploit this minimal, authoritative history to construct their
local PoAs, to execute feasible actions, and append new stamps only at action-commit boundaries. Embedding procedural
control within the quantum packet itself keeps control-flow aligned with entanglement-state evolution. As packets progress,
the accumulated stamps collectively induce a network-wide DAG that certifies end-to-end service fulfillment.
Nevertheless, most quantum network protocol stacks pro-
posed to date continue to mirror classical-layering design [24]–
[34]. A comprehensive survey and analysis of these layered
quantum-stack architectures is provided in [15]. It was indeed
in [15] that the core argument advanced in this work was
first articulated: a layered design is inherently unscalable in
the Quantum Internet, although that study did not propose a
technical solution to the problem.
A recent work [35] also recognized that classical layering
is unscalable for quantum networks and proposes a task-based
control framework. However, that design relies on assumptions
that make practical deployment challenging. In particular, it
assumes each node maintains a global, continuously refreshed
view of all quantum resources in the network, updated through
classical signaling whenever entanglement is generated, con-
sumed, or reallocated. Maintaining such global visibility en-
tails significant communication and latency overheads, and
appears difficult to reconcile with the operational realities of
quantum networks, where entanglement evolves through local
operations and cannot be synchronized network-wide without
prohibitive classical cost. Indeed, the architecture in [35]
introduces a globally coordinated classical control layer on
top of the quantum substrate. It functions as a control-theoretic
scheduler whose correctness depends on strong, system-wide
consistency assumptions, unlikely to hold in realistic deploy-
ments. As a result, [35] does not provide an organizational
principle for a protocol suite. Instead, it externalizes coor-
dination to a global (classical) controller. By contrast, our


--- Page 5 ---
5
dynamic-composition approach avoids any requirements of
global knowledge, being grounded in distributed, node-centric
execution model. Each node operates solely on its local view,
while packet-carried stamps allow end-to-end correctness to
emerge from local decisions, without requiring centralized
orchestration or network-wide synchronization.
II. PRELIMINARIES
As introduced in Sec. I, the Quantum Internet is an
entanglement-packet switching network, whose fundamental
scope is to distribute, maintain, and process entanglement,
which serves as the network delivery unit. Applications –
ranging from quantum teleportation to distributed quantum
computing – operate on top of such pre-established entan-
glement resources. In this light, the network fabric provisions
entanglement that applications subsequently consume, without
requiring the information-bearing quantum state to traverse
each hop. This perspective naturally encompasses both bipar-
tite and multipartite entanglement. Indeed, as detailed in [15],
[36], [37], protocols that remain valid across different persis-
tency classes of multipartite entanglement can be designed by
distributing multipartite resources via teleportation over pre-
shared bipartite entanglement. As a consequence, entangled
pairs serve as foundational operational primitives for entan-
glement distribution within the network, while the network
objective – not limited to distribution – encompasses also the
maintenance and processing of entanglement resources at any
multipartite scales.
A. Entities, Planes and Internal States
We adopt the architectural framework introduced in [1],
[2], which separates the control-plane from the data plane. In
this model, the control-plane comprises a classical component
for signaling through standard message exchanges, together
with a quantum control-plane that orchestrates entanglement
resources via Entanglement Distribution Controller (EDC) [1],
[2]. A key architectural element inherited from [1] is the
quantum packet structure, consisting of a quantum header and
a quantum payload. The quantum header carries the contextual
information needed for forwarding and resource selection,
while the payload contains entanglement qubits (ebits). This
quantum-native packet structure provides the foundation for
the meta-header defined in the following.
Let V be the set of network nodes. Each node v maintains
an internal state ISv(t) that evolves over time given by:
ISv(t) =
 FT v
c (t), FT v
q (t), Hintsv(t)

,
(1)
where
• FT v
c (t) is the classical forwarding table, capturing the
node reachability over the physical network graph.
• FT v
q (t) is the quantum forwarding table [1], namely the
entanglement inventory, reflecting the reachability on the
entanglement overlay graph. For each resource, FT v
q (t)
records the participating nodes via quantum addresses
(QAs), together with a resource identifier and associated
descriptors such as fidelity F and coherence budget τ.
• Hintsv(t) denotes optional control-plane assistance, pro-
vided through EDC-enforced policies, such as QoS poli-
cies or admissible parallelism.
Updates to ISv(t) may be periodic or event-driven, for
instance due to resource arrival, expiration, consumption, or
control-plane policy changes. An entanglement resource is
consumable only if its descriptors meet the service/application
requirements at the time of invocation. Because these descrip-
tors directly gate both feasibility and correctness, they are
first-class elements of ISv(t), rather than mere performance
counters. In other words, because these descriptors directly
govern protocol behavior and logic across the suite, they must
be part of the node internal state.
B. Service Intent, Micro- and Meta-Protocols
We now formalize the abstractions underlying the proposed
protocol suite. We begin with the notion of a service intent,
a declarative specification of what the application requests –
such as for example end-to-end entanglement establishment,
teleportation, or entanglement purification – independent of
how the network actually realizes it.
Definition
1
(Service
Intent).
A
service
intent
is
an
application-issued, mechanism-agnostic request that declares
the target quantum functionality and the participating nodes.
The intent is opaque to the network. It may include additional
parameters permitted by enforced policy. Formally,
I =
 Service, P, Θ, Π

,
(2)
where (i) Service is the identifier of the requested func-
tionality; (ii) P is the set of participating nodes, expressed
as quantum addresses. In case of bipartite services P =
{QAsrc, QAdst}, whereas for multipartite services, P
=
{QAi}i⊆V ; (iii) Θ collects quantitative targets, such as for
example Fmin, τmin; (iv) Π carries optional policy annota-
tions, such as QoS class or persistency class in the case of
multipartite entanglement. The intent does not encode route
information, scheduling, or procedures.
Stemming from the fundamental objective of the Quantum
Internet – distributing, maintaining, and processing entangle-
ment – we expose a minimal set of micro-protocols (MPs) and
their runtime compositions, called meta-protocols (MePs), as
defined in the following.
Definition 2 (Micro-Protocol (MP)). A micro-protocol imple-
ments a single, atomic network functionality.
Examples2 of MPs could include a single link-level entan-
glement generation attempt, a local quantum operation, or a
link-level synchronization step.
Definition 3 (Meta-Protocol (MeP)). A meta-protocol is a
higher-order construct obtained by dynamically composing a
set of MPs to realize a complex functionality.
Examples of MePs could include entanglement purification,
multi-hop entanglement distribution, and similar compound
2We provide an example of a canonical set of MPs later in Sec. III


--- Page 6 ---
6
procedures. As it will become evident in the following, the
realization of a complex functionality may require retries,
adaptation to evolving entanglement availability, and coor-
dination across multiple nodes. By design3, these features
are encapsulated within the MeP and do not leak across it:
only action commits surface externally as stamps. This pre-
serves a clean separation among mechanism (MPs), procedures
(MePs), and certification (stamps). The specific composition,
execution and certification workflow is detailed in Sec. III.
Definition 4 (Action). An action is an abstraction representing
a unit of progress toward fulfilling a service intent. At run time,
an action is realized by instantiating one or more MPs and/or
MePs, selected according to the node capabilities, policies,
and internal state.
Definition 5 (Action Commit). The action commit is the
certified completion of an action instance. An action commits
when its execution reaches a terminal outcome (success or
explicit failure), and this event is recorded by emitting a stamp
s. Action commit events are irreversible.
By design (see Sec. III), a stamp is appended to the packet
meta-header, formally defined as follows.
Definition 6 (Meta-Header). The meta-header H is the in-
band control-field carried by the quantum packet to support
end-to-end multi-hop service fulfillment. Formally:
H = (I, Stamps)
(3)
and it contains:
• the service intent I, defined in Def. 1;
• the ordered, append-only sequence of emitted stamps
certifying action commits along the path: Stamps =
⟨s1, . . . , sm⟩.
The meta-header is encoded in a subspace orthogonal to
the quantum payload subspace, thus enabling non-perturbing
access. Updates occur only at action-commit boundaries,
when the next stamp is appended. The meta-header carries
no speculative plans. Its structure is agnostic to the specific
MP/MeP implementations.
We note that the orthogonality4 between the meta-header
and payload subspaces can be realized in different ways, as
discussed in Sec. V-A. The specific physical realization of
the meta-header is therefore a platform-dependent engineering
choice. The architectural design proposed in this paper is
intentionally encoding-agnostic, since a sound organizational
principle must remain invariant under technological evolution
and heterogeneous hardware implementations. At the archi-
tectural level, the meta-header plays a role fundamentally dif-
ferent from that of classical layered headers. Unlike classical
headers, which are bound to a specific layer, the meta-header
is a cross-cutting control structure shared across all stages
of service fulfillment. As detailed in Sec. III, its role is to
provide the next hop with a consistent, authoritative context
to advance the service fulfillment. By carrying only executed
actions (stamps) – rather than speculative plans – the meta-
header avoids redundancy and ensures that header growth is
3See Sec. III for further details.
bounded by the logical progression of the service, thereby
supporting scalability. As a consequence of this design, the
meta-header constitutes a programmable procedural-control
element, while remaining logically coupled to entanglement-
state evolution through commit-atomic updates performed
exclusively at action boundaries.
It is worth noting that all the above definitions are invariant
to the evolution of MP/MeP granularity. A construct regarded
as a MeP today may collapse into a single MP tomorrow,
as technology advances. The abstractions introduced here
are stable under such shifts, ensuring that the protocol suite
remains scalable, modular, and future-proof.
III. PROTOCOL SUITE DESIGN
Core Idea: Service fulfillment progresses hop-by-hop and
it is driven in-band in a fully distributed manner, by the
processing performed on the quantum packet. In our design,
the packet header is extended into a meta-header, defined in
Def. 6, which carries (i) the original service intent and (ii) a
sequence of stamps certifying actions already committed along
the “service-path”. No speculative plan of the remaining work
is carried.
The architectural element that allows each node to advance
a service intent in a scalable and quantum-native manner is re-
ferred to as Dynamic Kernel. The kernel reads the meta-header
orthogonally to the payload and, using the node internal state
ISv(t), introduced in eq. (1), constructs a local, speculative
Plan of Action (PoA). The PoA is a planning artifact strictly
local to the node, since it is never propagated and does not
“evolve” across hops. Instead, the service fulfillment evolves as
the packet advances. The kernel executes the subset of planned
actions that is locally feasible. Whenever an action reaches a
terminal outcome, it commits and the kernel appends a new
stamp to the meta-header. These stamps provide the next hop
with a minimal yet authoritative and consistent record of what
has already been completed, enabling that node to recompute
its own PoA and further advance the service without requiring
any global knowledge or network-wide synchronization.
Remark 1. A salient property of the proposed suite is its
ability to operate correctly under variable levels of control-
plane support. Indeed, by design, each Dynamic Kernel ad-
vances a service intent autonomously, by using only node-
resident information, namely the service intent, the accu-
mulated stamps (carried in the meta-header), and the node
internal state ISv(t). Crucially, as it will be evident in the
next subsections, correctness and progress do not rely on the
Hintsv(t) field contained in ISv(t): the suite remains correct
when Hintsv(t) = ∅(purely autonomous operation), i.e.,
in the complete absence of control-plane assistance. When
present, Hintsv(t) provides optional, policy-driven guidance.
Such hints can inject a broader perspective than the one
available locally, refining decision-making to improve targeted
performance metrics, without compromising local autonomy,
which remains essential for scalability. The hints are strictly
advisory: they do not modify protocol semantics and may be
ignored if absent, stale, or inconsistent, in which case the
kernel falls back to the conservative, purely autonomous plan.


--- Page 7 ---
7
In other words, EDC hints constitute an optional performance-
optimization stratum. This design establishes a clear separa-
tion between correctness, which is ensured entirely through
autonomous, in-band mechanisms, and optimization, which
may optionally exploit control-plane guidance. As a result, the
proposal supports a graceful continuum ranging from fully
autonomous operation to control-plane-assisted refinement,
without compromising scalability or semantic guarantees.
A. Design Principle
The proposed suite introduces a quantum-native organiza-
tional principle based on dynamic composition. Instead of ar-
ranging functionalities into a stack of hierarchical layers, each
node runs a Dynamic Kernel that selects and composes atomic
MPs into transient, context-dependent MePs according to its
local state, policies, and the service intent. This organizational
principle is governed by three invariants:
• Local Autonomy: Each node constructs its own PoA
solely from its internal state ISv(t) and the packet
meta-header. No global knowledge or network-wide syn-
chronization is required, thereby eliminating scalability
bottlenecks.
• In-Band Coordination: Control information – the ser-
vice intent and the append-only log of action-commit
stamps – travels in-band within the quantum packet,
encoded in the orthogonal subspace of the meta-header
for non-perturbing access. This ensures coherence and
consistency between data and control evolution, avoids
reliance on out-of-band classical signaling, and prevents
divergence between resource state and protocol logic.
• Dynamic Composition: Based on the locally constructed
PoA, each node composes the required MPs into context-
aware MePs that realize the actions that are currently
“runnable” at that node. Sequencing, retries, and fallbacks
are handled locally within MePs, since only action com-
mits are stamped. Composition adapts to entanglement
availability, coherence budget, and node capabilities (op-
tionally refined by EDC hints) without changing seman-
tics.
Together, these three invariants replace static layering with
a dynamically coordinated, entanglement-aware orchestration
fabric. Modularity is not preserved by vertically isolating
functions into layers, but rather by composing and reusing
atomic functionalities whose semantics remain invariant across
the network. Adaptation, correctness, and service progression
arise from the distributed execution of dynamic kernels rather
than from fixed inter-layer interfaces.
As will become clear in the remainder of this paper, a key
consequence of these design principles is that the sequence
of locally committed actions, carried hop-by-hop as stamps
in the meta-header, implicitly induces an end-to-end DAG
representing the global service-fulfillment process. Crucially,
this global DAG is neither precomputed nor distributed, nor
is it explicitly carried in the packet. Instead, it emerges
naturally from the autonomous decisions of each kernel and
from the monotonic accumulation of stamps certifying action
commits. As a result, the global execution structure is obtained
without global knowledge, while preserving both correctness
and scalability.
B. Dynamic Kernel Pipeline: Overview
Figure 3 illustrates the quantum packet-processing pipeline
centered on the Dynamic Kernel, highlighting the packet
structure, the three internal building blocks of the kernel, and
the output packet after execution.
1) Input Quantum Packet and Local Context: Each node
processes an incoming quantum packet composed of a quan-
tum meta-header and a quantum payload. The meta-header
carries: (i) the service intent introduced in eq. (2) and (ii)
a sequence of stamps that certify actions already committed
along the “service-path” introduced in eq. (3). The meta-
header is encoded in a subspace orthogonal to the payload,
enabling non-disruptive and non-perturbing readout that leaves
the payload unchanged4. The quantum payload contains entan-
glement qubits (e-bits) that may be consumed, transformed,
or left untouched, depending on the local PoA. Payload e-bits
carried in the packet do not need to be strictly tied to the
current service intent.
Alongside the packet, the kernel consults the node internal
state ISv(t), as introduced in eq. (1). The internal state
exposes via FT v
q (t) the entanglement resources incident at
v along with their descriptors – such as ownership, fidelity,
coherence budget, identifiers – thereby enabling local feasibil-
ity checks and MP selection, without any reliance on global
network knowledge.
2) Dynamic Kernel Components: The Dynamic Kernel
comprises three logical components: the PoA Planner, the PoA
Executor, and the PoA Engine.
• PoA Planner. The Planner constructs a local PoA from
the original service intent, the stamps accumulated
in
the
meta-header,
and
the
node
internal
state
ISv(t). This PoA is synthesized as a local DAG
Dv(t)
=
 Av(t), Ev(t)

, where the vertices Av(t)
are the candidate actions the node can attempt, and
the directed edges Ev encode dependencies among
the actions that must be respected locally: (i) logical
causal relations (an action output feeds another); (ii)
resource/quality
constraints
(e.g.,
fidelity/coherence
thresholds);
and
(iii)
conservative,
view-induced
sequencing.
The
resulting
PoA
is
speculative
and
local: it captures only what node v can execute to
advance the service, given its own view. Importantly,
the packet–kernel interface exposes the meta-header
fields
explicitly.
Notably,
no
global
“frontier”
of
pending
actions
is
carried
in
the
packet.
Instead,
4Here, “orthogonal subspace” is meant in the formal quantum-mechanical
sense, thereby enabling non-perturbing readout with respect to the payload
state. Importantly, this does not preclude measurements on the meta-header.
Rather, measurements are performed on the control subspace as required
by the adopted meta-header physical implementation. By construction, such
measurements act only on the meta-header and therefore do not collapse
or otherwise perturb the entanglement state encoded in the payload sub-
space. This operational decoupling is conceptually aligned with approaches
exploiting orthogonal subspaces in order to separate control and quantum-state
evolution, such as for example in [38].


--- Page 8 ---
8
Fig. 3: The dynamic kernel pipeline for quantum packet processing. Each node receives a packet carrying the service intent
and accumulated stamps. The kernel computes a local Plan of Actions (PoA), selects and composes micro-protocols into
meta-protocols with embedded feasibility checks, and invokes them physically. The packet is updated with new stamps and an
evolved payload before being forwarded, so that the service request is gradually fulfilled hop-by-hop.
each
node
constructs
its
own
PoA
locally.
This
keeps the meta-header minimal and naturally adapts
to
dynamically
evolving
entanglement
availability.
Finally, the Planner inserts a terminal action aterm ∈
{ACT_DELIVER, ACT_FORWARD(·), ACT_DROP}
to
close the local DAG and eventually a soft-state action
(see Sec. IV-B for further details).
• PoA Executor. Triggered by the PoA produced by the
Planner, the Executor maps candidate actions to concrete
MP/MeP realizations, by selecting the appropriate MPs
and by producing a runnable schedule. To this end, the
Executor considers both (i) the actions themselves, driv-
ing the selection step, and (ii) their dependencies, guiding
the composition step of MPs into MePs. In this way,
sequencing constraints are naturally enforced prior to
invocation. The Executor also binds concrete parameters
– such as timeouts or retry/backoff budgets – based also
on the node internal state, and schedules the resulting
MePs under local timing/coherence constraints. Unlike
the Planner, the Executor has visibility over the set of
MPs actually available at node v and therefore performs
additional feasibility/capability checks, such as policy-
enforcement constraints. Embedding these checks within
the Executor ensures that only executable and autho-
rized actions are dispatched, thereby preventing wasted
resources and preserving consistency across nodes. In
essence, the MPs composition and ordering adapt to both
local resource state and policy.
• PoA Engine. The Engine actually runs the scheduled
MePs/MPs identified by the Executor, by invoking the
underlying communication and operation primitives. The
Engine enforces action boundaries: upon a terminal out-
come (commit or explicit abort), it atomically updates
the meta-header, by appending the corresponding stamp,
and it updates when needed the quantum payload and
FTq(v) to reflect the entanglement processing prescribed
by the PoA. No speculative writes occur: only committed
outcomes are recorded, thereby ensuring monotonicity
of the stamp log and consistency between control and
data evolution. This separation of concerns mirrors the
compiler/runtime split in classical computational systems:
the Planner plans, the Executor orchestrates, by mapping
and scheduling, while the Engine runs and certifies.
3) Side Interfaces and Output Quantum Packet: The kernel
relies on two auxiliary interfaces:
• MP Library Interface: It exposes the local catalog of
available MPs. The Executor queries the library to bind
actions to concrete MP/MeP realizations.
• Classical side-channel interface: It provides reliable clas-
sical signaling toward network nodes. Indeed, adopting
SDN terminology, this interface plays both southbound
and northbound roles, enabling bidirectional information
flow. In particular, EDC hints may also be conveyed via
this classical interface and used to refine quantum packet
processing. This is not explicitly depicted in Fig. 3.
After the execution described above, the kernel emits an
updated packet: the meta-header retains the original service
intent, but extends the set of new stamps to certify freshly
committed actions. The quantum payload is evolved accord-
ingly and the updated packet is then eventually forwarded to
the next hop selected by the local PoA, where the process
repeats.
Remark 2. This modular pipeline is designed for scalability


--- Page 9 ---
9
and correctness, in the inherently stateful, non-local regime
of entanglement. By carrying only the service intent and
the monotone (append-only) sequence of stamps, rather than
a speculative frontier of pending work, the packet remains
compact and avoids redundancy. Each node constructs its
PoA locally, adapting naturally to entanglement availability
and coherence-time budgets. Embedding feasibility/capability
checks in the Planner and Executor enforces safety and or-
dering before the actual MPs invocation: the Planner encodes
logical and resource guards in the PoA, and the Executor
performs capability/feasibility checks when binding actions to
MPs/MePs. By isolating the PoA Engine, hardware-specific
details and execution are abstracted. In this way, the kernel
unifies packet-carried control with node-local autonomy, pro-
viding a quantum-native alternative to classical layering.
C. Dynamic Kernel Pipeline: Formal Design
According to the above, we formalize the design of the
Dynamic Kernel as follows.
Designed Dynamic Kernel: At node v and (logical) time
t, the dynamic kernel Kv is the local orchestration and
execution environment that advances a service intent by plan-
ning, composing, and invoking micro-protocols accordingly
to the internal state of the node and to the in-band meta-
header carried within the quantum packet. Kv is not a single
processing unit, but a structured tuple of logical components
and interfaces:
Kv =

Plannerv, Executorv, Enginev, Ipkt
v
, Istate
v
,
(4)
Imp
v
, Isig
v

.
Specifically, the kernel exposes four first-class interfaces:
• Ipkt
v
: packet-access-interface. Reading of the meta-header
H = (I, Stamps) occurs in a subspace orthogonal to the
payload (non-perturbing).
• Istate
v
: access interface to the internal state ISv(t) =
(FT v
c (t), FT v
q (t), Hintsv(t)), i.e., classical/quantum for-
warding tables and optional EDC hints;
• Imp
v
: access interface to the locally available MP library
for composing MPs into MePs.
• Isig
v : access interface to reliable classical side-channel
used by specific MPs/MePs as needed.
Formally, Kv realizes the following mapping:
Kernel mapping. Given an input triple (H, payload, ISv(t)),
where H = (I, Stamps) is the meta-header, payload is the
carried quantum state(s), and ISv(t) is the node internal state,
the kernel realizes the mapping:
Kv :
 H, payload, ISv(t)

7−→
 H′, payload′, IS′
v(t)

.
(5)
Structure and operation. The logical components in (4) are
executed in the following order:
1) PoA Planner (Plannerv) builds a speculative local Plan
of Actions as a DAG Dv(t) = (Av(t), Ev(t)), given
(I, Stamps, ISv(t)), accessed via Ipkt
v
and Istate
v
.
2) PoA Executor (Executorv): performs feasibility/capabil-
ity checks using ISv(t) and Imp
v
, it selects a feasible
subset of actions and maps each action to a MP/MeP
(composition of MPs) realization. It produces a schedule
that honors dependencies Ev(t) and policy constraints.
3) PoA Engine (Enginev): invokes the scheduled MPs
(eventually using Isig
v
when classical signaling is re-
quired), updates the quantum payload and FTq(v) as
prescribed, and appends a new stamp to H upon each
action commit.
Guarantees. (i) Orthogonal read: H is read in a subspace
orthogonal to the payload, thereby enabling non-perturbing
access. (ii) Monotonicity: only committed actions are ap-
pended as stamps (append-only log). (iii) Commit-Atomicity:
header/payload/FTq(t) updates become visible atomically at
action commit. On abort, no update is visible. (iv) Locality: no
global state is assumed. Indeed, each hop recomputes its PoA
from (I, Stamps, ISv(t)). (v) Minimality: H′ carries only the
service intent and stamps, providing the next hop the minimal
and consistent context to compute its own PoA. (vi) Single-
writer for the meta-header: At any time, exactly one node
holds the authoritative meta-header H. Only the holder may
append stamps at action commit. Authority can be transferred
by forwarding H to the next node that will coordinate the next
commit5.
The algorithmic description of the kernel pipeline on a per-
node basis is given in Algorithm 1.
Remark 3. In the proposed architecture, action feasibility
is assessed locally through the described kernel pipeline. As
a result, many potential resource discrepancies are filtered
out prior to invocation. When they cannot be ruled out a-
priori, they are resolved through the operational outcome of
the invoked MPs/MePs, without requiring any global synchro-
nization. If, at execution time, a required quantum resource is
stale, no longer available or no longer satisfies fidelity/coher-
ence constraints, the corresponding action simply fails locally
and is handled via the retry/backoff/abort logic captured in
Algorithm 1. In other words, the Dynamic Kernel operating
at a single node does not attempt to maintain or reconcile a
global view of quantum resources. When an action involves
multiple nodes (e.g., entanglement generation, purification, or
swapping), correctness is ensured by the commit discipline:
an action commits – and thus becomes visible to subsequent
nodes – only when all required conditions have been satisfied
according to the semantics of the enclosing MP/MeP. Hence,
in the proposed architecture, distributed MPs may indeed
succeed at some nodes and fail at others. However, such
outcomes remain confined within the enclosing MP/MeP and
never become externally visible. An action is certified and
stamped only if the corresponding MeP reaches a commit
according to its semantics. Partial success or asymmetric MP
5When EDC hints enable parallel operations at different nodes, for example
two non-conflicting SWAPs, the single-writer discipline is preserved by policy.
Although detailed coordination mechanisms are beyond the scope of this
paper, two standard solutions could be: (i) the current holder of H supervises
the parallel actions via classical-side channel and appends one stamp per
completion upon receiving acknowledgments; (ii) H is forwarded to each
action coordinator in turn, which appends its stamp upon completion. In both
cases, execution proceeds in parallel while stamping remains single-writer and
the global commit DAG stays acyclic.


--- Page 10 ---
10
outcomes without a corresponding commit simply result in
local failure handling and do not induce any global inconsis-
tency. Importantly, discrepancies in quantum resources – such
as partial consumption of entanglement or asymmetric success
of distributed MPs – are operationally indistinguishable from
decoherence effects or loss. They are therefore handled uni-
formly as a local feasibility failure within the proposal, rather
than as global inconsistencies requiring reconciliation.
The same “containment” principle applies to partial failures
of auxiliary classical signaling. If the required classical in-
formation does not arrive within policy-defined bounds, the
enclosing MP/MeP cannot satisfy its commit conditions and
the action does not commit. The failure is handled locally at
the node without exporting inconsistent state via stamps.
From the above discussion, it also emerges that the meta-
header growth is architecturally bounded and semantically
constrained: it scales only with the number of committed
actions (stamps), and not with retries, failed attempts, spec-
ulative steps, or transient protocol states. Since stamps are
appended exclusively at action-commit boundaries, the meta-
header size reflects the logical progress of a service, rather
than its operational complexity or runtime variability. This
yields a predictable and bounded overhead, independent of
network size. Consequently, for any given service intent, the
number of committed actions is finite and predictable, as it
corresponds to the minimal set of certified milestones required
to reach a terminal outcome. In other words, in the proposed
suite, a service intent is a semantically well-defined objective
with commit-based termination, and the finiteness of the stamp
sequence follows directly from the commit discipline under-
lying service fulfillment. Additional mechanisms, as instance
stamp compaction, could be introduced as optimization layer
on top of the proposed design without altering its semantics.
Such mechanisms are natural future directions rather than
prerequisites for scalability.
D. Fundamental micro-protocols (MPs)
The kernel operates on a library of MPs that capture
elementary, reusable primitives, on which MePs are composed.
We identify a minimal and illustrative set of MPs, without
claiming a universal catalog. Indeed, as technology advances,
procedures that are today realized as MePs may collapse
into single MPs. The suite is deliberately invariant6 to such
boundary shifts: the Planner is MP-agnostic, the Executor
maps actions to the currently available MP library and binds
concrete parameters; the Engine invokes the MPs, without
changing the meta-header or stamps semantics. Thus, planning
and execution treat MPs as opaque primitives with declared
pre/post conditions and timing/coherence constraints, so cor-
rectness and scalability do not depend on where the MP/MeP
cut is drawn.
1) MPGEN (single entanglement-generation attempt): per-
forms one attempt to create link-level entanglement on
a physical quantum interface, either heralded or un-
heralded.
6The authors thank John Day for his seminal work on abstraction and
invariance, which inspired this principle.
Algorithm 1: Dynamic Kernel at node v
Input: Quantum Packet p = (H, payload)
with H = (I, Stamps) via Ipkt
v
;
internal state ISv(t) via Istate
v
.
Output: Updated packet p′ = (H′, payload′) and
internal state.
1 1) Orthogonal read (packet I/O):
I ←Ipkt
v
.READINTENT();
Stamps ←Ipkt
v
.READSTAMPS()
▷non-perturbing
2 2) PoA Planner (MP Agnostic): build a local action
DAG Dv = (Av, Ev) from (I, Stamps, ISv).
3 Dv = (Av, Ev) ←PLANPOA
 I, Stamps, Istate
v

4 Insert a terminal action in Av and eventually soft-state
action(s): aterm ∈
{ACT_DELIVER, ACT_FORWARD(c
nh), ACT_DROP}
(here c
nh is a placeholder).
5 3) PoA Executor (feasibility, mapping, schedule):
6 Sv ←SELECTFEASIBLE
 Dv, Istate
v

▷select
planner-produced actions executable
now, respecting Ev and checking
capabilities/coherence/policy
7 Φ ←MAPANDBIND
 Sv, Imp
v
, Istate
v

▷for each
action a ∈Sv, map a to a MeP
(sequence of MPs) and bind concrete
params (e.g., c
nh 7→nh)
8 Σ ←SCHEDULE
 Φ, Ev, Istate
v

▷compute an
execution order honoring Ev and
resource/timing constraints
9 4) PoA Engine (invoke MPs; commit on action
boundaries):
10 foreach (a, MePa) ∈Σ do
11
foreach MP ∈MePa do
12
if Imp
v
.INVOKEMP(MP, Isig
v ) then
13
Istate
v
.UPDATEFTQANDPAYLOAD()
14
else
15
HANDLEFAILURE(retry / backoff / abort)
16
if ABORT then
17
Ipkt
v
.APPENDSTAMP(FAILURESTAMP(a));
return drop p′
18
Ipkt
v
.APPENDSTAMP(COMMITSTAMP(a))
▷atomic action commit
19
if a = ACT_DELIVER then
20
return deliver p′
21
if a = ACT_FORWARD with nh then
22
return forward p′ to nh
23
if a = ACT_DROP then
24
return drop p′
2) MPQP (quantum processing): executes local quantum
operations, such as single- and multiple-qubit gates, as
well as related primitives.
3) MPSYN
(synchronization):
maintains/refreshes
time/phase
references
required
by,
for
example,
entanglement generation process, swapping, purification,


--- Page 11 ---
11
or entanglement-consumption MePs.
4) MPSIG (classical signaling): delivers minimal classical
side information, such as Bell State measurements,
ACK/NACK messages, policy acknowledgments, with
reliability, ordering, and latency properties consistent
with the node’s internal state and the service intent.
5) MPFW (packet forwarding): advances fulfillment of the
service intent by delivering the meta-header and, when
beneficial, the payload (including payload not tied to the
current intent) to the selected next hop nh.
Extensibility. Additional MPs can be introduced over time
without changing the kernel’s design: only the MP library
and the Executor’s mapping logic require updates. The meta-
header and the end-to-end service-fulfillment semantics remain
unchanged.
E. Node Roles and End-to-End Perspective
The pipeline operates uniformly at every node, but its
behavior depends on the current stage of service fulfillment.
• Initiating Node: The originator constructs the initial PoA,
by using only its internal state. Since no actions have yet
been committed, the stamps field of the meta-header is
empty. Accordingly, the packet carries only the service
intent and (optionally) an initial payload. By design, no
frontier field of pending steps is included, thereby avoid-
ing redundancy and any reliance on global knowledge.
• Intermediate Nodes: When the packet reaches an inter-
mediate node selected by the previous hop PoA, the
service intent is not yet fully satisfied. The node con-
sults its internal state and it recomputes its own PoA
from (I, Stamps, ISv(t)). It selects a feasible subset
of actions, executes them, appends the resulting stamps
to the meta-header, and evolves the payload/FT v
q (t)
accordingly, without requiring global network knowledge.
Each node contributes only its portion of the progress
it can safely realize given its internal state, current
availability, and connectivity. This service-oriented op-
eration dispenses with global synchronization and is
naturally aligned with the stateful nature of entanglement
resources.
• Terminating node: When the service intent is satisfied at
v, the kernel commits a final stamp certifying comple-
tion and delivers locally (thus, no further forwarding is
performed).
End-to-end perspective. Under this model, the service request
is fulfilled as a dynamic global DAG that emerges from local
commits (local refinements) at each node rather than being
precomputed or explicitly carried. Each hop updated the packet
with new stamps that certify completed actions, while the
payload eventually evolves in lockstep. By recording only
completed steps rather than speculative futures, the meta-
header remains minimal, ensures correctness, and avoids the
scalability limits associated with distributing a fully precom-
puted global plan. When EDC hints are available, independent
actions at different nodes may proceed in parallel; in their
absence, conservative, view-induced ordering preserves safety
without requiring global state.
Remark 4. One might argue that, since stamps encode
classical information, they could be carried entirely over a
parallel classical network infrastructure. We observe that this
would reintroduce the very limitations of a layered classical
architecture. Out-of-band signaling decouples the control from
the evolving quantum state, forcing global coordination to
maintain consistency. The system would either require global
synchronization or risk divergence between the quantum sub-
strate and its classical description. By contrast, embedding
the meta-header in-band with the quantum packet preserves
consistency between state evolution and control, ensures that
local refinements remain coherent, and avoids the scalability
pitfalls of a purely classical control-plane.
Remark 5. The proposed architecture does not assume ar-
bitrarily long coherence times, nor does it rely on plan-
ning/execution latencies being negligible. As in any quantum-
networking design, a minimal physical prerequisite is the
availability of quantum memories whose coherence time suf-
fices to complete the intended local operations; without such
capability, no network-level protocol (layered or otherwise)
can function. Within these unavoidable constraints, coher-
ence budgets are treated as first-class feasibility parameters:
they are consulted during PoA construction and enforced
during execution. If an MP/MeP fails due to decoherence
or timing violations, the enclosing action simply does not
reach commit and therefore produces no stamp; recovery is
handled locally via retry, backoff, or abort according to policy,
without compromising global correctness. In this sense, the
suite remains robust to timing variability by certifying only
completed actions, rather than presuming success.
IV. SERVICE FULFILLMENT AS AN EMERGENT COMMIT
DAG
This section formalizes end-to-end service progression as
a direct consequence of the design principles introduced in
Secs. II–III: local autonomy, in-band coordination via the
meta-header H = (I, Stamps), and per-node composition by
the Dynamic Kernel Kv (Eq. (3), Alg. 1). We discuss how
the monotone accumulation of stamps induces a network-wide
partial order over completed actions and, therefore, an emer-
gent DAG certifying service fulfillment, without distributing a
global plan or requiring any network-wide synchronization.
As described in Sec. III, within the kernel an action is
planned by the Planner, mapped to a MeP by the Executor,
and physically realized by the Engine. The completion of an
action – the action commit - occurs when the Engine reaches
a terminal outcome (success or explicit failure) and appends
a stamp to the meta-header. Clearly, the action execution may
involve multiple MPs, retries, or distributed coordination, but
only the commit event is recorded. Commits are irreversible
and stamps accumulate monotonically along the service path,
thereby certifying only terminal outcomes.
Thus, by design, a stamp is the in-band certification that an
action has committed. A stamp can have a minimal structure
as follows:
s = (a, Supp(a), T(a), EntIDs, outcome, ξ),
(6)


--- Page 12 ---
12
where a is the action identifier, Supp(a) is the set of partici-
pating nodes, T(a) denotes the commit timestamp (physical or
logical), EntIDs denotes the entanglement resources eventu-
ally consumed/produced, outcome represents the success or
failure of the action execution, and ξ aggregates optional
metadata.
Accordingly, the end-to-end fulfillment of a service intent
emerges as the distributed construction of a dynamic global
DAG of action commits. This abstraction decouples the logical
progression of service fulfillment from the physical imple-
mentation of actions, whose MeP/MP implementations may
include internal loops, retries, and inter–node coordination7.
Edges in the global DAG capture only the necessary
happens-before constraints (namely, the causal constraints)
between committed actions, as determined by logical, re-
source, or conservative orderings induced by local views.
These dependencies are not injected by any single node, but
they emerge systemically from the distributed evolution under
local node-views. Indeed, in the absence of EDC support, the
distributed evolution (by design) of the service intent may be
forced into conservative orderings: each node, relying only on
its local view, assumes dependencies that may not exist glob-
ally. This manifests as additional “view-induced edges” that
serialize otherwise independent actions, as instance two SWAP
operations on disjoint entanglement resources. With EDC
hints, some of these conservative edges can be pruned, and
the DAG reveals the true concurrency inherent in the service.
Thus, the global DAG is best understood as a partial order over
action commits, whose degree of concurrency depends on the
quality and the scope of control-plane information available
to nodes. This is formalized in the following subsection.
A. Global DAG
Let S(t) be the set of all the stamps that have been appended
to the meta-header across the network nodes up to (logical)
time t. We express the emergent global graph as follows.
Emerging Global DAG The emergent global graph at time
t is a direct acyclic graph (DAG) defining the dynamic global
order of executed actions fulfilling the service intent:
D∗(t) =
 A∗(t), E∗(t)

,
(7)
with vertices indicating the actions actually committed (by
producing a stamp) by time t:
A∗(t) = {α :α has committed by time t
and produced a stamp},
(8)
and edges capturing only commit-to-commit dependencies:
(α, β) ∈E∗(t)
⇐⇒β cannot commit unless α has committed. (9)
7For example, if the required EPR pairs are already available with sufficient
quality, entanglement purification can be realized by a single MP, i.e., MPQP.
Otherwise it expands into a MeP that iterates MPSYN and MPGEN with MPQP,
interleaving MPSIG as needed, until the target quality is reached. Regardless
from the particular case, the packet carries only minimal history (intent +
stamps), while service fulfillment – captured by the growing sequence of
stamps – advances hop-by-hop.
TABLE II: Excerpt of stamps for TELEPORT A→B (action-
level commits) illustrated in Fig. 4.
ID
Action
Support
Outcome
s1
LINK_PREP(A−Y )
{A, Y }
ok
s3
LINK_PREP(Y −B)
{Y, B}
ok
s4
SWAP(A−Y −B)
{A, Y, B}
ok
s6
CONSUME_TP(A→B)
{A, B}
ok
s7
ACT_DELIVER
{B}
ok
It is worth stressing that the acyclic nature of D∗(t) is
by construction: edges of E∗(t) point from earlier to later
commits and cycles cannot form as a consequence of design,
which is characterized by the following features:
(i) Commit-only stamping: a stamp is emitted and appended
to the meta-header only when the PoA Engine completes
(commits) an action instance. An abort emits a terminal
failure stamp.
(ii) Monotone timestamps: each stamp carries a timestamp
T(·) that is monotone with respect to the local happens-
before relation (a →b ⇒T(a) < T(b), as instance via
Lamport or vector clocks.
(iii) Irreversibility: commits are permanent (no un-commit).
(iv) Edge minimality: E∗(t) contains only dependencies re-
quired for commit. Local, speculative planning edges
Ev(t) produced by PoA Planners are not exported in
E∗(t).
Thus, D∗(t) is a DAG and induces a partial order over
committed actions up to time t. In this sense, D∗(t) is an
emergent global structure induced solely by packet-carried
stamps.
Remark 6 (Engine “zoom-in”). It is worthwhile to observe
that each vertex of D∗(t) abstracts the implementation graph
executed by the local PoA Engine to realize a local node
action: a composition of MPs that may include loops – due
to retries and/or backoffs – and inter-node coordination. This
per-action graph need not be acyclic. The commit DAG D∗(t)
deliberately decouples such intra-action control-flow: only
terminal commits materialize as vertices, ensuring that D∗(t)
itself remains a DAG. Zooming into a vertex in D∗(t) reveals
this finer-grained intra-action control-flow.
Concurrency and the Role of EDC. In the absence of EDC
hints, nodes may enforce conservative (view-induced) order-
ings that serialize otherwise independent actions, thereby re-
ducing visible parallelism. With EDC guidance, those spurious
constraints are pruned, and D∗(t) exposes the true parallelism.
B. Case Study: End-to-End Teleportation A→B
This section shows how the suite advances a service intent
using only local state and in-band coordination. At each
hop, the dynamic kernel recomputes a local PoA from the
node internal state and the packet meta-header; stamps are
appended only at action-commit boundaries; and the end-to-
end execution order emerges as a global service-fulfillment
DAG, without distributing any precomputed global plan. As a


--- Page 13 ---
13
Initiator node A
Intermediate node Y
Node B
PoA plan: (I, Stamps, ISA(t))
MeP: LINK PR (A−Y )
s1: LINK_PR{A, Y }
MPFW: ACT FORWARD(Y )
s2: ACT_FORWARD(Y )
Local: ACT_HOLD (no stamp)
PoA plan: (I, Stamps, ISY (t))
MeP: LINK PR (Y −B)
s3: LINK_PR{Y, B}
Local: SWAP on {A−Y −B}
s4: SWAP{A, Y, B}
MPFW: ACT_FORWARD(B)
s5: ACT_FORWARD(B)
PoA plan: (I, Stamps, ISB(t))
MPSIG: ReadyForBSM
Local at A: BSM_A (no stamp)
MPSIG: BSM outcomes
s6: CONSUME_TP{A, B}
s7: ACT_DELIVER{B}
MPSIG: CompletionAck
Fig. 4: Swim-lane execution of the Dynamic Kernel for TELEPORT(A →B) across A–Y –B. At each hop the kernel reads
intent I and stamps Stamps, recomputes a local PoA, composes MPs/MePs, and invokes MPs. Stamps are appended only at
action commits. Retries and backoffs remain local to MePs and do not inflate the meta-header. ACT_HOLD and BSM_A are
local and produce no stamps. Meta-header authority transfers on ACT_FORWARD. Dashed arrows are classical signaling.
case study, we instantiate the intent TELEPORT(A→B) over
a two-hop entanglement overlay A−Y −B. Table II lists an
excerpt of stamps, while Fig. 4 shows the kernel pipeline in a
swim-lane view.
1) Initiation at A: The application at A issues a service
intent requesting teleportation from A to B with target thresh-
olds for end-to-end fidelity Ft and residual coherence budget
τmin:
I = (TELEPORT, QAA →QAB; Ft, τmin),
(10)
where QAA and QAB denote the quantum addresses of the
two nodes [1].
Input packet. The quantum packet is p = (H, payload) with
H = (I, Stamps = ⟨⟩), namely, with an empty Stamps. As
pointed out before, the payload may carry auxiliary EPRs not
necessarily used by this service.
Internal state. Each node v
∈
{A, Y, B} maintains
ISv(t)
=
(FT v
c (t), FT v
q (t), Hintsv(t)) as described in
Sec. II-A. At the initial stage, A does not hold a direct A↔B
EPR8.
PoA Planner (MP-agnostic). The Planner orthogonally reads
H and, by exploiting ISA(t), constructs a local PoA DA =
(AA, EA) with actions such as:
{SYN(A−Y ), GEN(A−Y ), PURIFY(A−Y )
ACT_FORWARD(bY ), ACT_HOLD},
(11)
8Optional EDC hints in Hintsv(t) may advertise opportunities for parallel
generation on disjoint interfaces at nodes A and Y , as instance. The kernel
exploits such hints without assuming a global view.
with edges EA capturing logical and quality constraints. For
example, the generation-action is required multiple times when
purification is needed, namely, whenever the fidelity is below
the targeted threshold: GEN×k →PURIFY until F ≥Ft. The
ACT_HOLD is a local, soft-state action that keeps the initiator
(node A) waiting until an external wake-up (e.g., via classical
signaling) arrives. It does not append a stamp to H and it is
never exported across hops. In this case-study, ACT_HOLD is
necessary because A cannot certify end-to-end completion on
its own: the authoritative terminal commit is recorded at B
after the Pauli correction, required by the teleporting protocol.
When A receives B′s completion stamp, it releases its local
soft state ACT_HOLD. This preserves the acyclicity of the
global commit DAG, since ACT_HOLD never materializes as
a stamp.
Executor (mapping actions to MPs/MePs). Feasibility and
capabilities checks against ISA(t) select the planned actions
executable now. Each selected action is then mapped to MP-
s/MePs composed from the MP library and bound to concrete
parameters:
- A-Y Link preparation: compose a meta-protocol MePA−Y
link
as MPSYN →MPGEN×k →MPQP (local gates and mea-
surements used by purification), with classical feedback
via MPSIG when required.
- In-band forwarding: implement ACT_FORWARD(bY ) di-
rectly as the micro-protocol MPFW(bY = Y ).
As said, the ACT_HOLD is installed as local soft-state. A
schedule honoring EA and coherence windows is produced;
retries/backoffs remain inside MePA−Y
link .


--- Page 14 ---
14
Engine (invoking MPs). The Engine interfaces with the MP
library and executes the scheduled MPs in order:
(i) time/phase alignment via MPSYN;
(ii) repeated entanglement attempts via MPGEN;
(iii) local gates/measurements for purification via MPQP with
any required acknowledgments via MPSIG;
(iv) in-band forwarding to Y via MPFW.
Upon the commit of each planned action, the Engine appends
a stamp s = (a, Supp(a), T(a), EntIDs, outcome, ξ) to
H.Stamps. In this case-study, a stamp trace at A could be:
s1 = (LINK_PR(A−Y ), {A, Y }, T1, {eAY }, ok, FAY , τAY ),
s2 = (ACT_FORWARD(Y ), {A}, T2, ∅, ok, −).
The underlying MP invocations – with retries and backoffs –
remain encapsulated within their MePs, via Excutor policies
and Engine commit boundaries. The updated packet proceeds
to Y carrying the refined meta-header and a purified ebit of
the A −Y EPR pair in the payload. Meanwhile, A enters
ACT_HOLD locally (no stamp) awaiting a wake-up.
2) Intermediate node Y : The PoA Planner at node Y
receives p = (H, payload) with H = (I, Stamps) carrying
the commits produced at A. By inspecting ISY (t), it results
that no Y ↔B EPR exists. Y can prepare this EPR pair
and perform a local SWAP to establish an entangled link
between A and B. Thus, the Planner builds a local PoA
DY = (AY , EY ) reflecting the above, with actions such as:
{SYN(Y −B), GEN(Y −B), PURIFY(Y −B),
SWAP(A−Y −B), ACT_FORWARD( bB)}.
(12)
Edges EY encode logical and resource constraints, with op-
tional parallel GEN if hinted: SYN→GEN×k →PURIFY until
F ≥Ft, then SWAP→ACT_FORWARD.
Executor (mapping actions to MPs/MePs). Feasibility and
capability checks against ISY (t) select executable actions and
bind them to MPs/MePs:
- Y −B link preparation: composes a meta-protocol
MePY−B
link
as: MPSYN →MPGEN
×k →MPQP (local
gates/measurements for purification), with classical feed-
back via MPSIG when required.
- Local swapping: composes the meta-protocol MePswap
for performing the swapping as: MPQP→MPSIG, where
MPQP at Y is for the Bell-state measurement process and
MPSIG is for disseminating the SWAP outcome to B,
which is utilized not only to correct the shared entangled
state, but also as a soft-state to update its quantum
forwarding table FT B
q (t).
- In-band forwarding: implements ACT_FORWARD(B) as
MPFW( bB = B) for sending the updated meta-header
to B, thereby enabling the BSM at A required by the
teleportation protocol.
A schedule is produced that honors EY and coherence win-
dows; retries/backoffs remain encapsulated within MePY−B
link .
Engine (invoking MPs). The Engine interfaces with the MP
library and executes the scheduled MPs in order:
(i) MPSYN on Y −B;
(ii) repeated MPGEN on Y −B;
(iii) purification via MPQP and MPSIG when required;
(iv) MPQP for the SWAP at Y and MPSIG to publish BSM
outcome9 to B;
(v) MPFW to forward the meta-header to B.
In particular, after the entangled pair Y −B reaches (Ft, τ)
thresholds, SWAP commits by creating an entangled link
between A and B. At each action commit, the Engine appends
a stamp s in the meta-header. The commits at Y – an excerpt
of which is reported in Tab. II – materialize as:
s3 = (LINK_PR(Y −B), {Y, B}, T3, {eY B}, ok, FY B, τY B),
s4 = (SWAP(A−Y −B), {A, Y, B}, T4, {eAB}, ok, FAB, τAB),
s5 = (ACT_FORWARD(B), {Y }, T5, ∅, ok, −).
3) Consumption across A and B (BSM at A, correction
at B): Node B receives p = (H, payload) from Y with H
now including the SWAP stamp. By virtue of the SWAP at Y ,
nodes A and B hold their respective halves of the EPR pair
in FT A
q (t) and FT B
q (t).
Kernel at B (activate and notify A). The Planner at B adds
the consumption and forwarding actions:
{CONSUME_TP(A→B), ACT_Deliver},
with the Executor mapping CONSUME_TP to MPQP at B for
the Pauli corrections and it schedules a MPSIG notification
to A (ReadyForBSM) to wake A’s hold. The Engine sends
MPSIG.ReadyForBSM→A and awaits the two classical
BSM bits from A.
Kernel at A (perform BSM; meta-header remains at B).
Upon ReadyForBSM, A’s Planner refines the local PoA with
{BSM_A}. The Executor maps BSM_A to MPQP on (A’s input
qubit, A’s half of the A–B ebit) and binds MPSIG to deliver
the two outcomes to B. The Engine performs the BSM and
sends the outcomes via MPSIG. No global stamp is appended
at A because H resides at B; A remains in ACT_HOLD until
completion.
Kernel at B (apply correction; authoritative stamping).
When the two BSM bits arrive, the kernel enables the cor-
rection. The Engine applies MPQP (Pauli) and appends:
s6 =
 CONSUME_TP(A→B), {A, B}, T6, {eAB}, ok, −

,
s7 =
 ACT_DELIVER, {B}, T7, ∅, ok, −

.
It then emits MPSIG.CompletionAck→A so A can close
its local soft-state. The authoritative, in-band history is the
monotone stamp sequence in H held at B, which remains
acyclic and monotone.
Closure at A (local). Upon receiving CompletionAck, A
transitions ACT_HOLD →ACT_DELIVER locally (soft-state).
V. DISCUSSION AND OPEN RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This section summarizes some key properties of the pro-
posed Distributed Dynamic Kernel and positions it with re-
spect to classical layering design. We distill how our proposal
achieves modularity, adaptability, and scalability, and how
9As design strategy the BSM outcome is sent to only one of the node and
not both.


--- Page 15 ---
15
TABLE III: Companion to Table I: Dynamic Kernel remedies to layering limitations
Layering Features / Assumptions
Layered Design Consequence
Distributed-Kernel Remedy
Vertical, static abstraction
boundaries between
functionalities
Layers operate independently and inter-layer dependen-
cies cannot be expressed. Local choices cannot safely
constrain remote behavior.
No layering design. Each hop computes a local PoA
and composes MPs/MePs at runtime. Resource/quality
guards are encoded in PoA edges and are consulted via
ISv(t). Stamps certify progress.
Each layer expects its own local descriptors, causing
inconsistency and overhead: state drifts as resources
evolve.
Single, authoritative in-band meta-header. Only com-
mitted actions append monotone stamps. No per-
layer replicas, no drift. Orthogonal reads keep control
quantum-native and non-perturbing.
No inherent adaptability to coherence budgets or
ephemeral resource availabilities.
PoA is rebuilt from (I, Stamps, ISv(t)) at every hop;
actions/MePs adapt to current resource availability and
policy.
Poor expression of multi-hop, stateful behaviors: cross-
layer sequences (e.g GEN→PURIFY→SWA) become
brittle or duplicated; retries/backoffs leak across layers.
Kernel composes MPs into MePs that encode the se-
quence. Thus retries/backoffs stay inside MePs. Only
terminal commits become stamps.
Functions/metadata duplicated to preserve layer auton-
omy, by hindering scalability.
Commit semantics and updates at action boundaries
eliminate duplication. Header growth is bounded by
committed actions only. No speculative futures in-band.
The stamp sequence is a compact, verifiable execution
trace. This assures scalability.
Technology evolution forces frequent interface changes.
Planner is MP-agnostic. The suite is invariant to
MP/MeP boundary shifts: functionality can collapse or
expand without changing header/stamp semantics.
Encapsulation as ordering
primitive
Encapsulation prescribes vertical order but cannot en-
code true dependencies (resource/quality guards) or
cross-hop constraints.
Order merges (i) locally from the PoA DAG and sched-
ule and (ii) globally from the stamp log, certifying
commits and inducing an acyclic partial order over
action commits (no speculative edges exported).
Inherently classical
control-plane
Continuous, network-wide updates to maintain a global
view scale poorly and incur latency. Thus assuring
correctness is costly and fragile.
No global view required. Monotone stamps form a
distributed commit log. A global DAG emerges from
local decisions. Optional EDC hints prune conservative
orderings.
The meta-header is an in-band control-field. Only ter-
minal outcomes are stamped, by providing rollback-free
failure handling. Classical signaling is used strictly for
essential needs (e.g., BSM bits).
processing order is enforced without fixed strata. A side-
by-side mapping from layering conflicts to our remedies is
provided in Table III, as a companion to Table I.
• Decoupling of Mechanism and Implementation: A core
tenet of the suite is the separation between mechanism
and implementation. The Planner is MP-agnostic, the
Executor maps actions to the available MP library, by
binding concrete parameters, and the Engine invokes
MPs. As a result, correctness and semantics – meta-
header and stamps – are invariant to where the MP/MeP
boundary is drawn and to future technological shifts
that may collapse/expand functionalities. This boundary
invariance preserves the suite across device generations,
while enabling implementation evolution behind stable
mechanisms.
• Modularity
via
Opaque
Primitives
and
Commit-
Atomicity:
Modularity
is
achieved
by
treating
MPs
as
opaque
primitives
with
explicit
pre/post-
conditions and timing/coherence guards. The Executor
composes MPs into MePs without depending on their
internals. The Engine enforces commit-only stamping:
header/payload/FT v
q (t) updates become visible at action
commit (or abort) boundaries. Retries/backoffs and
intra-action loops are contained within MePs and never
inflate the header. The stamp log thus becomes a
compact, verifiable execution trace made only of facts
that happened, not speculative steps.
• Adaptability and Scalability from Local PoA and In-Band
History: Unlike fixed layering that prescribes a vertical
order, the kernel computes a local PoA Dv = (Av, Ev)
from (I, Stamps, ISv(t)), adapting to current resource
availability, coherence budgets, and policy. Progress is
certified by monotone action-commit stamps transported
in-band in an orthogonal subspace of the quantum packet.
This eliminates per-layer duplication and removes the
need for global control-plane refresh after each quantum
step. Consequently, scalability follows from two princi-
ples: (i) local containment of control-flow and failures,
and (ii) minimal growth of the header, which increases
only with committed actions.
• Order by Certification Not by Prescription: In classical
layering, encapsulation and fixed interfaces prescribe a
vertical processing order. In the proposed suite, process-
ing order emerges from three complementary mecha-
nisms:
1) Local
enforcement.
The
Planner
Dv(t)
=
(Av(t), Ev(t)) and the Executor schedule enforce
intra-node sequencing, by honoring dependency


--- Page 16 ---
16
edges and resource/quality guards.
2) Commit boundaries. The Engine action bound-
aries (commit/abort) are the only points where
header/payload/FTq(t) changes take effect.
3) Global
propagation.
Monotone
action-commit
stamps
carried
in-band
are
the
authoritative,
minimal history that the next hop must respect.
They do not prescribe future steps, rather they
induce an emergent, network-wide partial order
D∗(t) over what has actually committed.
As a consequence, within a node order is given by Ev
and the scheduled MPs, while across nodes order is
the stamped commit-to-commit “happens-before”. Op-
tionally, EDC hints can prune view-induced serializations.
In a nutshell, while encapsulation enforces order by
prescription in fixed layering-based stacks, our design
enforces order by certification: local scheduling decides
what may run, stamps certify what did run, and sub-
sequent nodes must plan in ways consistent with that
certified history.
From the above, it emerges that the design: (i) decouples
mechanism from implementation via MP-agnostic planning
and commit semantics; (ii) preserves modularity through
opaque MPs and MePs; (iii) achieves adaptability by comput-
ing PoAs from local state and in-band history; and (iv) scales
by avoiding global synchronization and by bounding header
growth to committed actions.
A. Open Research Directions
While this work establishes a quantum-native organizational
principle for the Quantum Internet, several research directions
remain open for the community to explore and investigate.
Physical realization of the meta-header: In our proposal,
the meta-header is an architectural control abstraction and
is intentionally agnostic to any specific physical encoding.
Several realizable options exist [39]. For instance, orthogo-
nality between the meta-header and the payload subspaces
(required for non-perturbing access) can be implemented either
(i) by exploiting distinct degrees of freedom – e.g., time-
bin, frequency-bin, spatial-mode, or polarization – of optical
photons or (ii) by encoding control and payload into mutually
orthogonal subspaces within the same degree of freedom. A
systematic comparison of these alternatives is an interesting
research direction. Future work could quantify qubit/mode
overhead, control-field lifetime, error accumulation associated
with specific encoding choices and constraints. This thereby
will establish concrete trade-offs between architectural gener-
ality and encoding-specific choices.
Quantitative Cost Models: Complementary to the above
physical-realization direction, a second open direction is the
development of quantitative cost models. Specifically, while
as indicated in Sec. III-C the meta-header growth is architec-
turally bounded and semantically constrained by the number
of committed actions required by a service intent, translating
this bound into platform-specific overheads – e.g., number
of qubits/modes per stamp, encoding-dependent error rates,
and read/write latency – for different service classes requires
careful investigation in its own right. Such analysis would
yield explicit complexity relations linking service semantics –
number and type of action commits – to the physical footprint
of the resulting stamp sequence, and it would enable principled
comparisons across alternative encoding and implementation
choices. Importantly, any such cost model should respect
the architectural constraints of this work: meta-header and
payload must remain operationally decoupled, and commit-
atomic semantics must be preserved.
Simulation of the Dynamic Kernel: An important and
very interesting open-research direction is the systematic eval-
uation of the proposed organizational model on quantum net-
work simulators. In this perspective, we have already initiated
the development of a quantum network simulator explicitly
conceived to natively support Dynamic-Kernel–based protocol
composition, with preliminary results reported in [40]. Ex-
tending this simulator to incorporate the full kernel pipeline
– commit semantics, in-band meta-header evolution, MP/MeP
scheduling, resource-aware PoA construction, and stochastic
failure models – will enable quantitative assessment of per-
formance, scalability, and robustness under realistic network
dynamics. Such a simulator provides a controlled environment
to explore alternative encoding choices and derive service-
dependent cost models consistent with the commit-driven
design.
Experimental mapping on near-term testbeds: A com-
plementary research direction concerns the experimental in-
stantiation of the Dynamic Kernel abstractions onto near-term
quantum-network testbeds. Our ongoing effort on an in-house
photonic-entanglement Quantum Internet testbed aims at trans-
lating PoA construction, MP/MeP composition, and commit-
based meta-header processing into executable components
on photonic hardware. Experimental validation will provide
empirical insight into coherence-time budgeting, classical side-
channel reliability, end-to-end latency accumulation, and the
operational behavior of distributed commit semantics in non-
ideal regimes. Together, simulation and testbed investigations
constitute a substantial research program enabled by the ar-
chitectural foundation established in this work. And we hope
the broader community will engage with these efforts.
Standardization and Industrial Relevance: An open re-
search direction with direct industrial impact is how to trans-
late the proposed organizational principle into standardizable
abstractions [2], [5]. Moving from research prototypes to
production-scale Quantum Internet infrastructures will require
architectural primitives that remain stable under rapid hard-
ware evolution and heterogeneous vendor implementations.
In this perspective, the separation between mechanism (MP
semantics), composition (MePs), and certification (stamps
and commit semantics) positions the Dynamic Kernel as a
candidate foundation for future standardization efforts. Key
questions include, but are not limited to: (i) identifying a
minimal and extensible meta-header format; (ii) determining
which stamp fields are mandatory versus optional for each
service class; and (iii) defining verifiable conformance criteria
for commit semantics and in-band control invariants. Ad-
dressing these questions would enable interoperability across
platforms and vendors, foster ecosystem-level convergence,


--- Page 17 ---
17
and ultimately accelerate industrial adoption and technology
transfer.
Collectively, these directions illustrate that the present work
provides a foundational architectural layer. Its value lies not
only in replacing static layering, but in defining a coherent de-
sign space within which scalable, interoperable, and industri-
ally viable quantum networking systems can be systematically
engineered.
VI. CONCLUSION
Static layering, while historically successful in classical
networking, is structurally misaligned with the non-local and
stateful nature of entanglement. In a quantum network, local
actions at a node constrain remote possibilities, preventing
service progression from being cleanly decomposed into ver-
tically isolated strata. For this, we introduced a quantum-
native organizational principle based on dynamic composition.
Within the designed protocol suite, each node runs a Dynamic
Kernel that constructs a local PoA from the service intent,
accumulated commit stamps, and its internal state, and then
executes the currently feasible actions by composing micro-
protocols (MPs) into meta-protocols (MePs). Service progress
is certified through in-band, monotone action-commit records
carried in the meta-header, which collectively induce a dis-
tributed DAG of committed actions without requiring global
knowledge or network-wide synchronization. The proposed
principle enforces order by certification rather than prescrip-
tion: local scheduling determines what may run, commit
semantics determine what did run, and subsequent planning
must respect that certified history. Correctness is entirely local
and in-band, thereby preserving scalability, while performance
can optionally be enhanced via advisory control-plane hints
without changing protocol semantics. This commit-driven,
state-aware framework constitutes a necessary shift in protocol
organization for the Quantum Internet. It provides a hardware-
agnostic – yet operationally precise – foundation on which
simulators, experimental testbeds, and ultimately interopera-
ble standards can be built across heterogeneous platforms.
Hardware-agnostic organizational principles are essential to
withstand technology evolution. By separating mechanism
from implementation, and by remaining encoding-agnostic
while explicitly entanglement-state-aware, the proposed Dy-
namic Kernel offers a stable architectural framework for a
scalable and market-ready Quantum Internet.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Caleffi and A. S. Cacciapuoti, “Quantum Internet Architecture:
unlocking Quantum-Native Routing via Quantum Addressing,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, 2026. invited paper.
[2] A. S. Cacciapuoti, M. Caleffi, J. Illiano, and C. D. Risi, “Quantum-
Native Architectural Tenets and Philosophy for the Quantum Internet,”
Internet-Draft draft-cacciapuoti-qirg-quantum-native-architecture-00, In-
ternet Engineering Task Force, Nov. 2025. Work in Progress.
[3] A. S. Cacciapuoti, M. Caleffi, F. Tafuri, F. S. Cataliotti, S. Gherardini,
and G. Bianchi, “Quantum internet: Networking challenges in distributed
quantum computing,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 137–143, 2020.
[4] A. S. Cacciapuoti et al., “When entanglement meets classical communi-
cations: Quantum teleportation for the quantum internet,” IEEE Trans.
on Communications, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 3808–3833, 2020. invited paper.
[5] W. Kozlowski, S. Wehner, R. V. Meter, B. Rijsman, A. S. Cacciapuoti,
M. Caleffi, and S. Nagayama, “Architectural Principles for a Quantum
Internet.” RFC 9340, Mar. 2023.
[6] H. J. Kimble, “The quantum internet,” Nature, vol. 453, no. 7198,
pp. 1023–1030, 2008.
[7] R. Van Meter, Quantum Networking. Wiley-IEEE Press, 1st ed., 2014.
[8] W. D¨ur, R. Lamprecht, and S. Heusler, “Towards a quantum internet,”
European Journal of Physics, vol. 38, no. 4, p. 043001, 2017.
[9] A. S. Cacciapuoti, J. Illiano, and M. Caleffi, “Quantum internet address-
ing,” IEEE Network, 2023.
[10] C. Wang, A. Rahman, R. Li, M. Aelmans, and K. Chakraborty, “Appli-
cation Scenarios for the Quantum Internet.” RFC 9583, June 2024.
[11] J. Wu, T. Hu, and Q. Li, “Q-id: Lightweight quantum network server
identification through fingerprinting,” IEEE Network, vol. 38, no. 5,
2024.
[12] Z. Li, K. Xue, J. Li, L. Chen, R. Li, Z. Wang, N. Yu, D. S. L.
Wei, Q. Sun, and J. Lu, “Entanglement-assisted quantum networks:
Mechanics, enabling technologies, challenges, and research directions,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 4, 2023.
[13] M. Liu, J. Allcock, K. Cai, S. Zhang, and J. C. Lui, “Quantum networks
with multiple service providers: Transport layer protocols and research
opportunities,” IEEE Network, vol. 36, no. 5, 2022.
[14] C. Wang and A. Rahman, “Quantum-enabled 6g wireless networks:
Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29,
no. 1, 2022.
[15] J. Illiano, M. Caleffi, A. Manzalini, and A. S. Cacciapuoti, “Quantum
internet protocol stack: A comprehensive survey,” Computer Networks,
vol. 213, p. 109092, 2022.
[16] S. DiAdamo, B. Qi, G. Miller, R. Kompella, and A. Shabani, “Packet
switching in quantum networks: A path to the quantum internet,” Phys.
Rev. Res., vol. 4, Oct 2022.
[17] S. J. Ben Yoo, S. K. Singh, M. B. On, G. G¨ul, G. S. Kanter, R. Proietti,
and P. Kumar, “Quantum wrapper networking,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 62, 2024.
[18] F. Vista, D. Holme, and S. DiAdamo, “Quantum backbone networks
for hybrid quantum dataframe transmission,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 62, 2024.
[19] D. Krioukov, k. c. claffy, K. Fall, and A. Brady, “On compact routing
for the internet,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 37, p. 41–52,
jul 2007.
[20] R. Braden, T. Faber, and M. Handley, “From protocol stack to protocol
heap: role-based architecture,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol. 33, p. 17–22, Jan. 2003.
[21] V. Gazis, E. Patouni, N. Alonistioti, and L. Merakos, “A survey of
dynamically adaptable protocol stacks,” IEEE Communications Surveys
& Tutorials, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 3–23, 2010.
[22] Kreutz, Diego and Ramos, Fernando M. V. and Ver´ıssimo, Paulo
Esteves and Rothenberg, Christian Esteve and Azodolmolky, Siamak and
Uhlig, Steve, “Software-defined networking: A comprehensive survey,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 103, 2015.
[23] J. Day, Patterns in Network Architecture: A Return to Fundamentals.
Prentice Hall, 2008.
[24] R. Van Meter, T. D. Ladd, W. J. Munro, and K. Nemoto, “System
design for a long-line quantum repeater,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1002–1013, 2008.
[25] R. Van Meter, J. Touch, and C. Horsman, “Recursive quantum repeater
networks,” NII Journal, pp. 65–79, 2011.
[26] R. V. Meter and J. Touch, “Designing quantum repeater networks,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 64–71, 2013.
[27] T. Matsuo, C. Durand, and R. Van Meter, “Quantum link bootstrapping
using a ruleset-based communication protocol,” Phys. Rev. A, vol. 100,
p. 052320, Nov 2019.
[28] R. Van Meter et al., “A quantum internet architecture,” IEEE QCE22,
pp. 341–352, sep 2022.
[29] A. Dahlberg et al., “A link layer protocol for quantum networks,” in
Proc. of ACM SIGCOMM ’19, p. 159–173, 2019.
[30] W. Kozlowski and S. Wehner, “Towards large-scale quantum networks,”
in Proc. of ACM NANOCOM ’19, pp. 1–7, 2019.
[31] W. Kozlowski, A. Dahlberg, and S. Wehner, “Designing a quantum
network protocol,” in Proc. of the 16th International Conference on
emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies, pp. 1–16, 2020.
[32] M. Pompili et al., “Experimental demonstration of entanglement delivery
using a quantum network stack,” npj Quantum Information, 2022.
[33] A. Pirker and W. D¨ur, “A quantum network stack and protocols for
reliable entanglement-based networks,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 21,
p. 033003, mar 2019.


--- Page 18 ---
18
[34] J. Miguel-Ramiro et al., “Genuine quantum networks with superposed
tasks and addressing,” npj Quantum Inf, 2021.
[35] A. Pirker, B. Munoz, and W. D¨ur, “A resource-centric, task-based
approach to quantum network control,” 2025.
[36] F. Mazza, M. Caleffi, and A. S. Cacciapuoti, “Intra-QLAN Connectivity
via Graph States: Beyond the Physical Topology,” IEEE Transactions
on Network Science and Engineering, pp. 1–18, 2025.
[37] S.-Y. Chen, J. Illiano, A. S. Cacciapuoti, and M. Caleffi, “Entanglement-
based artificial topology: Neighboring remote network nodes,” IEEE
Open Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 6, pp. 2220–2238,
2025.
[38] K. Simonov, M. Caleffi, J. Illiano, J. Romero, and A. S. Cacciapuoti,
“Universal quantum computation via superposed orders of single-qubit
gates,” Phys. Rev. Res., Dec 2025.
[39] M. Caleffi, L. d’Avossa, X. Han, and A. Sara Cacciapuoti, “Quantum
transduction: Enabling quantum networking,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 28, 2026.
[40] A. Pearson, F. Mazza, M. Caleffi, and A. S. Cacciapuoti, “Q2NS:
A Modular Framework for Quantum Network Simulation in ns-3,”
to appear in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Quantum
Communications, Networking, and Computing (IEEE QCNC), 2026.
invited paper.
