--- Page 1 ---
DualPath: Breaking the Storage Bandwidth
Bottleneck in Agentic LLM Inference
Yongtong Wu1,3 Shaoyuan Chen2,3 Yinmin Zhong1,3 Rilin Huang1
Yixuan Tan3 Wentao Zhang3 Liyue Zhang3 Shangyan Zhou3 Yuxuan Liu3
Shunfeng Zhou3 Mingxing Zhang2 Xin Jin1 Panpan Huang3
1School of Computer Science, Peking University
2Tsinghua University
3DeepSeek-AI
ABSTRACT
The performance of multi-turn, agentic LLM inference is in-
creasingly dominated by KV-Cache storage I/O rather than
computation. In prevalent disaggregated architectures, load-
ing the massive KV-Cache from external storage creates a
fundamental imbalance: storage NICs on prefill engines be-
come bandwidth-saturated, while those on decoding engines
remain idle. This asymmetry severely constrains overall sys-
tem throughput.
We present DualPath, an inference system that breaks
this bottleneck by introducing dual-path KV-Cache loading.
Beyond the traditional storage-to-prefill path, DualPath en-
ables a novel storage-to-decode path, in which the KV-Cache
is loaded into decoding engines and then efficiently trans-
ferred to prefill engines via RDMA over the compute net-
work. DualPath combines this optimized data path — which
inherently avoids network congestion and avoids interfer-
ence with latency-critical model execution communications
— with a global scheduler that dynamically balances load
across prefill and decode engines.
Our evaluation on three models with production agentic
workloads demonstrates that DualPath improves offline in-
ference throughput by up to 1.87× on our in-house inference
system. It can also improve online serving throughput by an
average factor of 1.96× without violating SLO.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Models (LLMs) are rapidly evolving from
single-turn chatbots [16, 36] and standalone reasoners [36]
into agentic systems that can autonomously plan, invoke
tools, and solve real-world tasks through multi-turn interac-
tions [8, 24, 31, 45, 48]. In such settings, an LLM no longer
serves isolated prompts; instead, it participates in long-running
sessions where context accumulates over time [29]. As agen-
tic applications become increasingly prevalent, multi-turn
LLM inference has emerged as a critical workload in pro-
duction systems, ranging from coding assistants [47, 52] to
autonomous task agents [28, 59].
40% GPU util.
Prefill
KV Persistent Storage
100% util.
Decode
RDMA
Prefill
KV Persistent Storage
Decode
80% GPU util.
100% util.
400Gbps/node
8*400Gbps/node
Figure 1: Existing bottleneck (left) and DualPath (right).
This paradigm shift in applications has driven a significant
transformation in LLM inference workloads: from traditional
human-LLM interaction to human-LLM-environment inter-
action, called the agentic paradigm. The typical pattern of
human-model interaction involves users providing input,
engaging in a few rounds of interaction with the LLM, and
consuming the results generated by the LLM. By contrast,
an agentic LLM may interact with an external environment,
through tools such as a web browser and Python interpreter,
over dozens or even hundreds of turns. Although each in-
dividual tool call or feedback is short (often hundreds of
tokens), the context accumulates across turns and can grow
to extreme lengths. As a result, agentic workloads become
highly I/O-bound: the multi-turn, short-append pattern leads
to very high KV-Cache hit rates — typically ≥95% [7] —
making the efficiency of KV-Cache loading, rather than pure
computation, the dominant performance factor.
To improve throughput under agentic workloads, existing
LLM inference systems have converged on a common set
of architectural patterns: layer-wise prefill [17, 50], prefill–
decode (PD) disaggregation [37, 55, 58], and external KV-Cache
storage [18, 30, 38]. In these systems, prefill engines load the
KV-Cache in a layer-wise manner to accommodate as many
requests as possible within a single batch. When prefill com-
pletes, decoding engines typically receive KV-Cache from
prefill engines via a high-performance RDMA network. The
decoding engines then generate tokens and store their KV-
Cache in distributed storage to enable reuse across turns.
However, this architecture also introduces a critical limi-
tation. As shown in Figure 1, prefill engines must load large
arXiv:2602.21548v1  [cs.DC]  25 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
volumes of KV-Cache from remote storage. As a result, prefill-
side storage network bandwidth becomes the throughput bot-
tleneck of the entire system, even though decoding engines
often have substantial unused storage network bandwidth.
This imbalance reveals a fundamental inefficiency in ex-
isting designs: storage network bandwidth is unevenly uti-
lized across engines. The bandwidth of prefill engines are
persistently saturated, while decoding engines remain un-
derutilized. Simply provisioning more bandwidth to prefill
engines is costly and often impractical in general-purpose
clusters. Therefore, it is promising to exploit and combine
the available I/O bandwidth of all engines, rather than over-
loading prefill engines alone, to accelerate KV-Cache loading
for agentic LLM workloads.
Prior studies have attempted to alleviate the KV-Cache
loading bottleneck. Mooncake [38] caches KV-Cache in a
distributed DRAM pool and employs an affinity-aware sched-
uler to maximize the DRAM KV-Cache hit rate. However, it
cannot be used in memory-constrained scenarios, such as
the rollout phase in RL, where DRAM is occupied to hold
large training state that is offloaded from HBM. It is also not
cost-effective in scenarios with enormous working sets (e.g.,
online serving), considering the cost comparison between
DRAM and SSD. Other attempts reduce the amount of KV-
Cache data to retrieve [19] and reduce the retrieval overhead
[22, 51]. However, they do not solve the inherent inefficiency
caused by storage I/O imbalance between different engines.
In this paper, we present DualPath, a new LLM inference
system that rethinks KV-Cache loading in modern inference
architectures for agentic workloads. The key insight behind
DualPath is that KV-Cache loading does not have to be prefill-
centric. While existing systems always load KV-Cache di-
rectly from storage into prefill engines, they cannot utilize
the remote storage bandwidth of decoding engines. Dual-
Path leverages this observation by enabling dual-path KV-
Cache loading: in addition to the conventional storage-to-
prefill path, KV-Cache can be loaded into decoding engines
and then transferred to prefill engines via high-performance
RDMA. By dynamically selecting between these paths, Du-
alPath redistributes network load and alleviates prefill-side
bandwidth pressure.
Realizing this design raises two challenges. First, introduc-
ing an extra loading path introduces complex traffic patterns
and potential interference with collective primitives in model
execution, which can degrade overall performance if unman-
aged. Second, the system must decide online which loading
path to use under dynamic and heterogeneous workloads,
and ensure load balance across both GPUs and NICs simul-
taneously. To address these challenges, DualPath adopts (1)
an optimized dual-path loading data path design, which in-
troduces no inherent congestion under common P/D ratios,
(2) a NIC-centric traffic management approach to isolate KV-
Cache traffic from latency-sensitive model inference commu-
nications, and (3) a dynamic scheduling policy that jointly
balances computation and network utilization across prefill
and decoding engines.
We implement DualPath on top of a modern inference
stack and evaluate it using representative agentic workloads
with long contexts and high cache reuse. Experiments show
that DualPath significantly improves system throughput and
the first token latency, while maintaining the latency be-
tween tokens. In agentic inference scenarios, DualPath in-
creases end-to-end throughput by up to 1.87× for offline
inference, and improves the online serving throughput by
1.96× on average.
In summary, this paper makes three contributions:
• We identify the I/O-bound nature of multi-turn, agentic
LLM workloads and show that KV-Cache loading domi-
nates system performance under modern LLM inference
architectures.
• We present DualPath, an inference system that introduces
dual-path KV-Cache loading and leverages decoding-engine
bandwidth to resolve prefill-side bottlenecks.
• We design and evaluate a workload-aware scheduling al-
gorithm that dynamically balances computation and net-
work resources, significantly improving balance on realis-
tic workloads.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
LLM Inference Preliminary
LLM inference is becoming one of the most important sys-
tem workloads recently. Popular LLMs utilize decoder-only
transformer architecture, comprising stacked blocks with
attention layers and feed-forward networks (FFNs). Atten-
tion layers enable token interactions within requests, while
FFNs process tokens independently. The model predicts sub-
sequent tokens based on preceding ones, storing attention
keys and values as KV-Cache in HBM to avoid recomputa-
tions.
PD-disaggregated Inference. Prefill–decode (PD) disaggre-
gation [37, 58] separates the prefill phase from the decode
phase, assigning them to dedicated prefill engines (PEs) and
decode engines (DEs), respectively. The two phases exhibit
distinct compute and memory patterns: prefill is compute-
intensive and batched, while decode is memory-bound and
latency-sensitive. With PD disaggregation, PEs load the hit
KV-Cache and perform prefilling; then, they transfer the KV-
Cache to DEs, which perform autoregressive decoding. This
design reduces interference between phases, enables stage-
specific optimizations, and improves scalability, making it
2


--- Page 3 ---
context
> rm –rf /
generation
300 tokens 
output
append
Turn
Your task is …
> python ..
short output
…
30k tokens
30300 tokens prompt,  99% KV-Cache hit rate!
Figure 2: Agent trajectory example.
the de facto architecture for modern LLM serving. To sup-
port multi-turn conversations, the KV-Cache is often stored
in distributed storage for reuse across turns.
Layerwise Prefill. Long-context prefill is bottlenecked by
HBM capacity, as both activations and the KV-Cache for
the entire batch must reside within it, forcing limited batch
sizes and leading to poor GPU utilization. LayerKV [50] and
PrefillOnly [17] address this problem by exploiting the strong
locality in prefill computations: each layer requires only its
own layer-specific KV-Cache. Consequently, the KV-Cache
can be allocated and freed per layer, and the GPU holds only
one layer’s KV-Cache for the forward batch. This increases
the effective batch size (in tokens) by approximately a factor
equal to the number of layers, boosting prefill throughput.
2.2
Agentic Use of LLMs
LLMs increasingly power agentic applications that perform
multi-turn reasoning and interact with an environment (via
e.g., terminal commands, code execution, or asking for hu-
man feedback) over long sessions. As shown in Figure 2, in
a typical turn, the model receives a prompt composed by the
previous context plus some newly appended tokens (often
tool output or user input) and generates the next action or
response. A single agent run is a trajectory of dozens or even
hundreds of turns: the context grows turn-by-turn and can
reach up to one million tokens [4, 11]. Because most of the
context, typically >95% tokens in our traces, is reused across
rounds, the vast majority of tokens in each round can hit the
KV-Cache; only the newly appended context needs prefill
computation. Due to the extreme length of agent trajectories,
DRAM and HBM-based KV-Cache storage like Mooncake
[38] can only store a small proportion of KV-Caches, neces-
sitating the use of larger yet cheaper external SSD-based
KV-Cache storage [13].
The agentic LLM inference workload is also prevalent in
agent LLM training, which often adopts reinforcement learn-
ing (RL) approaches. In a typical RL training loop, the agent
LLM first undergoes a rollout phase, where it is prompted
to generate a large number of multi-step agent trajectories.
These trajectories are then scored by a separate reward model.
Finally, the LLM parameters are updated to increase the like-
lihood of high-scoring outputs and reduce the likelihood of
low-scoring ones. During the rollout phase, substantial data
(like reward model and optimizer states) is offloaded to host
DRAM, further constraining the available DRAM for KV-
Cache. This reinforces the need for external, high-capacity
KV-Cache storage that can accommodate long agentic rollout
contexts efficiently.
2.3
Modern AI Data Center Architecture
Modern AI data centers are purpose-built logical supercom-
puters engineered to handle large-scale generative AI train-
ing and inference workloads. For example, in a standard
NVIDIA DGX SuperPOD [32], each node is equipped with 8
Hopper GPUs interconnected via high-speed NVLink. Each
GPU is paired with a dedicated 400 Gbps compute NIC (CNIC,
also known as east-west NIC), which maximizes inter-node
communication bandwidth. Independent of the compute fab-
ric, each node also features a storage NIC (SNIC, also known
as south-north NIC) up to 400 Gbps, providing fast access to
datasets, model checkpoints, and on-disk KV cache.
A fundamental principle of this architecture is that the
compute network and the storage network are isolated from
each other [55]. This separation is essential to maximize
both storage and application performance. By isolating high-
intensity east-west compute traffic between GPUs from stor-
age traffic, the architecture prevents interference between
them, and drastically reduces compute communication la-
tency. This design also ensures that the inter-GPU communi-
cation remains highly reliable and predictable even when per-
forming data-intensive tasks such as reading large datasets
or writing multi-terabyte model checkpoints.
3
BOTTLENECK & MOTIVATION
We observe severe GPU underutilization during agentic infer-
ence tasks. Our investigation reveals that KV-Cache loading
speed is the bottleneck due to the limited bandwidth of the
single storage NIC on each node. Analysis demonstrates
that three decisive factors jointly cause this bottleneck, as
discussed below.
First, agentic workloads exhibit high KV-Cache hit rates,
which require more I/O and less computation, thus creating
a severe I/O bottleneck. Agentic workloads are naturally
long-context, short-append, and multi-turn. On each turn,
the GPU needs to read the KV-Cache of the entire context
from persistent storage and perform prefill computation
for appended tokens. Our trace collected from representa-
tive coding tasks shows the mean number of rounds is 157,
demonstrating the tendency of LLMs to engage in multi-turn
interactions. The average context length is 32.7k, while the
3


--- Page 4 ---
Table 1: Cache-compute ratio with append length 429, across
context lengths (16k–64k). KV-Cache data type defaults to
FP8 unless specified.
Model
GB/PFLOP (16K–64K)
Qwen2.5-32B [42] (FP16)
117-267
GPT-OSS-120B [35]
47–95
Qwen3-235B-A22B [43]
39–60
DeepSeek-V3.2 660B [16]
13–36
DeepSeek-V3 660B [15]
4.8–5.8
append length mean is only 429, which means a KV-Cache
hit rate of 98.7%. In such a scenario, the cache-compute ratio,
defined as the ratio of KV-Cache to load and the computation
needed, is approximately 22 GB/PFLOP for DeepSeek-V3.2
[16], posing a significant bottleneck on storage bandwidth.
Note that the KV-Cache size of DeepSeek MLA model is
already highly optimized; for models with larger KV-Cache
sizes (see Table 1), the situation is even worse. The ratio
of DeepSeek-V3.2 is higher than DeepSeek-V3 [15], benefit-
ing from its sparse attention design, lowering computation
demands.
Second, the hardware evolution trend is not well suited
for agentic inference workloads. In recent years, network
bandwidth and HBM capacity have lagged behind the growth
of GPU FLOPS, which drives us to run into memory and
communication walls under agentic workloads. As shown
in Figure 3, from NVIDIA Ampere to Blackwell, the I/O-
compute ratio decreases by 14.4×. Low NIC bandwidth limits
KV-Cache loading speed, making GPUs idle. In addition,
small HBM capacity limits the token batch size for GPU
kernels [10, 14, 27, 54] to compute at the same time, hindering
full utilization of compute units such as Tensor Core [17].
Third, existing LLM inference systems exhibit severe stor-
age network utilization imbalance across different engine
types. In prevalent PD-disaggregated systems, the KV-Cache
for hit tokens is loaded exclusively by prefill engines directly
from remote storage. This design centralizes all storage I/O
pressure on the prefill-side SNICs, while the SNICs on decode
engines remain largely idle. Consequently, the aggregate
storage network bandwidth cannot be fully harnessed.
The above analysis demonstrates that the fundamental per-
formance issue for agentic inference on PD-disaggregated ar-
chitecture is the high I/O demand for KV-Cache retrieval and
unbalanced storage network bandwidth utilization across
inference engines. Meanwhile, we observe that the network
traffic of the compute network, which has much larger ag-
gregate bandwidth than the storage network, exhibits an
intermittent pattern: collective operations used in model
inference burst in sub-millisecond intervals. Therefore, an
2020
2022
2024
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
Max Dense
FLOPS (PFLOPS)
GPU Compute: 28.8x
PCIe Bandwidth: 2.0x
GPU Memory: 2.4x
FLOPS
NIC
HBM
1
5
10
15
20
Batch Size
1x
2x
3x
4x
Relative Token Thput.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
HBM Capacity (GB)
0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
NIC Bandwidth (Tb/s)
Figure 3: Left: Hardware trends of NVIDIA GPUs. Right:
Relative token throughput with varying request batch size
(each request has 30K context with 300 tokens appended).
opportunity naturally emerges: we can utilize the SNIC band-
width of decode nodes to load KV-Cache from storage, and
transfer it back to the prefill nodes, utilizing the spare band-
width of the faster compute network.
4
DUALPATH SYSTEM OVERVIEW
To break the prefill-side storage I/O bottleneck, we propose
a dual-path loading architecture that fundamentally re-
thinks how KV-Cache is retrieved in PD-disaggregated infer-
ence. Based on this architecture, we design and implement
DualPath. DualPath adopts two widely-adopted techniques
demonstrated in §2: (1) PD Disaggregation [37, 58], which
separates prompt and decode processing for better efficiency.
(2) Layerwise prefill, which avoids HBM bottlenecks recog-
nized by LayerKV [50] and PrefillOnly [17] on prefill engines
and improves GPU utilization.
Our system consists of the following components:
• Inference Engines. Each engine manages one GPU. En-
gines are categorized into prefill engines (PEs) for prefill
and decoding engines (DEs) for decode.
• Traffic Manager (§5). Each engine contains a traffic man-
ager to conduct (1) Host-Device memory copies (H2D &
D2H), (2) KV-Cache transfers between PEs and DEs, and
(3) KV-Cache reads/writes from/to storage via the stor-
age NIC. We adopt a CNIC-centric traffic management
approach, detailed in §5, to prevent KV-Cache traffic from
affecting communications in model inference.
• Request Scheduler (§6). A central scheduler that receives
client requests and distributes them across engines. It is
also responsible for dynamically distributing data traffic
between two paths (Figure 4).
4.1
Dual-Path Loading
In addition to the conventional storage-to-prefill path, Du-
alPath introduces a novel storage-to-decode path, allowing
KV-Cache to be loaded first into a decode engine and then
transferred to the prefill engine via high-bandwidth RDMA
over the compute network. By dynamically distributing load
across both paths, the system aggregates the storage NIC
4


--- Page 5 ---
Prefill Engine
Persistent Storage
Hit KV-Cache Transfer: 
Prefill Engine
GPU
SNIC
CNIC
DRAM
node
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Layer Block
Full Block
Prefill Engine
Decoding Engine
GPU
SNIC
CNIC
DRAM
(7)
(9)
(8)
(a) PE Read Path
Prefill Engine
Persistent Storage
Prefill Engine
GPU
Prefill Engine
SNIC
CNIC
DRAM
Decoding Engine
GPU
SNIC
CNIC
DRAM
node
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Hit KV-Cache Transfer: 
Layer Block
Full Block
(b) DE Read Path
Figure 4: Dual-path loading illustration. The scheduler dynamically distributes data traffic between the two paths.
bandwidth of all engines — including otherwise-idle decode-
side NICs — and eliminates the asymmetric bandwidth satu-
ration that limits existing systems. This approach transforms
the storage I/O from a single-bottleneck resource into a glob-
ally pooled and schedulable capacity. The exact data flows
of the dual-path are described below.
To implement dual-path loading, DualPath allocates a
small amount of DRAM as buffers on each PE and DE, called
PE buffer and DE Buffer.
Prefill PE read path. First, the KV-Caches of hit tokens
are read from persistent storage into the PE buffer (as Label
1 and 2 shown in Figure 4a). Before the computation of an
attention layer, those KV-Caches of that layer are transferred
to PE HBM (3 and 4) to compute the KV-Cache of cache-miss
prompt tokens. Then, all KV-Caches of both hit and miss
tokens are transferred to the DE buffer to form the complete
prompt KV-Cache (5-7). This process (3-7) repeats 𝑛𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟
times. During the prefill forward pass, transfers overlap with
computation.
Prefill DE read path. The KV-Caches of hit tokens are first
read into DE buffer (as Label 1 and 2 shown in Figure 4b).
During PE prefill, KV-Cache for the corresponding layer is
read from the DE buffer, also overlapping with computation
(3-5). This process repeats 𝑛𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟times. After a layer’s com-
putation completes, only the KV-Caches of miss tokens are
transferred to DE buffer and merged with the existing hit
token KV-Cache.
Decode Phase. After receiving the complete prompt KV-
Cache in DE buffer (including loaded KV-Cache via PE read
path and the KV-Cache of newly appended tokens), the de-
code phase begins. The DE first allocates HBM and performs
host-to-device (H2D) transfers (Label 8 and 9 in Figure 4a;
Label 6 and 7 in Figure 4b), then releases CPU memory before
starting decode. The design of DE buffer imposes bandwidth
pressure on DRAM and CNIC (an extra H2D), which could
be avoided by directly bypassing it via GPU Direct RDMA.
However, since the generation length is typically short in
this scenario, time-to-first-token (TTFT) accounts for a non-
negligible portion of the total end-to-end request time. Intro-
ducing DE buffer helps reduce GPU memory usage. During
decode, whenever a full block of tokens (e.g., 64 tokens) is
accumulated, it is immediately persisted to disk.
Different Block Layouts. We adopt two different block
layouts: Full Block and Layer Block, which contain all lay-
ers and a single layer, respectively. Detailed layout can be
found in §A.5. For all interactions with storage, we adopt Full
Blocks. In the PE read case, KV-Cache loading to PE HBM
and transfer to DE Buffer occur in a layerwise streaming
fashion, both using Layer Blocks. Similarly, for the DE read
path, transfers from the DE Buffer to the PE HBM use Layer
Blocks.
4.2
Bottleneck-Free Analysis
We demonstrate that the system can fully saturate all stor-
age NICs without introducing compute-NIC or DRAM bot-
tlenecks, under most reasonable P/D ratios. We assume a
well-configured PCIe topology (each pair of GPU–NIC is
under the same PCIe switch), load-balanced task scheduling,
no congestion on the computation network, and that storage
read bandwidth is fully utilized.
Notation. Let 𝑃and 𝐷denote the number of prefill and
decode nodes, respectively. Each node has 𝑔GPUs, each with
one compute NIC of bandwidth 𝐵. The storage bandwidth
per machine is 𝑠× 𝐵(shared by all engines on that machine);
𝑀is the memory bandwidth per machine.
Traffic per PE-DE pair. We assume that the storage read
bandwidth is fully utilized and that task scheduling is load-
balanced. Under load balancing, storage NIC bandwidth is
evenly shared. The traffic per pair for the PE read path (all
steps in Figure 4a) is 𝑇𝑝= 𝐵𝑠/(𝐷𝑔2); for the DE read path
5


--- Page 6 ---
(Figure 4b) it is 𝑇𝑐= 𝐵𝑠/(𝑃𝑔2). Link traffic is the sum over
all pairs using that link.
PE CNIC Bandwidth Analysis. For PE CNIC, loopback
traffic (i.e., H2D and D2H that does not traverse switches)
exists, so the total traffic on the PCIe side is always greater
than or equal to the switch-direction traffic, regardless of
read or write operations. Therefore, we only need to compute
the pressure on the PCIe side. Read operations include PE
paths (3) and (5), with total traffic over all pairs:
2 ×𝑇𝑝× 𝐷𝑔= 2𝐵𝑠/𝑔≤𝐵
(1)
Since 𝑠≤𝑔always holds in practice, the read direction is
always bottleneck-free. Write operations include PE path (4)
and DE path (5), with total traffic:
(𝑇𝑝+𝑇𝑐) × 𝐷𝑔= 𝐵𝑠/𝑔× (1 + 𝐷/𝑃) ≤𝐵
(2)
Then, we obtain:
𝑃/𝐷≥
𝑠
𝑔−𝑠
(3)
DE CNIC Bandwidth Analysis. For DE CNIC, read opera-
tions include PE path 8 and DE paths 3/6, with traffic:
(𝑇𝑝+𝑇𝑐× 2) × 𝑃𝑔= 𝑠/𝑔× (𝑃/𝐷+ 2) × 𝐵≤𝐵
(4)
Then, we obtain:
𝑃/𝐷≤𝑔−2𝑠
𝑠
(5)
Write operations include PE paths 7/9 and DE path 7, with
traffic:
(2𝑇𝑝+𝑇𝑐) × 𝑃𝑔≤𝐵
(6)
This implies:
𝑃/𝐷≤𝑔−𝑠
2𝑠
(7)
DRAM Pressure Analysis. DRAM is half-duplex, so we
sum the read and write pressures. For PE MEM, the pressure
is 2𝑠𝐵, which generally does not exceed memory bandwidth.
For DE MEM, following the similar analysis above, we can
get the pressure is (3 + 2𝑃/𝐷)𝐵𝑠. Requiring the DE MEM
pressure to be less than or equal to 𝑀, we obtain:
𝑃/𝐷≤𝑀/𝐵𝑠−3
2
(8)
Summary. Combining all the above analyses, we have:
𝑠
𝑔−𝑠≤𝑃/𝐷≤min
𝑔−2𝑠
𝑠
, 𝑔−𝑠
2𝑠, 𝑀/𝐵𝑠−3
2

.
(9)
For (𝑔= 8,𝑠= 1) with 𝑀≈500 GB/s and 𝐵𝑠≈50 GB/s, the
bottleneck-free range is 1
7 ≤P/D ≤7
2, which covers most
practical configurations.
4.3
Practical Challenges
The dual-path architecture fundamentally reorients data
movement: KV-Cache can be loaded either directly from
storage into prefill engines or indirectly via decode engines,
thereby aggregating storage bandwidth across all engines
and breaking the prefill-side I/O bottleneck. However, real-
izing this high-level design in a practical system introduces
three interrelated challenges. We briefly outline these chal-
lenges below and refer the reader to the corresponding sec-
tions for details.
Fine-grained data transfer (§5). The layer-wise execu-
tion paradigm, while essential for overcoming HBM capacity
limits, fragments the KV-Cache into numerous fine-grained
blocks [37]. Transferring this multitude of fine-grained data
chunks between storage, host DRAM, and GPU HBM must
incur minimal overhead and seamlessly overlap with com-
putation to realize throughput gains.
Traffic isolation (§5). The complex data path in DualPath
introduces additional KV-Cache transfer traffic on both the
compute network and PCIe links. A primary concern is that
this traffic may interfere with existing latency-sensitive col-
lective communication operations essential for model ex-
ecution — such as AllToAll in expert parallel [56] and Re-
duceScatter/AllGather in tensor/context parallel. Since these
collective communications are critical to end-to-end infer-
ence latency, a key challenge lies in exploiting spare I/O
bandwidth without degrading model inference performance.
Dynamic load balancing (§6). As we are adopting two dif-
ferent paths for KV-cache loading, the system must promptly
decide which path to use for each request. A naive policy
could overload one path, recreating the original bottleneck.
The traffic scheduler must balance multiple factors in real-
time: storage NIC queue lengths, computational load on
GPUs, and request workload characteristics.
5
CNIC-CENTRIC TRAFFIC MANAGER
Modern LLM inference systems employ a range of advanced
data transfer technologies — such as on-chip CUDA copy en-
gine and GPUDirect Storage [34] — to move data efficiently
between storage, host memory, and GPU HBM. However,
all these mechanisms can interfere with latency-sensitive
collective communications (e.g., EP AllToAll) during model
execution. This arises for two primary reasons: (1) such
transfer technologies often operate over separate paths that
do not share the same QoS controls as the compute net-
work, and (2) existing GPUs do not support PCIe QoS [39],
making it difficult to shield model inference communication
from other traffic contending for PCIe bandwidth. Addition-
ally, because the collective communications occur in rapid,
sub-millisecond-level bursts, it is impractical to rely on a
6


--- Page 7 ---
software-based traffic shaper to interleave lower-priority I/O
operations between these high-priority traffic windows.
To address this, we propose a CNIC–centric data trans-
fer approach which is widely adopted in our production
deployment: all data traffic in or out of a GPU, including lo-
cal H2D/D2H copy, must go through the GPU’s paired CNIC
with a GPUDirect RDMA [33] data path. By consolidating
all traffic onto the compute network, we can leverage the
native QoS capabilities of compute network to enforce strict
traffic differentiation.
5.1
Traffic Isolation
For the InfiniBand-based network, we leverage virtual lanes
(VLs) [5] to enforce isolation between different traffic classes.
All model inference communication traffic is assigned to a
dedicated high-priority VL, while all other traffic, including
KV-Cache transfer, is mapped to a separate low-priority VL.
We configure the VL arbiters of all network switches and
NICs with a weighted round-robin policy that reserves ap-
proximately 99% of total bandwidth to high-priority VL. The
remaining bandwidth is allocated to the low-priority VL to
prevent starvation. This configuration ensures that model
execution traffic is virtually unaffected by KV-cache trans-
fers, while still allowing KV-cache traffic to opportunistically
utilize otherwise idle bandwidth in the compute network.
Detailed configurations are described in §A.1.
Although our experiments are conducted on an InfiniBand-
based network, the same design principles naturally extend
to other interconnect technologies. DualPath can be deployed
on RDMA over Converged Ethernet (RoCE) by leveraging
Traffic Class (TC) and Differentiated Services Code Point
(DSCP) markings [6, 20] in conjunction with hardware packet
queues. Emerging technologies such as UnifiedBus [1] and
Ultra Ethernet [9] are likewise converging on QoS mecha-
nisms for heterogeneous traffic, which can directly support
the requirements of DualPath.
5.2
CNIC-Assisted KV-Cache Copy
Existing GPU data transfer technologies include GPUDirect
Storage [34], which loads KV-Cache from storage backend
to GPU HBM, and CUDA copy engine, which directly copies
host DRAM to GPU via PCIe. However, these methods fail to
isolate KV-Cache traffic from high-priority latency-sensitive
collective communications in model execution, severely de-
grading inference performance.
To solve the limitations of existing approaches, we adopt
a CNIC-assisted H2D/D2H data path. For KV-Cache loading,
we first read the KV-Cache into host DRAM from the stor-
age backend. Then, we submit an RDMA Write request to
the GPU’s paired CNIC to perform local H2D copy. Storing
newly generated KV-Cache follows a symmetric process: it
is first transferred to host DRAM via CNIC, then persisted to
the storage backend over the storage network. This design
establishes the CNIC as the central QoS scheduler for all GPU
PCIe traffic, allowing its VL arbiter to prioritize the inference
communication traffic and perform KV-Cache transfer using
spare PCIe bandwidth.
Although this approach may appear to take a detour com-
pared to GPUDirect Storage (which directly reads KV-Cache
to GPU HBM) and CUDA copy engine (which directly copies
host memory to GPU HBM), to our best knowledge, this
is currently the only practical method to ensure that KV-
Cache load/store does not degrade the performance of critical
model–execution communication.
We also observe that CNIC-assisted H2D and D2H outper-
form the CUDA copy engine when handling a large number
of small data chunks. Our measurements show that submit-
ting a single copy operation via cudaMemcpyAsync incurs a
latency overhead of approximately 5-7𝜇𝑠. We failed to further
break down this overhead due to the closed-source nature
of CUDA driver. In contrast, submitting one RDMA Write
work request involves only a few mmio writes to NIC regis-
ters in user space and takes only around 1𝜇𝑠. Furthermore,
the RDMA work submission overhead can be significantly
amortized by leveraging doorbell batching [25].
6
ADAPTIVE REQUEST SCHEDULER
Although our theoretical analysis shows promising results,
imbalanced load reduces hardware utilization, and in this
scenario, we need to consider two dimensions of balance
simultaneously: (1) NIC traffic, and (2) the utilization balance
of GPUs. We divide scheduling into two levels: inter-engine
scheduling, which assigns requests to a (PE, DE) pair and
selects the read path (PE or DE) for each request; and intra-
engine scheduling, which determines which requests are
included in each forward batch for computation.
6.1
Inter-Engine Scheduling
We organize engines into groups to reduce the scheduler
pressure. Only the engine rank 0, called Leader Engine, in-
teracts with the scheduler. All engines of a group are all PEs
or all DEs. All engines on one node are guaranteed to be in
the same group. All engines in one group proactively fetch
tasks together regularly. When fetching new requests, each
engine 𝑒reports (1) 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑒, the number of requests assigned
to it that have not yet completed; (2) the total token count
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒over those 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑒requests; and (3) the disk reading queue
length 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒) of the node 𝑛(𝑒) that engine 𝑒belongs to.
GPU load, disk read load, and network load are all strongly
correlated with token count. We therefore use token count
as a proxy and aim to balance it across engines.
7


--- Page 8 ---
read queue
overload {
best!
𝛽
Reading queue
Candidate 
but long
read queue
}
α
also
candidate
𝑡𝑜𝑘!
node
𝛽
α
Figure 5: An illustration of Inter-Engine PE Scheduling.
All eight GPUs are in the same PE engine group and the
scheduler will choose the best.
PE Scheduling. All requests arriving at the scheduler en-
ter a waiting queue and are scheduled in a FIFO order. The
scheduling algorithm is invoked when a PE group initiates a
fetch request. An illustration of the inter-engine scheduling
process is shown in Figure 5. We define two constants, short
reading queue threshold 𝛼, and unfinished token upper limit
𝛽, measured in tokens. All engines are split into three cate-
gories: (1) overloaded engines where 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒> 𝛽; (2) engines on
nodes with short disk reading queues where 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒) ≤𝛼
and 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒≤𝛽; and (3) engines on nodes with longer disk read-
ing queues where 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒) > 𝛼and 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒≤𝛽. We do not
assign new requests to overloaded engines. Second-category
engines are prioritized over third-category engines because
they reside on nodes with shorter disk reading queues, and
lack of subsequent requests would easily lead to storage NIC
underutilization.
We assign the current request to the PE with minimum
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒in the second category if non-empty, otherwise in the
third category if non-empty. After assignment, we update
the selected PE’s 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒, then proceed to the next request in the
waiting queue. If both categories are empty, we terminate
this fetch request and return the already-assigned requests
to the Leader Engine.
DE Scheduling Phase 1: across groups. DE scheduling
is two-level and does not preserve global FIFO. There is a
global waiting queue and a private queue per DE engine
group. Incoming requests first enter the global queue. When
a DE group fetches, group-level scheduling drains the global
queue and assigns each request to the group whose total
𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒(sum over its engines) is minimum; this balances token
count across groups and thus NIC and GPU load.
DE Scheduling Phase 2: within a group. Then we cal-
culate the sum of remaining HBM for all DEs in the group
and traverse from the head of the private queue to calculate
how many requests can be scheduled assuming no HBM
fragmentation. These requests form the set 𝑅. It is an upper
bound that can be scheduled. Then, we calculate a high token
threshold 𝑍= 1.05 × (Í
𝑟∈𝑅𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑟+ Í
𝑒∈𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒)/|𝐸|.
Next, we try to pop the head of private queue and schedule
it to a DE. Among DEs with sufficient remaining HBM for the
Algorithm 1: Inter-PE Scheduling Algorithm
Data: Waiting queue 𝑄, PE group 𝐺𝑃𝐸, load metrics
(𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒),𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒) reported by each engine 𝑒,
where 𝑛(𝑒) denotes the node that engine 𝑒
belongs to, constants 𝛼and 𝛽
Result: Assigned requests to PEs
Each engine 𝑒reports (𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒),𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒);
Classify all PEs into three categories:;
𝐶1 ←{𝑒∈𝐺𝑃𝐸: 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒> 𝛽};
𝐶2 ←{𝑒∈𝐺𝑃𝐸: 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒) ≤𝛼∧𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒≤𝛽};
𝐶3 ←{𝑒∈𝐺𝑃𝐸: 𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑_𝑞𝑛(𝑒) > 𝛼∧𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒≤𝛽};
while 𝑄is not empty do
𝑟←head of 𝑄;
if 𝐶2 ≠∅then
𝑝𝑒∗←arg min𝑒∈𝐶2 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒;
else
if 𝐶3 ≠∅then
𝑝𝑒∗←arg min𝑒∈𝐶3 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒;
else
Terminate this fetch request;
Return assigned requests to Leader
Engine;
break;
end
end
Assign request 𝑟to PE 𝑝𝑒∗;
Update 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑝𝑒∗←𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑝𝑒∗+ tokens(𝑟);
Remove 𝑟from 𝑄;
end
request, we partition into (1) high-token DEs, where 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒+
len(𝑟) > 𝑍, and (2) the rest. We prefer category (2) to keep
token count balanced; category (1) DEs already have higher
GPU and NIC pressure. Within category (2) we choose the DE
with minimum 𝑠𝑒𝑞𝑒to balance request count; if category (2)
is empty we choose the DE with minimum 𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒in category
(1) to reduce HBM exhaustion and preemption risk. If no
DE has sufficient HBM, the fetch ends and already-assigned
requests are returned.
KV-Cache Read Task Scheduling. After selecting PE and
DE for a request, we choose to read on the side with the
shorter reading queue. It is probably better to split the request
into two parts and read them from both sides, and we leave
it as future work.
6.2
Intra-Engine Scheduling
Only PEs require intra-engine scheduling, as DEs always
place all requests into the forward batch. An illustration of
8


--- Page 9 ---
Parallel group
Chunked
prefill
Request scheduled
Queuing Request
Compute Quota
sync
Bubble!
Compute 
Quota
Attention
FFN
Profile
Timeline
ours
original
Figure 6: Intra-Engine Schedule. Left: compute-quota-based
batch selection. Right: GPU timeline before and after apply-
ing compute quota.
the intra-engine scheduling process is shown in Figure 6.
Data parallelism is widely adopted for attention layers, espe-
cially for MLA models. Under such a parallel configuration,
each GPU serves a different set of requests. It may lead to
workload imbalance among all GPUs that must synchronize
after the attention stage and enter the FFN stage together,
causing GPU bubbles waiting for other peers. Therefore, we
need to make sure they have similar attention layer execution
times to minimize the waiting bubbles.
Layer Time Estimation. We use FIFO packing to decide
how many requests to include in a forward batch. Each re-
quest in a forward batch is described by a pair (𝑐𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑,𝑏𝑠𝑧),
where𝑐𝑎𝑐ℎ𝑒𝑑is the number of tokens with KV-Cache already
available (from storage hits or previous forward passes), and
𝑏𝑠𝑧is the number of tokens requiring KV-Cache computa-
tion in this forward batch. From these pairs, we compute the
total theoretical computation for the attention layer and esti-
mate its execution time. The relationship between theoretical
computation and wall-clock time depends on hardware and
parallel configuration, and can be fitted in advance through
profiling as previous works [17] and [2].
Algorithm. We keep adding requests in FIFO order as long as
the predicted attention layer execution time does not exceed
a predefined upper bound, called the compute quota. If adding
a request would exceed this bound, we perform binary search
on 𝑏𝑠𝑧to find a smaller 𝑏𝑠𝑧′ to fit in the remaining compute
quota and perform chunked prefill for that request.
7
EVALUATION
7.1
Implementation
We implement DualPath based on our in-house inference
framework. For CUDA kernels, our in-house framework
adopt the combination of FlashMLA [27], DeepGEMM [14],
and DeepEP [56], which aligns with the current mainstream
open-source framework [26, 57]. The DualPath implemen-
tation involves approximately 5K lines of modifications on
Table 2: Statistics of agent trace datasets.
MaxLen
Turns
Append
Gen
Total
Context
32K
60
608
148
28639
17183
48K
106
474
172
42607
25120
64K
157
429
176
55958
32721
top of it. We adopt 3FS [13] as distributed storage and use
an io_uring-like interface for kernel bypass.
7.2
Experimental Setup
Testbed. We conduct our experiments on a cluster of GPU
servers with InfiniBand interconnection. Each server has 8
NVIDIA Hopper GPUs and dual processors. Additionally,
each node is provisioned with eight 400Gbps RDMA NICs
connected to InfiniBand network and one additional storage
NIC connected to 3FS. The computation and storage net-
works are physically isolated. Our cluster-wide 3FS has no
internal DRAM cache and can saturate the 400Gbps band-
width of the storage NIC.
Models. We evaluate on three models: (1) DeepSeek V3.2
[16] 660B, an MoE model with DeepSeek Sparse Attention,
denoted as DS 660B, (2) a 27B downscaled version of DS 660B,
denoted as DS 27B, and (3) Qwen2.5-32B [42], a dense model
with GQA, denoted as Qwen 32B. DS 660B and Qwen 32B cor-
respond to the publicly released checkpoint on HuggingFace.
DS 27B is our internal experimental model with a similar
architecture to DS 660B. Detailed specifications are provided
in §A.2.
Datasets. We collected three agent trace datasets from our
production agentic RL training workloads with varying max-
imum context lengths (MaxLen). Each dataset contains 500
trajectories. The average interaction turns (Turns), average
appended and generated tokens per turn (Append and Gen),
average number of total tokens (Total), and average number
of context tokens (Context) are summarized in Table 2.
Baselines. We compare DualPath, denoted as Ours, against
the following baselines:
• SGL(MC): SGLang [57] (commit 19089aa) with HiCache
[40], Mooncake [38] Store enabled and 3FS as the storage
backend, and Mooncake Transfer Engine for prefill-decode
disaggregation. We did not run SGL(MC) for DS 27B be-
cause SGLang lacks support for this downscaled version.
• Basic: Our unmodified internal inference framework (de-
tailed in §7.1). Comparing DualPath and SGL(MC) is unfair
due to implementation differences. Therefore, we only re-
port performance improvements from Basic to Ours.
• Oracle: Based on DualPath, we bypass all disk reads, D2H
& H2D transfers, and inter-PD KV-Cache transfers. This
9


--- Page 10 ---
3250
3500
3750
Max Agent Len = 32k
512
1024
2048
4096
0
1000
2000
JCT (s)
7000
8000
Max Agent Len = 48k
512
1024
2048
4096
0
2000
4000
16000
18000
Max Agent Len = 64k
512
1024
2048
4096
0
5000
10000
14000
16000
512
1024
2048
4096
0
2000
4000
JCT (s)
  N/A
20000
22500
512
1024
2048
4096
0
5000
10000
  N/A
17500
20000
512
1024
2048
4096
0
5000
10000
  N/A
  N/A
5000
5500
128
256
512
Number of Agents
0
2000
4000
JCT (s)
  N/A
16000
18000
128
256
512
Number of Agents
0
5000
10000
  N/A
5500
6000
6500
32
64
128
Number of Agents
0
2000
4000
Ours(oracle)
Ours
Ours(basic)
SGL(MC)
Figure 7: Offline inference performance under varying numbers of agents and maximum agent context lengths. Top: DS 27B.
Middle: DS 660B. Bottom: Qwen 32B. N/A for running into an error before finishing.
configuration represents the theoretical performance up-
per bound assuming zero I/O overhead.
P/D Ratio and Parallelism. We default to 2P4D for DS
660B, 1P2D for Qwen 32B, and 1P1D for DS 27B (where
1P1D means one node for each side). For DS models, we use
EP and DP. For Qwen 32B, we use DP only in DualPath, while
SGL(MC) uses TP=8 since DP attention is not supported for
this model in SGLang. Detailed configuration is provided in
§A.4.
Metrics. For offline inference scenarios, we measure job
completion time (JCT) for the entire task. For online serving
scenarios, we measure TTFT, TTST (Time to the second
token), and TPOT.
7.3
Offline Batch Inference
This section evaluates throughput performance in offline
batch inference, which is the case of the rollout phase in RL
training. In this scenario, 𝑛agents start to rollout simulta-
neously, and we measure the JCT when all requests have
finished.
Varying Agents Batch Size & Max Agent Length (MAL).
DualPath benefits more from larger batch sizes and longer
MALs. Figure 7 reports JCT under different batch sizes and
MALs. SGL(MC) encountered errors in our setup and failed to
complete some large configurations (marked as N/A). On DS
660B, DualPath achieves up to 1.87× over Basic, and demon-
strates performance with Oracle, indicating that KV-cache
I/O is largely eliminated. On DS 27B, DualPath improves over
Basic by up to 1.78× but remains 1.09–1.85× slower than
Oracle due to limited storage bandwidth in 1P1D (Figure 8).
For Qwen 32B, it shows similar trends as DS 27B.
Varying Append Length & Generation Length. DualPath
has more advantages when append and generation tokens are
short. Longer append lengths imply greater GPU compute
pressure, and longer generation lengths lower KV-Cache
loading pressure due to larger prefill gap time. To investigate
the impact of this factor, we scale each round’s append length
by a constant factor, and then truncate the whole trajectory
at given MAL. The same holds for generation length. As
shown in Figure 9, with append length increases, Basic per-
formance gradually approaches DualPath and Oracle, while
10


--- Page 11 ---
512
1024
2048
#Agents
 Max Agent Len = 32k
0
500
1000
1500
JCT (s)
512
1024
2048
#Agents
 Max Agent Len = 48k
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
512
1024
2048
#Agents
 Max Agent Len = 64k
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Ours
Ours(basic)
1p1d
1p2d
2p1d
Figure 8: Impact of prefill-decode ratio on offline inference performance (DS 27B).
x1
x1.5
x2
x3
Append Scale
0
2000
4000
JCT (s)
x1
x1.5
x2
x3
Gen Scale
0
2000
4000
JCT (s)
Ours(oracle)
Ours
Ours(basic)
Figure 9: Left: varying append lengths (DS 660B, 64K context,
1024 agents). Right: varying generation lengths (DS 660B,
64K, 1024 agents)
DualPath and Oracle performance changes only slightly, in-
dicating that the bottleneck consistently lies in GPU compute
pressure. Compared to Basic, DualPath achieves 1.82−1.99×
speedup at different append scales. The trend for generation
length scaling is similar.
Varying Prefill-Decode Ratio. Across all ratios, DualPath
demonstrates substantial performance gains compared to
Basic. We conduct rollout experiments on DS 27B with 1P1D,
2P1D, and 1P2D prefill-decode ratios to characterize the im-
pact of resource allocation between prefill and decode stages
on overall system performance. As shown in Figure 8, Dual-
Path achieves an average speedup of 1.64× across all config-
urations (up to 2.46×). Basic 1P1D and Basic 1P2D perform
comparably; so do DualPath 1P1D and Basic 2P1D, as well
as DualPath 2P1D and DualPath 1P2D. This occurs because
each pair of systems has equivalent available storage band-
width (Basic can only use prefill node storage bandwidth,
while DualPath can utilize all nodes), which confirms that
storage bandwidth is the dominant bottleneck in agentic
scenarios.
7.4
Online Serving
Methodology. We evaluate system latency characteristics
under varying agent arrival rates per second (APS). Agents
arrive according to a Poisson process at a specified rate,
with each agent commencing replay from round zero to its
last round upon arrival. For our experiments, the SLO is set
as TTFT ≤4 seconds and TPOT ≤50ms. In the TPOT and
TTST figures, data points exceeding the SLO threshold are
omitted. Experiment termination is triggered when either:
(1) TTFT exceeds 4 seconds, or (2) the system reaches steady
state, defined as TTFT variation within a 150-second sliding
window remaining below 5% compared to that 30 minutes
prior.
As shown in Figure 10, DualPath achieves higher APS
capacity than Basic (1.67× for DS 27B, 2.25× for DS 660B).
DualPath’s TTST is comparable to Basic, while TPOT shows
that DualPath does not introduce additional decoding over-
head compared to Basic. SGL(MC) exhibits anomalously low
TTST, likely due to implementation issues where the first two
tokens arrive at the client almost simultaneously. For DS 27B,
all metrics exhibit trends similar to DS 660B. However, both
Basic and DualPath show significantly higher TPOT than
Oracle, suggesting the overhead of basic P-D transferring
is considerable in small model cases. We leave it as future
work.
Average JCT for both models are presented in Figure 11.
A detailed analysis of working set implications is discussed
in §8. As shown in Figure 12 (left), DualPath maintains sta-
ble TTFT components across different APS, while Basic’s
queuing time grows dramatically due to insufficient storage
bandwidth.
7.5
Ablation Study
We conduct an ablation study to quantify the contribution
of each technical component in DualPath. Experiments are
performed under the offline inference setting with 64K MAL
and agent batch size 1024 and 2048. The differences between
Basic and Ours are grouped into three techniques: layerwise
prefill, dual-path loading, and scheduling algorithm. We add
the techniques gradually to demonstrate individual contri-
bution. As shown in Figure 12, compared to Basic, adding
layerwise prefill reduces JCT by 17.21% on average, allevi-
ating PE HBM bottlenecks and hiding transfer overhead.
Adding Dual-path loading on top of layerwise prefill delivers
11


--- Page 12 ---
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.75
0
1
2
TTFT (seconds)
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.75
0.1
0.2
TTST (seconds)
0.25
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.75
0.01
0.02
TPOT (seconds)
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
APS
0
2
4
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
APS
0.0
0.5
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.55
APS
0.03
0.04
0.05
Ours(basic)
Ours
Ours(oracle)
SGL(MC)
Figure 10: TTFT, TTST, and TPOT as functions of agent arrival rate (APS). Shadow means the fluctuation in the last 150s
before experiments finish. Top: DS 27B, Bottom: DS 660B.
0.01
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
APS
0
500
1000
1500
Avg. JCT (s)
660B
27B
Ours(basic)
Ours
Ours(oracle)
SGL(MC)
Figure 11: Average completion time of all trajectories versus
arrival rate for online serving.
0%
25%
50%
75%
100%
Percentage (%)
0.15
0.2
APS
0.25
Basic
+Layer
+DPL
+Sched
0
5000
10000
JCT (s)
1024 agents
2048 agents
Sch.
A.
R.
PF.
Figure 12: Left (§7.4): TTFT breakdown for online serving
(DS 660B) across APSs, Sch. for scheduling, A. for allocating,
R. for reading KV-cache, PF. for prefill. In each pair of pillars,
the first is for DualPath and the second is for Basic. Right
(§7.5): Offline inference ablation results (DS 660B, 64K context
length). Layer, DPL, Sched stands for Layerwise prefill, Dual-
Path Loading, and scheduling, respectively.
the primary performance gains, reducing JCT by 38.19% on
average compared to Basic, as it enables requests to read
KV-Cache from either PE or DE, fully utilizing distributed
storage bandwidth. Finally, employing our scheduling al-
gorithm on top of dual-path loading to decide KV-Cache
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
Time (seconds)
1.0
1.5
Max/Avg Ratio
1.184
1.528
Ours
Ours w/o scheduling
Figure 13: Load balance of storage NICs traffic
0
20
40
Relative Time in Task (%)
 #Agents = 512
1.0
1.5
2.0
Attn. Time Max/Avg
0
20
40
Relative Time in Task (%)
 #Agents = 1024
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Ours
Ours w/o scheduling
Figure 14: Load balance of attention execution time.
loading paths achieves the best performance, reducing JCT
by 45.62% compared to Basic, demonstrating the effective-
ness of load-balanced scheduling across storage NICs.
Load Balance. DualPath’s scheduling algorithm improves
load balance for both storage NICs and attention layer ex-
ecution times. For storage NICs, our scheduling algorithm
improves load balance from 1.53 to 1.18 compared to round
robin scheduling (Figure 13). For attention layers, DualPath
maintains the Max/Avg ratio as low as 1.06 during the first
5% of the task, reducing GPU idle bubbles (Figure 14). The
storage NIC metric is the ratio of maximum to average traffic
across all storage NICs on three machines within a small time
window, where 1.0 represents perfect balance. The attention
12


--- Page 13 ---
Table 3: Large-scale experiment results.
Setting
JCT
TTFT TTST TPOT
Offline
2P4D, 2K agents
3,167s
–
–
–
48P96D, 48K agents 3,201s
–
–
–
Online
2P4D, 0.4 APS
–
1.739s 0.228s 0.039s
44P88D, 8.8 APS
–
1.847s 0.194s 0.036s
0
1000
2000
3000
Time (seconds)
0
2
4
6
Prompt TPS
1e7
Prompt TPS
TTFT
Running agents
0
10
20
TTFT (s)
0
20000
40000
Running Agents
Figure 15: 48P96D offline inference metrics. 1e7 is the scal-
ing factor of Prompt TPS.
layer metric is calculated among all GPUs in an expert paral-
lel group for each forward. As the task progresses, both ratios
become meaningless due to underloaded system. Therefore,
we do not show the tail phase of the workload.
7.6
Large-Scale Scalability
We conduct both offline and online experiments using up
to 1,152 GPUs to demonstrate production-level scalability
(Table 3). For offline inference, scaling from 2P4D (2K agents)
to 48P96D (48K agents) achieves near-linear speedup with
comparable JCT (3,167s vs. 3,201s). For online serving, the
44P88D configuration achieves 22× throughput (8.8 vs. 0.4
APS) while maintaining similar latency. Across all experi-
ments, scheduler CPU usage remains below 10 cores, con-
firming it is not a bottleneck. Some detailed metrics over
offline inference process are shown in Figure 15.
Due to the lack of fine-tuned parallelism settings and P/D
ratios (which requires a substantial experimentation budget),
the large-scale experiments do not demonstrate additional
JCT or serving capacity gains compared to multiple small-
scale units with equivalent cost. However, large-scale de-
ployment remains important for the following reasons. First,
it reduces fragmentation and provides greater flexibility for
fine-tuning parallelism and P/D ratios. Second, large-scale
deployment offers more scheduling opportunities to mitigate
queuing latency under unpredictable bursty online requests.
These observations suggest several directions for future work
(§8.1).
8
DISCUSSION
8.1
Potential Future Work
The workload of offline inference is highly dynamic. For ex-
ample, in our agentic RL tasks, the workload depends heavily
on the researchers’ algorithm design, and the prefill stage
typically experiences significantly higher pressure in the
first half of execution than in the second half. Meanwhile,
profiling these tentative experiments is costly, as some ex-
periments are only run a limited number of times. Therefore,
more adaptive and flexible approaches for parallelism and
P/D ratio configuration are needed, such as simulators or
online adjustment mechanisms. Second, the scheduling algo-
rithm still has room for improvement, as we expect to achieve
lower TTFT percentiles under large-scale deployment.
8.2
Working Set Analysis
As shown in Figure 11, given an arrival rate 𝜆(i.e., new tra-
jectories per second) and mean JCT ¯𝑇, the working set of the
KV-Cache can thus be approximated as 𝜆¯𝑇× 𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙_𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑎𝑣𝑔/2.
In our setting of DS 660B serving, this value of DualPath
ranges from 69 GB at APS 0.1 to 681 GB at APS 0.45.
In production, the working set would be larger since our
evaluation assumes zero inter-arrival time and zero tool call
latency. If JCT increases by 𝑟times due to these gaps, the
system’s APS capacity increases by 𝑟times (gaps do not
stress LLM inference), causing the working set to expand by
𝑟2 times. This would exceed available memory and reduce
the distributed memory pool’s hit rate. Such experiments re-
quire 𝑟times more machine hours and 𝑟2 times more storage
(cost scaling as 𝑟3), which we cannot afford given limited
resources.
9
RELATED WORK
Distributed Memory Cache Pools. Mooncake [38] builds a
distributed DRAM pool for KV-Cache. TokenLake [46] intro-
duces a unified segment-level prefix cache pool. Compared
to them, DualPath targets storage backend directly, balanc-
ing the traffic among all SNICs, and reduces DRAM usage
greatly without harming performance. DualPath can also be
combined with a middle DRAM cache, but the performance
gain is marginal.
KV-Cache I/O Optimization. Efficiently loading the mas-
sive KV-Cache from other caching tiers is a fundamental
bottleneck in disaggregated LLM serving architectures. Prior
work has approached this problem primarily from the per-
spective of a single data path. Strata [49] tackles I/O bottle-
necks in hierarchical storage by co-designing GPU-assisted
I/O with cache-aware scheduling. Other work, like KVPR [23]
and TailorKV [53], mitigates bandwidth constraints (e.g.,
13


--- Page 14 ---
PCIe) on this path via recomputation overlapping and layer-
granular hybrid quantization.
LLM Inference System. Recent years have seen many infer-
ence acceleration techniques, such as paged attention [26],
chunked prefill, and hybrid batching [2, 21]. Prefill-decode
disaggregated inference [37, 58] separates the prefill and de-
code stages onto different GPUs, reducing performance inter-
ference between them and allowing each stage to adopt dis-
tinct parallel strategies and hardware configurations, which
unlocks substantial optimization opportunities. It has largely
become the de facto standard for inference serving.
Attention Mechanisms. Attention mechanism allows to-
kens to interact with previous tokens in the sequence. There
are many variants such as Multi-Head Attention (MHA) [44],
Multi-Query Attention (MQA) [41] and Grouped-Query At-
tention (GQA) [3], Multi-head Latent Attention (MLA) [12].
For those attention mechanisms (denoted as dense attention),
the ratio of computation and KV-Cache size for one token is
a constant since both scale linearly with sequence length.
10
CONCLUSION
This paper presents DualPath, an agentic LLM inference
framework that addresses the imbalance of KV-Cache read-
ing under PD-disaggregated architecture through dual-path
KV-Cache loading. By redistributing storage network load
with workload-aware scheduling, DualPath achieves up to
1.87× throughput improvement for offline inference. It also
achieves 1.96× higher agent runs per second on average in
online serving.
REFERENCES
[1] 2026. UnifiedBus. https://www.unifiedbus.com/en. (2026).
[2] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference
with Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI 24). 117–134.
[3] Joshua Ainslie, James Lee-Thorp, Michiel de Jong, Yury Zemlyanskiy,
Federico Lebron, and Sumit Sanghai. 2023. GQA: Training Generalized
Multi-Query Transformer Models from Multi-Head Checkpoints. In
Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. 4895–4901.
[4] Anthropic. 2026. Introducing Claude Opus 4.6. https://www.anthropic.
com/news/claude-opus-4-6. (2026).
[5] InfiniBand Trade Association. 2007. InfiniBand Architecture Specifica-
tion Volume 1, Release 1.2.1. (2007).
[6] Brian E. Carpenter and Kathleen M. Nichols. 2002. Differentiated
services in the Internet. Proc. IEEE 90 (2002), 1479–1494. https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:1723205
[7] Qiaoling Chen, Zhisheng Ye, Tian Tang, Peng Sun, Boyu Tian, Guoteng
Wang, Shenggui Li, Yonggang Wen, Zhenhua Han, and Tianwei
Zhang. 2026.
CONCUR: High-Throughput Agentic Batch Infer-
ence of LLM via Congestion-Based Concurrency Control.
(2026).
arXiv:cs.DC/2601.22705 https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.22705
[8] Sadia Sultana Chowa, Riasad Alvi, Subhey Sadi Rahman, Md Abdur
Rahman, Mohaimenul Azam Khan Raiaan, Md Rafiqul Islam, Mukhtar
Hussain, and Sami Azam. 2026. From language to action: a review of
large language models as autonomous agents and tool users. Artificial
Intelligence Review (2026).
[9] Ultra Ethernet Consortium. 2026. Ultra Ethernet Specification v1.0.2.
(2026).
[10] Tri Dao. 2024. FlashAttention-2: Faster Attention with Better Paral-
lelism and Work Partitioning. In International Conference on Learning
Representations. 35549–35562.
[11] Google DeepMind. 2026. Gemini 3 Pro. https://deepmind.google/
models/gemini/pro/. (2026).
[12] DeepSeek-AI. 2024. DeepSeek-V2: A Strong, Economical, and Efficient
Mixture-of-Experts Language Model. (2024). arXiv:2405.04434
[13] DeepSeek-AI. 2025. 3FS. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/3FS. (2025).
[14] DeepSeek-AI. 2025. DeepGEMM. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/
DeepGEMM. (2025).
[15] DeepSeek-AI. 2025.
DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report.
(2025).
arXiv:cs.CL/2412.19437 https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437
[16] DeepSeek-AI. 2025. DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the Frontier of Open
Large Language Models. (2025). arXiv:2512.02556
[17] Kuntai Du, Bowen Wang, Chen Zhang, Yiming Cheng, Qing Lan,
Hejian Sang, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Xiaoxuan Liu, Yifan Qiao, Ion
Stoica, and Junchen Jiang. 2025. PrefillOnly: An Inference Engine
for Prefill-only Workloads in Large Language Model Applications. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles (SOSP ’25). 399–414.
[18] Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic,
Junbo Deng, Xingkun Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. 2024. Cost-
Efficient Large Language Model Serving for Multi-turn Conversations
with CachedAttention. In 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 24). 111–126.
[19] Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, and Jiwu Shu. 2025. Fast State Restoration
in LLM Serving with HCache. In Proceedings of the 20th European
Conference on Computer Systems. 128–143.
[20] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Zhong Deng, Gaurav Soni, Jianxi Ye,
Jitu Padhye, and Marina Lipshteyn. 2016. RDMA over Commodity
Ethernet at Scale. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGCOMM Conference
(SIGCOMM ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 202–215. https://doi.org/10.1145/2934872.2934908
[21] Connor Holmes, Masahiro Tanaka, Michael Wyatt, Ammar Ahmad
Awan, Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi,
Heyang Qin, Arash Bakhtiari, Lev Kurilenko, and Yuxiong He. 2024.
DeepSpeed-FastGen: High-throughput Text Generation for LLMs via
MII and DeepSpeed-Inference. (2024). arXiv:2401.08671
[22] Yifan Hu, Shi Qiu, Jianqin Yan, Hao Chen, Xintao Wang, Tang Lu,
Guangtao Xue, and Yiming Zhang. 2025. TARDIS: A GPU-Centric KV
Cache Service for Efficient LLM Inference. In Proceedings of the 16th
ACM SIGOPS Asia-Pacific Workshop on Systems (APSys ’25). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 46–53. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3725783.3764393
[23] Chaoyi Jiang, Lei Gao, Hossein Entezari Zarch, and Murali Annavaram.
2025. KVPR: Efficient LLM Inference with I/O-Aware KV Cache Par-
tial Recomputation. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2025. 19474–19488.
[24] Juyong Jiang, Fan Wang, Jiasi Shen, Sungju Kim, and Sunghun Kim.
2024. A survey on large language models for code generation. ACM
Transactions on Software Engineering and Methodology (2024).
[25] Anuj Kalia, Michael Kaminsky, and David G Andersen. 2016. De-
sign guidelines for high performance RDMA systems. In 2016 USENIX
annual technical conference (USENIX ATC 16). 437–450.
14


--- Page 15 ---
[26] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serv-
ing with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles. 611–626.
[27] Jiashi Li and Shengyu Liu. 2025. FlashMLA: Efficient Multi-head Latent
Attention Kernels. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/FlashMLA. (2025).
[28] Yuanchun Li, Hao Wen, Weijun Wang, Xiangyu Li, Yizhen Yuan, Guo-
hong Liu, Jiacheng Liu, Wenxing Xu, Xiang Wang, Yi Sun, Rui Kong,
Yile Wang, Hanfei Geng, Jian Luan, Xuefeng Jin, Zilong Ye, Guanjing
Xiong, Fan Zhang, Xiang Li, Mengwei Xu, Zhijun Li, Peng Li, Yang
Liu, Ya-Qin Zhang, and Yunxin Liu. 2024. Personal LLM Agents: In-
sights and Survey about the Capability, Efficiency and Security. (2024).
arXiv:cs.HC/2401.05459 https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.05459
[29] Weizhe Lin, Hui-Ling Zhen, Shuai Yang, Xian Wang, Renxi Liu, Hant-
ing Chen, Wangze Zhang, Chuansai Zhou, Yiming Li, Chen Chen, Xing
Li, Zhiyuan Yang, Xiaosong Li, Xianzhi Yu, Zhenhua Dong, Mingxuan
Yuan, and Yunhe Wang. 2025. Towards Efficient Agents: A Co-Design
of Inference Architecture and System. (2025). arXiv:cs.CL/2512.18337
https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.18337
[30] Yuhan Liu, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaoting
Feng, Yuyang Huang, Samuel Shen, Rui Zhang, Kuntai Du, and Junchen
Jiang. 2025. LMCache: An Efficient KV Cache Layer for Enterprise-
Scale LLM Inference. (2025). arXiv:2510.09665
[31] Mahmoud Mohammadi, Yipeng Li, Jane Lo, and Wendy Yip. 2025.
Evaluation and benchmarking of llm agents: A survey. In Proceedings
of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining V. 2. 6129–6139.
[32] NVIDIA. 2023. SuperPOD: Next Generation Scalable Infrastructure
for AI Leadership.
http://docs.nvidia.com/https:/docs.nvidia.com/
dgx-superpod-reference-architecture-dgx-h100.pdf. (2023).
[33] NVIDIA. 2026. Developing a Linux Kernel Module using GPUDi-
rect RDMA. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/gpudirect-rdma/index.html.
(2026).
[34] NVIDIA. 2026. GPUDirect Storage Overview Guide. https://docs.
nvidia.com/gpudirect-storage/overview-guide/index.html. (2026).
[35] OpenAI. 2025.
gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card.
(2025).
arXiv:2508.10925
[36] OpenAI. 2025.
Introducing GPT-5.2.
https://openai.com/index/
introducing-gpt-5-2/. (2025).
[37] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo
Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2025. Splitwise: Efficient
Generative LLM Inference Using Phase Splitting. In Proceedings of
the 51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture.
118–132.
[38] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing
Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. 2025. Mooncake:
Trading More Storage for Less Computation — A KVCache-centric Ar-
chitecture for Serving LLM Chatbot. In Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies. 155–170.
[39] Andre Richter, Christian Herber, Thomas Wild, and Andreas Herkers-
dorf. 2016. Resolving Performance Interference in SR-IOV Setups with
PCIe Quality-of-Service Extensions. In 2016 Euromicro Conference on
Digital System Design (DSD). 454–462. https://doi.org/10.1109/DSD.
2016.41
[40] SGLang. 2026. SGLang HiCache. https://docs.sglang.io/advanced_
features/hicache.html. (2026).
[41] Noam Shazeer. 2019. Fast Transformer Decoding: One Write-Head is
All You Need. (2019). arXiv:1911.02150
[42] Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. (2025). arXiv:2412.15115
[43] Qwen
Team.
2025.
Qwen3
Technical
Report.
(2025).
arXiv:cs.CL/2505.09388 https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388
[44] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017.
Attention is All You Need. In Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. 6000–6010.
[45] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen
Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. 2024. A
survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers
of Computer Science 18, 6 (2024), 186345.
[46] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Yinmin Zhong, Guanzhe Huang, Yibo Zhu,
Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2025. TokenLake: A Unified Segment-level
Prefix Cache Pool for Fine-grained Elastic Long-Context LLM Serving.
(2025). arXiv:cs.DC/2508.17219 https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.17219
[47] Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang
Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Has-
san Awadallah, Ryen W White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2023. Au-
toGen: Enabling Next-Gen LLM Applications via Multi-Agent Conver-
sation. (2023). arXiv:cs.AI/2308.08155 https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.08155
[48] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang
Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, et al. 2025.
The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey.
Science China Information Sciences 68, 2 (2025), 121101.
[49] Zhiqiang Xie, Ziyi Xu, Mark Zhao, Yuwei An, Vikram Sharma
Mailthody, Scott Mahlke, Michael Garland, and Christos Kozyrakis.
2025. Strata: Hierarchical Context Caching for Long Context Language
Model Serving. (2025). arXiv:2508.18572
[50] Yi Xiong, Hao Wu, Changxu Shao, Ziqing Wang, Rui Zhang, Yuhong
Guo, Junping Zhao, Ke Zhang, and Zhenxuan Pan. 2024. LayerKV:
Optimizing Large Language Model Serving with Layer-wise KV Cache
Management. (2024). arXiv:2410.00428
[51] Jianqin Yan, Shi Qiu, Yina Lv, Yifan Hu, Hao Chen, Zhirong Shen,
Xin Yao, Renhai Chen, Jiwu Shu, Gong Zhang, and Yiming Zhang.
2025. Phoenix: A Refactored I/O Stack for GPU Direct Storage without
Phony Buffers. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC ’25).
1267–1283.
[52] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu
Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-
computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 50528–50652.
[53] Dingyu Yao, Bowen Shen, Zheng Lin, Wei Liu, Jian Luan, Bin Wang,
and Weiping Wang. 2025. TailorKV: A Hybrid Framework for Long-
Context Inference via Tailored KV Cache Optimization. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025. 20340–20359.
[54] Zihao Ye, Lequn Chen, Ruihang Lai, Wuwei Lin, Yineng Zhang,
Stephanie Wang, Tianqi Chen, Baris Kasikci, Vinod Grover, Arvind
Krishnamurthy, and Luis Ceze. 2025. FlashInfer: Efficient and Cus-
tomizable Attention Engine for LLM Inference Serving.
(2025).
arXiv:2501.01005
[55] Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Huazuo
Gao, Jiashi Li, Liyue Zhang, Panpan Huang, Shangyan Zhou, Shirong
Ma, et al. 2025. Insights into deepseek-v3: Scaling challenges and
reflections on hardware for ai architectures. In Proceedings of the 52nd
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture. 1731–1745.
[56] Chenggang Zhao, Shangyan Zhou, Liyue Zhang, Chengqi Deng, Zhean
Xu, Yuxuan Liu, Kuai Yu, Jiashi Li, and Liang Zhao. 2025. DeepEP: an
efficient expert-parallel communication library. https://github.com/
deepseek-ai/DeepEP. (2025).
[57] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff
Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang:
Efficient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs. In Pro-
ceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information
15


--- Page 16 ---
Processing Systems. Article 2000, 27 pages.
[58] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating
Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized Large Language Model
Serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 24). 193–210.
[59] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek
Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng, Tianyue Ou, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, et al.
2023. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.13854 (2023).
A
APPENDIX
A.1
Traffic Isolation Configuration Details
InfiniBand. The InfiniBand QoS mechanism employs two
arbitrators: high-priority and low-priority. Traffic is sched-
uled using Weighted Round Robin (WRR) in the high-priority
arbitrator, then steered to the low-priority arbitrator accord-
ing to qos_high_limit; setting it to 255 disables the low-
priority arbitrator entirely. Detailed scheduling algorithm
can be found in [5]. Our configuration:
• qos_max_vls 4
• qos_high_limit 240
• qos_vlarb_high 0:192,1:192,2:0,3:192
• qos_vlarb_low 0:192,1:192,2:64,3:192
RoCE. RoCE enforces QoS through DSCP-based traffic clas-
sification and hardware traffic classes (TC). Packets are first
mapped from DSCP values to TCs, each backed by a dedi-
cated hardware queue on NICs and switches (typically up
to eight). To match the four-VL configuration in InfiniBand,
we configure four lossless RDMA TCs with Priority Flow
Control (PFC) enabled. Bandwidth isolation is achieved by
assigning proportional scheduling weights to these TCs on
both NICs and switches, reserving the majority of bandwidth
for model inference traffic while allocating a small fraction
to KV-cache traffic to prevent starvation.
A.2
27B Model Specifications
In terms of overall model scale, the hidden dimension 2560,
the intermediate size of dense layers is 12288, the number
of hidden layers is 30, the number of attention heads is 32,
the number of routed experts is 72, the MoE intermediate
size is 1536, the number of activated experts per token is 6,
the number of shared experts is 2, and the number of initial
dense layer is 1. Regarding the index attention mechanism,
the number of attention heads is 32, the head dimension is
64, the topk tokens for sparse attention is 1024. The LoRA
compression for the Q matrix of both indexer and main
attention is removed.
A.3
Agent Task Structure
To provide context for the dataset characteristics, we briefly
describe the agent task structure, though this background
is orthogonal to our system design. Each agent operates
within a sandbox environment containing a code repository
with known bugs and associated error messages. The agent is
instructed via prompt to diagnose and fix the bug. The model
possesses tool-use capabilities, invoking bash commands in
the sandbox by emitting structured outputs. The agent and
environment engage in multi-turn interactions, where each
turn consists of a prompt (previous context concatenated
with new information, most of which is tool output) and the
model generating a subsequent tool invocation by decoding.
Each trajectory is a sequence of rounds; round 𝑖consists
of appended tokens 𝐴𝑖and the number of generated tokens
𝑔𝑖. We use 𝐺𝑖to indicate the tokens generated in round 𝑖,
which are not presented in our dataset. We define𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑖+1
as the concatenated list of 𝐴1,𝐺1,𝐴2,𝐺2, ...,𝐴𝑖,𝐺𝑖. In round
𝑖+ 1 of our replay, the agent concatenates the prompt as
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑖+1 + 𝐴𝑖+1, and then sets proper sampling parame-
ters to ensure it generates exactly 𝑔𝑖+1 tokens, i.e., 𝐺𝑖+1. To
generate additional agent trajectories, we sample an exist-
ing trajectory and prepend a synthetic round with random
tokens as 𝐴1 and 𝑔1 = 1.
A.4
Experimental Configurations
Configuration Parameters. For DeepSeek models, Dual-
Path allocates 80GB DRAM each node, and SGL(MC) uses
totally 1.5TB DRAM on every node. For Qwen 32B, due to
the larger KV-Cache, DualPath allocates 320GB. Speculative
decoding is disabled for all settings. We use 3FS as the stor-
age backend for all configurations. The short reading queue
threshold 𝛼(described in §6) is set to the number of tokens we
can read during 3 seconds, and the unfinished token upper
limit 𝛽is set to the number of tokens one GPU can process
for 5 seconds. Those values are profiled in advance. Compute
Quota Threshold is set to 300ms for all DualPath and Oracle
baselines.
KV-Cache Hit Length Calculation. For all systems ex-
cept SGL(MC), we limit the KV-Cache hits to only occur
within a trajectory, and the hit length is calculated in the
client because no eviction is needed. For SGL(MC), hit lengths
are computed internally based on HiCache and Mooncake
Store cache states.
A.5
KV-Cache Block Layout
Layerwise prefill reduces KV-Cache block size to 1/𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟
of the original, and makes the number of blocks larger to
𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟×, posing challenges to transfer and storage perfor-
mance. To overcome this, we design two distinct block types:
Layer Block and Full Block. A Layer Block is a byte tensor
16


--- Page 17 ---
with shape [1,𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠,𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠] and stores one-layer KV-Cache
for some tokens. The number of tokens is called 𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒.
𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠indicates the cache bytes needed per layer per token.
Meanwhile, a Full Block has shape [𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟,𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠,𝑏𝑦𝑡𝑒𝑠].
This design enables us to avoid manual KV-Cache memory
layout conversion throughout inference by simply concate-
nating 𝑛Layer Blocks to yield a Full Block. KV-Cache is
stored in distributed storage using a trie structure, where
each tree node corresponds to a Full Block.
17
