--- Page 1 ---
Training Generalizable Collaborative Agents
via Strategic Risk Aversion
Chengrui Qu∗
Caltech
Yizhou Zhang∗
Caltech
Nicholas Lanzetti∗
Caltech
Eric Mazumdar∗
Caltech
February 26, 2026
Abstract
Many emerging agentic paradigms require agents to collaborate with one another (or people) to
achieve shared goals.
Unfortunately, existing approaches to learning policies for such collaborative
problems produce brittle solutions that fail when paired with new partners. We attribute these failures
to a combination of free-riding during training and a lack of strategic robustness. To address these
problems, we study the concept of strategic risk aversion and interpret it as a principled inductive bias
for generalizable cooperation with unseen partners. While strategically risk-averse players are robust
to deviations in their partner’s behavior by design, we show that, in collaborative games, they also (1)
can have better equilibrium outcomes than those at classical game-theoretic concepts like Nash, and (2)
exhibit less or no free-riding. Inspired by these insights, we develop a multi-agent reinforcement learning
(MARL) algorithm that integrates strategic risk aversion into standard policy optimization methods. Our
empirical results across collaborative benchmarks (including an LLM collaboration task) validate our
theory and demonstrate that our approach consistently achieves reliable collaboration with heterogeneous
and previously unseen partners across collaborative tasks.
Keywords: Strategic risk aversion, multi-agent reinforcement learning, partner generalization
1
Introduction
AI systems increasingly operate in multi-agent environments, where success depends on effective interaction
with other agents. An increasingly important subset of these problems involves agents solving collaborative
tasks—i.e., tasks where agents must work together towards a shared goal. Examples of such problems range
from robots coordinating with people in shared physical spaces like warehouses (Kruse et al., 2013), to
emerging “agentic AI” problems where multiple models collaborate to write code (Wu et al., 2024) or solve
math problems (Cemri et al., 2025).
A common approach to such problems is to view them as collaborative games and use concepts from game
theory to design algorithms to learn collaborative policies (Dafoe et al., 2021). Viewed through this lens,
a central challenge in collaborative games is partner generalization—where one seeks to maintain effective
interaction across new sets of partners (Carroll et al., 2019; Hu et al., 2020; Ruhdorfer et al., 2025). Indeed,
in many real-world settings, agents must navigate situations in which they interact with different partners
(either algorithmic or human) who may have slightly different goals, heuristics, or levels of competence.
Agents should learn strategies that work well across a broad range of partners without sacrificing performance.
Unfortunately, current approaches tend to struggle with this—with learned policies often failing to generalize
to new partners (Stone et al., 2010), or overfitting to other agents’ eccentricities and becoming overly reliant
on specific conventions (Carroll et al., 2019; Lerer and Peysakhovich, 2019).
We view the problem of partner generalization as ultimately a question of robustness of the learned policy
and of alignment between agents (Leibo et al., 2017). The need for robustness emerges from the requirement
that learned strategies be insensitive to changes in a partner’s strategy and degrade gracefully in performance
∗Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
1
arXiv:2602.21515v1  [cs.LG]  25 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
as the partners become less collaborative. The need for alignment emerges from a desire to find agents that
contribute proportionally to the task. If agents learn to under-contribute or delegate costly actions (Liu et al.,
2023; Sunehag et al., 2018) to their partners—effectively free-riding on their partner’s effort—they cannot
generalize to new environments and partners. While free-riding is a widely acknowledged phenomenon in
game theory, it is rarely studied as a problem in collaborative multi-agent learning despite recent empirical
evidence that it arises even with large AI models (Zhang et al., 2025).
Prior work—which we review in Section 2 and then in depth in Appendix A—has studied partner
generalization in specific settings that fail to scale to large-scale problems like the post-training of LLM
agents (Hu et al., 2020) or via largely heuristic approaches (Forkel and Foerster, 2025). In contrast, in this
paper we advance strategic risk aversion as a principled and scalable approach to addressing this issue in a
broad class of collaborative games.
Recently proposed in multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) to derive human-like strategies in general
games (Mazumdar et al., 2024), strategic risk aversion mirrors behaviors observed in people in experimental
economics (Goeree et al., 2003). Unlike many approaches to robustness or risk aversion in MARL which
primarily focus on robustness to uncertainty in the underlying environment, strategic risk aversion posits
that agents should be risk-averse to uncertainty stemming from their opponents’ decisions. This perspective
inherently aligns with the goal of partner generalization, as it forces agents to be robust to deviations in their
partner’s play.
Formalizing this principle leads to a new equilibrium concept: (Strategically) Risk-Averse Quantal Response
Equilibria (RQE) (Mazumdar et al., 2024). While RQE has been shown to better capture human play in
simple experiments and offer better computational tractability (Zhang and Mazumdar, 2025) than classic
game theoretic concepts, its potential for collaborative games and partner generalization remains unknown.
We argue that strategic risk aversion provides a suitable inductive bias for robust cooperation in collaborative
games: at an RQE, an agent is trained against a structured set of plausible partner deviations, governed by
the agent’s degree of risk aversion. This ensures strategies are robust without being overly conservative.
Contributions: Through both a theoretical analysis of RQE in structured collaborative games and
extensive experiments across a range of diverse multi-agent benchmarks, we validate that RQE are particularly
suited for collaborative tasks. In particular, our contributions are as follows:
• Incentivizing collaboration (Theorem 4.1): We prove that in continuous quadratic aggregative
games, strategic risk aversion can encourage collaboration, with higher risk aversion leading to a greater
focus on the shared goal. This implies a counterintuitive result: unlike in classic robust optimization or
RL, robustness does not necessarily require sacrificing performance.
• Alleviating free-riding (Theorem 4.5): We prove in finite-action collaborative games with private
costs that strategic risk aversion can mitigate free-riding at equilibrium. Thus, risk aversion can reduce
the alignment problem in collaborative MARL.
• Scalable risk-averse MARL algorithms: We develop Strategically Risk-Averse Policy Optimization
(SRPO), a MARL algorithm that optimizes an RQE-derived objective which integrates naturally with
policy-optimization algorithms like independent proximal policy optimization (IPPO).
• Empirical validation: We demonstrate across collaborative MARL benchmarks that SRPO consis-
tently achieves more reliable coordination with heterogeneous and unseen partners than IPPO (the
current scalable MARL baseline). We observe that while IPPO performs well, it consistently finds
free-riding equilibria that limit its generalization. In contrast, we observe—in line with our theory—that
RQE found by SRPO exhibit no free-riding and result in better partner generalization. We also provide
preliminary small-scale experiments showing that these findings can even extend to the fine-tuning of
collaborative agentic AI teams made up of large language models, demonstrating the scalability of our
approach.
2
Related Works
Our work studies strategic risk aversion in collaborative MARL. We cover the most relevant related work
here and defer a more in depth discussion to Appendix A.
2


--- Page 3 ---
The most related literature in collaborative MARL focuses on the partner generalization problem; i.e., how
to learn collaborative policies that remain effective when paired with previously unseen partners (Barrett et al.,
2014; Carroll et al., 2019; Dizdarević et al., 2025). This is sometimes referred to as zero-shot coordination
(Hu et al., 2021, 2020), or ad-hoc teamwork problem (Stone et al., 2010). One large class of approaches can
broadly be described as population-based methods (Lupu et al., 2021; Rahman et al., 2023; Vinyals et al.,
2019; Wang et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023) in which one trains against a diverse set of learned
policies—essentially performing domain randomization for partners. Though such approaches are conceptually
simple, the task of generating good populations of partners is nontrivial and typically relies on heuristic,
task-dependent design choices. Furthermore, such approaches quickly become computationally intractable
for complex, high-dimensional settings (e.g., LLM fine-tuning) and tend not to have strong guarantees that
they result in better generalization. To circumvent this limitation, Forkel and Foerster (2025) attempt to
induce robustness by introducing more randomness during training (by increasing entropy regularization in
policy optimization). Though this method scales well, our experiments demonstrate that it does not solve
free-riding and consequently does not address the problem of generalization across collaborative tasks.
In contrast, our approach based on strategic risk aversion scales as a simple modification to existing
policy-optimization techniques, is grounded in a principled game theoretic formulation, and empirically
consistently delivers more stable cross-play performance across collaborative benchmarks. While these forms
of risk aversion have been well studied in the experimental economics literature (Goeree et al., 2003; Goeree
and Offerman, 2002; Gollier, 2001), they have only recently been studied in theory (Lanzetti et al., 2025b;
Mazumdar et al., 2024) and in MARL (Slumbers et al., 2023; Zhang and Mazumdar, 2025). We demonstrate
its potential in collaborative games.
3
Problem Setup
We consider a general-sum collaborative game with N players. Each player i ∈[N] is endowed with actions
ai ∈Ai, where the action spaces can be discrete or continuous, and we use the notation A−i = Q
j̸=i Aj for
the action space of all players except i. Each player aims to maximize a utility function ui : Ai × A−i →R.
The utility function consists of a shared reward R, which coincides for all players, and a private cost ci, so
that
ui(ai, a−i) = R(a1, . . . , aN) −ci(ai).
These games are collaborative since all players seek to maximize the reward, but pay for their own effort.
They have been well studied in economics under the guise of public goods games and naturally model many
real-world scenarios where players aim to collaboratively accomplish a task but are penalized for their own
effort. The players select a mixed strategy xi ∈∆(Ai), which is a probability over the available actions Ai
(here, ∆(Ai) is the set of probability distributions over Ai). In the standard game-theoretic setting, the
utility of each player is then the standard risk-neutral expected utility
Ui(xi, x−i) = E a1∼x1
...
aN∼xN
[ui(ai, a−i)],
where x−i is the collection of the mixed strategies of all other players j ̸= i.
In this work, we follow Mazumdar et al. (2024) and propose to introduce two elements of human
decision-making: risk aversion and bounded rationality.
Risk aversion
To model risk aversion, we consider players that seek to optimize a risk-adjusted utility
based on the entropic risk measure with risk aversion parameter τi > 0 (e.g., see Föllmer and Schied (2002)),
instead of their expected utility. Players’ resulting objectives are given by
U τi
i (xi, x−i) =
inf
p∈∆(A−i) Ui(xi, p) + 1
τi
KL(p, x−i).
(1)
In words, the utility results from a worst-case approach, in which a fictitious adversary tries to inflict
maximum damage at the (risk-neutral) expected utility, while not deviating “too much” from the strategies of
all other players. For the sake of this paper, we will measure this deviation with the KL divergence, defined
3


--- Page 4 ---
as KL(p, q) = P
j pj log

pj
qj

(when A−i is discrete) and KL(p, q) =
R
Rn ρp(x) log

ρp(x)
ρq(x)

(when A−i = Rn is
continuous), where ρp and ρq are the densities of p and q (provided they exist, else KL(p, q) = +∞). Our
choice of the entropic risk measure is rooted in operations research, but also motivated by ubiquitous use of
the KL divergence across machine learning and in particular in policy optimization in reinforcement learning.
By focusing on the KL divergence, we derive algorithms that can be implemented with minimal changes to
existing codebases.
Bounded rationality
To incorporate bounded rationality, we add entropy to each player’s utility, so that
their utility is
U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i) = U τi
i (xi, x−i) −ϵiH(xi),
(2)
where ϵi > 0 and H(xi) is the (negative) entropy of the mixed strategy xi; i.e., H(p) = P
j pj log(pj) (if Ai is
discrete) and H(p) =
R
Rn ρp(x) log(ρp(x))dx (when Ai = Rn is continuous), where ρp is again the density of
p (provided it exists, else H(p) = +∞). Entropy regularization of the utility leads to the celebrated quantal
response model in behavioral economics (McKelvey and Palfrey, 1995) and is widely employed in machine
learning for exploration purposes (e.g., see Ahmed et al. (2019)). For more general regularization schemes,
we refer to Mazumdar et al. (2024).
Risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE).
Given our new utility U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i), we now define
a RQE as a set of joint mixed strategies from which no player has an incentive to unilaterally deviate:
Definition 3.1 (Mazumdar et al. (2024), Definition 5). A tuple of mixed strategies (x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
N) is a
risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE) with degrees of risk aversion τ1, . . . , τN and bounded
rationality ϵ1, . . . , ϵN if for all players i we have
U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x⋆
−i) ≤U τi,ϵi
i
(x⋆
i , x⋆
−i) ∀xi ∈∆(Ai).
(3)
When τi, ϵi →0 we recover Nash equilibria, when τi →0 we recover quantal response equilibria, and
when ϵ →0 and τ →∞we recover security strategies. In the next section, we investigate the benefits of risk
aversion, together with bounded rationality, in two classes of collaborative games: aggregative continuous
quadratic games and finite symmetric collaborative games. These insights prompt us, in the subsequent
section, to use RQE for the design of algorithms to train collaborative agents in MARL.
4
“Free-Lunch” Theorems for Strategic Risk Aversion in Collabora-
tive Games
We first study strategic risk aversion in simple, structured classes of collaborative games which are more
tractable to analyze than complex MARL problems we design algorithms for. We prove two “free-lunch”
theorems that illustrate how strategic risk aversion can (1) increase collaboration and (2) mitigate free
riding—both of which are essential to the task of partner generalization. These results serve as a principled
rationale for incorporating strategic risk aversion into MARL. We empirically observe both these properties
across our experiments in Section 6, validating that our insights extend beyond structured games.
4.1
Strategic Risk Aversion can Induce Collaboration
Our first setting lies in continuous (A = Rn) quadratic aggregative games, popular in economics (Corchón,
1994) and control theory (Paccagnan et al., 2018). In line with our collaborative setting, we write the utility
of each player as the difference between a shared reward that depends on the aggregate action a1 + . . . + aN,
so that
R(a1, . . . , aN) = 1
2
* N
X
i=1
ai, H
N
X
i=1
ai
+
+
*
h,
N
X
i=1
ai
+
,
4


--- Page 5 ---
Figure 1: (i). Expected utility of each player as a function of the degree of risk aversion τ at equilibrium,
when ϵ = 1 in Example 4.2. Player’s utilities can first increase with risk aversion before decreasing due to
over-conservatism, meaning that strategic risk aversion can yield better performing equilibria than Nash
or QRE. (ii). Probability that a player collaborates at a RQE as a function of the level of risk aversion,
for ϵ = 0.2 for the game in Example 4.6. Strategic risk aversion alleviates free riding entirely after a given
threshold (i.e., δ →0) as our theory predicts.
for some H negative definite and h of appropriate dimensions, and a private cost that only depends on the
player’s own action ai, of the form ci(ai) = ρi
2 ∥ai∥2 for ρi > 0. For simplicity of exposition, we assume
here that all players have the same degree of risk aversion τi and bounded rationality ϵi, and the same ρi.
Nevertheless, as we show in the Appendix B.1, all results extend to the case where these are player-dependent.
Being a continuous game, the computation of an RQE is infinite dimensional, as it involves searching over
mixed strategies over continuous action spaces. In Proposition B.3 in the appendix, however, we bypass this
complexity by showing that there is a unique Gaussian RQE (i.e., RQE where mixed strategies are Gaussian)
that can be computed efficiently. This effectively allows us to study the effect of risk aversion on the expected
shared reward J(τ) := Eai∼x⋆
i (τ) [R(a1, . . . , aN)] .
Remarkably, as we show in the next theorem (proven in Appendix B.1), this function is strictly increasing.
That is, risk monotonically increases the shared reward and thus induces collaboration between the players.
Theorem 4.1 (risk induces collaboration). Let x⋆
i (τ) be the Gaussian mixed strategy of player i at the
unique Gaussian RQE of the game, as a function of the degree of risk aversion τ. Then, the expected
shared reward τ 7→J(τ) is strictly increasing1. That is, players contribute more to the shared reward as
they become more risk-averse.
This increasing contribution to the shared reward generally entails an increase in the players’ private cost.
Thus, in practice, we observe a tradeoff between being risk neutral (τ →0) and more risk-averse (τ large)
with large personal cost but large shared reward. In a one-dimensional example, we can study this tradeoff
analytically.
Example 4.2. Consider two robots that move an object from the origin to a target location ¯a. Each robot
exerts a force ai, so that the total force is a1 + a2. Players incur a penalty for their own actuation effort.
Thus, the shared reward is −1
2(a1 + a2 −¯a)2 and the personal cost is 1
2a2
i (with ρi = 1 for simplicity). In this
case, the Gaussian RQE has mean m⋆
i (τ) =
¯a
3−τϵ and variance Σi = ϵ
2. The equilibrium expected reward is
concave in τ as shown in Fig. 1, highlighting that risk aversion can yield higher utilities.
Remark 4.3. We refer to Theorem 4.1 as a “free-lunch" theorem because it suggests that one can add risk
aversion into a game and not incur a loss in performance. This can be observed in Fig. 1(i) in which
equilibrium utility increases from a risk-neutral baseline before decreasing again. This is in stark contrast to
single-agent RL or classic robust optimization where robustness necessitates sacrificing performance.
We validate our theory in broader classes of games in Section 6 and observe that, in some games, some
degree of strategic risk aversion can increase collaboration and performance over a risk-neutral baseline. In
1The function is strictly increasing on the domain of τ where RQE are well-defined, that is, when the risk parameters τ is
“not too large”; else, risk diverges to infinity. For details, we refer the reader to the appendix and, in particular, to (14).
5


--- Page 6 ---
other games, however, the structure is less amenable to such phenomena, and we observe that risk aversion
introduces conservatism and a corresponding decrease in performance.
4.2
Strategic Risk Aversion Alleviates Free-riding
We now prove a second “free-lunch” theorem associated with strategic risk aversion in collaborative games,
namely that players who are strategically risk-averse will free-ride less at equilibrium. We prove this result in
the context of 2-player collaborative finite symmetric games played over the probability simplex. These are
games in which player i = 1, 2’s utility is given by
Ui(x1, x2) = Ea1∼x1,a2∼x2[R(a1, a2)] −Eai∼xi[c(ai)],
where R is a symmetric (R(a1, a2) = R(a2, a1)) shared reward, c is a private cost, and xi are strategy vectors
in the probability simplex in Rn. Although the game is symmetric, equilibria can be asymmetric and thus
exhibit free-riding—i.e., one player can exert significantly less effort at equilibrium while still enjoying high
utility. As we observe across our experiments, free-riding equilibria are ubiquitous across many MARL
benchmarks and pose a significant challenge to the generalization of agents’ strategies. Concretely, we define
free riding in our game as follows.
Definition 4.4 (free-riding). An RQE (x1, x2) ∈∆(A) × ∆(A) exhibits free-riding with degree δ ≥0 if
the difference in costs paid by each player at the RQE is δ; i.e., |Ea1∼x1[c(a1)] −Ea2∼x2[c(a2)]| = δ. If
δ = 0, the RQE does not exhibit free-riding.
The following theorem shows that as a player’s degree of risk aversion increases, free-riding becomes less
prevalent.
Theorem 4.5 (risk removes free-riding). There exists a game-dependent constant C depending only on R,
c, and the degree of bounded rationality ϵ such that if player’s degrees of risk aversion τ in a two-player
collaborative game satisfy τ > C
δ2 , then the game can admit no RQE with degree of free-riding greater than
δ.
This theorem (proven in Appendix B.2) shows that as strategic risk aversion increases, RQE must exhibit
less free-riding. The intuition for this result is as follows: suppose that player i free-rides at a RQE. If they
become risk-averse, the worst-case deviation for their opponent is simply to stop putting any effort into
the game. Since player i is free-riding and not putting their own effort, this deviation causes a large drop
in performance. Thus, at a risk-averse equilibrium, a player must contribute some of their own effort. We
validate this intuition in a simple coordination game.
Example 4.6. Consider the game with A = {C = collaborate, D = defect}, R(a1, a2) = 1 if a1 = C or
a2 = C (at least one player collaborates) and R(a1, a2) = 0 if a1 = a2 = D (both defect), and c(ai) = 0.4 if
ai = C (cost of collaboration) and c(ai) = 0.0 otherwise. We fix ϵ = 0.2 and study the effect of the degree of
risk aversion on the game in Fig. 1. Without risk aversion, the game has one symmetric and two free-riding
RQE. As the degree of risk aversion increases, players become increasingly collaborative and the degree
of free-riding diminishes. Importantly, there is a threshold where the two free-riding RQEs disappear and
“merge” into the symmetric one—a phenomenon known as pitchfork bifurcation.
We validate this theorem through our experiments in both the Overcooked gridworld and the Tag
environment. In both environments, we empirically observe that Nash agents naturally learn to free-ride at
equilibrium which in turn severely degrades their ability to generalize to new agents. Our strategic risk-averse
agents however tend to put more effort into the task and thus generalize better to new agents.
Remark 4.7. In our ablation studies on the effects of risk aversion, we empirically observe a threshold-like
phenomenon under which free riding disappears as risk aversion increases past a certain threshold. This
seems to validate that the implications of Theorem 4.5 hold beyond the simple classes of games covered by
the theorem.
6


--- Page 7 ---
5
MARL Algorithm Design
The theoretical benefits of strategic risk aversion—increased collaboration and no free-riding—prompt us to
design scalable strategically risk-averse training algorithms for MARL. We do so in the general setting of
policy optimization algorithms. For a more detailed mathematical background of risk aversion in MARL, we
refer to Appendix C.
5.1
Meta-algorithm for Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization
In standard policy optimization, each agent seeks a policy πθi, parametrized by parameters θi, that maximizes
an objective function Li(θi, θ−i), which is a function of the policies of all agents. Inspired by our strategically
risk-averse utility (1), it is tempting to replace this objective function with
inf
ϕi Li(θi, ϕi) + 1
τi
KL(ϕi, θ−i) −ϵiH(θi),
(4)
where, to ease exposition, we slightly overload the notation of KL(ϕi, θ−i) to be the (expected) KL-divergence
between the induced policies across states (if the problem is one of MARL) . Unfortunately, the computation
of this objective poses a significant computational challenge. The mere evaluation of this objective, as well as
the computation of its gradient, requires solving a high-dimensional non-convex optimization problem—the
infimum over ϕi—and is therefore computationally prohibitive.
To bypass this complexity, we follow Mazumdar et al. (2024) and resort to an auxiliary game in which we
augment the number of players. For each agent i, we replace the infimum in (4) by an adversary that aims to
inflict maximum damage to agent i, while not deviating too much from the other agents’ policies, and is thus
designed to solve the infimum in (4). As such, the objective of agent i is now a function of their parameters
θi and those of their adversary:
Li(θi, ϕi) + 1
τi
KL(ϕi, θ−i) −ϵiH(θi),
(5)
where the KL term can now be dropped as it does not affect the agent’s parameters. The objective of the
adversary agent, who controls the adversarial policy πϕi and whose goal is to minimize the objective of agent
i, depends on the parameters of all agents and is therefore given by
−Li(θi, ϕi) −1
τi
KL(ϕi, θ−i) + ϵiH(θi),
(6)
where the entropy term can be dropped. While adversarial training has been proposed as a robustness
technique, such methods are often unstable to train and result in over-conservative policies (Bukharin et al.,
2023; Lauffer et al., 2025). The key insight resulting from strategic risk aversion is the idea to constrain the
adversary to not deviate from the opponents policy (which is also evolving during training). This extra step
stabilizes training.
This framing provides us with a meta-algorithm for strategically risk-averse MARL. We now instantiate
this algorithm in the case of PPO, also called independent PPO (IPPO) when deployed in multi-agent settings
(Yu et al., 2022), and introduce Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization (SRPO), the first strategically
risk-averse algorithm for MARL.
5.2
SRPO
When using PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), the objective of agent i is given by
LIPPO
i
(θi, θ−i) = LCLIP
i
(θi, θ−i) −ϵiH(θi)(ot
i),
(7)
where the clipped surrogate objective is
LCLIP
i
(θi, θ−i) = Et
h
min

rt
i(θi) ˆAt
i(θi, θ−i),
clip(rt
i(θi), 1 −δ, 1 + δ) ˆAt
i(θi, θ−i)
i
,
7


--- Page 8 ---
with rt
i(θi) =
πθi(at
i|ot
i)
πθi,old(at
i|ot
i) being the importance sampling ratio, ˆAt
i(θi, θ−i) the estimated advantage at time t
(and depends on θ−i as it is computed using samples of the policies of all agents), ϵiH(θi)(ot
i) a (negative)
entropy regularizer, and ot
i the observation of agent i at time t.
We can now follow the meta-algorithm above to derive strategically risk-averse proximal policy optimization.
Specifically, the objective of agent i is
LSRPO
i
(θi, ϕi) = LCLIP
i
(θi, ϕi) −ϵiH(θi)(ot
i).
(8)
Since the PPO objective already includes entropy regularization, the additional entropy term in (5) is
superfluous. The objective of player i’s adversary is then
¯LSRPO
i
(ϕi, (θi, θ−i)) = −LCLIP
i
(θi, ϕi) −1
τi
KL(ϕi, θ−i).
(9)
Overall, SRPO consists of running gradient descent on these objectives. We present pseudocode and details
in Appendix C.2, and note here that the iteration structure and complexity of SRPO is very similar to that
of IPPO.
6
Experiments
We evaluate the proposed SRPO algorithm against IPPO on three cooperative multi-agent benchmarks and
one LLM-based debate task. We use IPPO as our benchmark due to its emerging role as the dominant
scalable algorithm for collaborative MARL across numerous benchmarks (de Witt et al., 2020; Forkel and
Foerster, 2025; Yu et al., 2022). The experimental design closely follows the theoretical motivations developed
earlier. Concretely, our experiments test the following claims:
• Partner generalization. SRPO achieves higher and more stable cross-play performance than IPPO
when paired with previously unseen partners.
• Shared reward and free-riding. In cooperative tasks with private costs, SRPO converges to equilibria
with higher shared reward and reduced free-riding behavior.
• Scalability. SRPO remains practical in complex multi-agent settings when implemented with policy
sharing and adversary sampling.
We implement SRPO and IPPO in four representative environments: (1) a modified grid-world inspired by
Overcooked AI (Carroll et al., 2019), which allows explicit modeling of both shared team rewards and private
costs; (2) Tag (Lowe et al., 2017), a continuous-control coordination task; (3) 4-player Hanabi (Bard et al.,
2020) with 3 colors and 3 ranks, a partially observed cooperative game requiring implicit coordination and
communication used to study zero-shot coordination (Forkel and Foerster, 2025), and (4) an LLM-based
multi-agent debate setting (Du et al., 2024; Park et al., 2025) on the GSM8K dataset (Cobbe et al., 2021) in
which agents must collaborate to solve math problems.
Training and evaluation.
Across all environments, for an apples-to-apples comparison, the number
of interactions with the environment for both SRPO and IPPO are kept the same. We evaluate partner
generalization using cross-play performance, where a trained agent is paired with held-out partners not
encountered during training. This evaluation makes the existence of free-riding-type policies extremely
apparent: the policies lead to a distinct checker-board pattern, which emerges when free-riding agents are
paired with one another and fail to achieve good performance. We consistently observe this phenomenon
arising from IPPO-trained agents across environments.
Ablation studies.
Across environments, we also report results of ablation studies on both entropy and
strategic risk aversion to further validate our theory, show how our results are robust to hyper-parameter
selection, and highlight how entropy alone cannot guarantee generalization in general collaborative games
despite positive empirical evidence in special cases (Forkel and Foerster, 2025). The code will be released
upon publication, and the detailed setup is in Appendix D.
8


--- Page 9 ---
Figure 2: Cross-play and ablation experiments in the overcooked environment. Each square represents the
average reward across 10 episodes of length 128 for each pair of agents. Diagonal blocks represent the training
performance of the agents. (i) We directly observe that IPPO (ϵ = 0.1) learns to free-ride while SRPO
(τ = 10, ϵ = 0.1) does not. Furthermore, mirroring Theorem 4.1, we observe that SRPO yields higher utility
strategies (i.e., risk improves performance). (ii) Results of an ablation experiment, varying τ while holding
ϵ = 0.1. We empirically observe that free-riding completely disappears as risk aversion increases, mirroring
the result in Theorem 4.5. (iii) Difference between Training Performance (TP) and Cross-play Performance
(CP) (mean and standard deviation): the performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and
larger standard deviation in cross-play, while the performance of SRPO is unaffected.
6.1
Overcooked Gridworld
We construct an environment based onOvercooked Ruhdorfer et al. (2025) multi-agent benchmark to serve
as a simple laboratory to verify our theory. In our Overcooked Gridworld, agents receive a shared team
reward when an onion is picked up (+1) and placed into a pot (+10), while each agent incurs private costs for
movement (−0.2) and collision (−2). This induces a canonical social dilemma: although the team objective
is collaborative, each agent has an incentive to avoid costly effort and rely on the teammate to complete the
task. Results are shown in Fig. 2.
SRPO reduces free-riding and exhibits higher performance.
Empirically, IPPO always converges to
a free-riding equilibrium where one teammate avoids movement but collects high reward due to the effort of
their partner—evident in the characteristic checkerboard pattern observed in the top left block of Fig. 2(i).
In contrast, SRPO learns a policy in which both agents coordinate and contribute to the task. This behavior
matches SRPO’s objective: because training explicitly optimizes performance against plausible adversarial
partner deviations (Section 5), non-contribution becomes risky. As we summarize in Fig. 2(iii), SRPO
thus attains both higher performances and improved cross-play reliability, consistent with our theoretical
predictions.
Ablation study of the degree of strategic risk aversion τ.
As shown in Fig. 2(ii), small values of
τ and IPPO (τ = 0) lead to free-riding and thus poor cross-play performance, reflecting reliance on fragile
conventions and lack of effort on the part of agents. As τ increases, collaboration becomes more stable: policies
converge to a consistent solution, free-riding disappears, and cross-play performance improves, validating
that Theorem 4.5 holds more broadly. We also observe that SRPO is robust to choices of τ. Ablations
show consistent gains over IPPO across orders of magnitude of τ. We make similar observations in ablation
experiments in the Tag environment presented in Appendix D.6.
6.2
Tag
In Tag, two chasers must coordinate to catch a runner. The chasers get a shared positive reward (+1) if
a chaser collides with a runner. We first train runner policies independently via adversarial training, and
then train chaser policies using either IPPO or SRPO against a fixed runner to keep the game collaborative.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Figure 3: Cross-play performances of SRPO (τ = 10, ϵ = 0.01) and IPPO (ϵ = 0.01) agents in the Tag
environment against a runner seen during training (i) and an unseen runner (ii). Each square represents the
average reward of two agents across 100 runs of length 100. IPPO does well in training environments (yet still
clearly learns free-riding like policies), but their performance degrades drastically against an unseen runner.
SRPO has slightly lower training performance but clearly learns a more generalizable policy. (iii) Difference
between Training Performance (TP) and Cross-play Performance (CP) (mean and standard deviation): the
performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and larger standard deviation in cross-play,
while the performance of SRPO is almost unaffected.
Cross-play performance is evaluated along two axes: (i) pairing trained chasers with an unseen chaser partner
(teammate shift), and (ii) evaluating chasers against a runner policy not observed during training (opponent
shift). The results are shown in Fig. 3.
SRPO learns more generalizable policies.
We empirically observe that in this standard benchmark
environment, IPPO-trained agents can learn high performing policies. However, we also observe that these
policies often encode free-riding and can overfit to both the runner encountered during training and specific
coordination conventions it develops with its training partner. While this can produce strong in-distribution
performance (i.e., on the diagonal), it degrades sharply under either teammate or runner shifts, as seen in the
sharp drops in performance as IPPO agents are played against each other, as we summarize in Fig. 3(iii).
In contrast, SRPO has slightly worse performance in the training environment. This highlights that in
some environments incorporating strategic risk aversion may sometimes require tradeoffs with performance.
In the case of Tag, we can trace this back to the lack of the aggregative structure required for Theorem 4.1.
Nevertheless, SRPO attains consistently higher and more stable cross-play performance across both other
partners (including free-riding IPPO agents) and runners, showing their potential to generalize more widely.
6.3
Hanabi
Hanabi is a collaborative card game in which players must play cards in the correct sequence, with the
twist that you can see everyone’s cards except your own. It is a canonical benchmark for collaboration in
MARL (Bard et al., 2020). Following Lauffer et al. (2025), we consider a simplified game with 3 colors and
3 ranks. In this setting, agents may develop private communication protocols during training that fail to
generalize to unseen teammates. We focus here on the 4-player variant to demonstrate the scalability of
SRPO with the number of players, and present results on 2-player games in Section D.
Scalability of SRPO.
To scale SRPO to larger numbers of agents we make use of policy sharing—i.e., we
share a single risk-averse policy across agents and maintain only one adversary policy, randomly assigning the
adversarial role during training. The results are shown in Fig. 4. where we observe that SRPO exhibits more
stable cross-play performance than IPPO.
10


--- Page 11 ---
IPPO Agent 1&2
SRPO Agent 1&2
IPPO Agent 3&4
SRPO Agent 3&4
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75
4.00
4.25
(a)
TP
CP
TP
CP
0
1
2
3
4
-24.8%
-15.8%
IPPO
SRPO
(b)
Figure 4: Cross-play performance of SRPO and IPPO agents in the Hanabi environment. We use policy
sharing to validate the scalability of SRPO. During evaluation, we let agents 1 and 2 share a policy and
agents 3 and 4 share a policy, enabling pairwise cross-play evaluation. In Fig. 4a, each square represents the
average reward of the two agent groups across 100 runs, each of length 100. Fig. 4b shows the differences
between training performance (TP) and cross-play performance (CP) (mean and standard deviation) for both
IPPO and SRPO. SRPO remains more robust when paired with an unseen partner. Here, we set the entropy
coefficient to be ϵ = 0.001 for both IPPO and SRPO, and τ = 0.01 for SRPO.
6.4
Multi-LLM-Agent Debate on GSM8K
To conclude, we present a proof-of-concept on using SRPO in a language-based cooperative reasoning setting
in which agents must collaborate to solve grade school math word problems (Cobbe et al., 2021) through
structured debate.
In this setup, two agents engage in a three-round iterative debate protocol. In the first round, each agent
independently observes the question and produces its own reasoning and answer. In subsequent rounds,
each agent observes the original question as well as both agents’ outputs from the previous round, and then
refines its response. Successfully solving a problem therefore requires more than producing a correct answer
in isolation: each agent must reinforce correct reasoning while remaining robust to potentially misleading
or incorrect proposals from its teammate. This naturally induces a cooperative yet adversarial interaction,
where robustness to the partner’s policy plays a critical role in achieving reliable joint performance.
Both IPPO (the existing state-of-the-art) and SRPO agents are trained using multiple base language
models, including Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct (Q0.5B) and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (Q3B) (Bai et al., 2025), as
well as Qwen3-0.6B (Q0.6B) and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Q4B) (Yang et al., 2025), using the verl training
framework (Sheng et al., 2024). Here, we set the entropy coefficient to be ϵ = 0 for both IPPO and SRPO,
and τ = 10 for SRPO.
We evaluate performance along two complementary robustness dimensions. First, we measure cross-play
performance between agents trained with the same method but using different model scales. Performance
is quantified using joint accuracy, where a problem is counted as correct only if both agents produce the
correct final answer. This metric directly reflects the ability of agents to coordinate reliably under policy
heterogeneity. Second, we evaluate robustness to drastic partner shifts by pairing a trained Qwen agent
with an untuned Llama 3.2-1B-Instruct model (Grattafiori et al., 2024). In this setting, we measure the
accuracy of the trained agent alone, isolating its ability to maintain correct reasoning despite interacting with
a potentially unreliable partner. Results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.
SRPO extends to LLM-based multi-agent systems.
As shown in Table 1, SRPO consistently improves
joint accuracy over IPPO across all cross-play combinations, with gains of up to 19.27%. This demonstrates
that SRPO enhances coordination robustness across heterogeneous policies, enabling agents to reliably reach
11


--- Page 12 ---
Table 1: Cross-play performance (joint accuracy) across model scale combinations. Percentage improvement
is computed relative to IPPO. Across all model combinations, SRPO consistently outperforms IPPO in terms
of cross-play performance.
Method
Q0.5B&Q0.6B Q0.5B&Q3B Q0.5B&Q4B Q0.6B&Q3B Q0.6B&Q4B Q3B&Q4B
SRPO
0.622
0.686
0.873
0.616
0.848
0.732
IPPO
0.605
0.651
0.846
0.573
0.711
0.709
Improvement (%)
+2.81%
+5.38%
+3.19%
+7.50%
+19.27%
+3.24%
Table 2: Performance (the accuracy of the trained agent itself) when paired with an untuned Llama 3.2-
1B-Instruct model. Percentage improvement is computed relative to IPPO. Across all model sizes, SRPO
agents consistently outperform IPPO, indicating that SRPO endows the trained the power to be robust to
the teammate.
Method
Q0.5B
Q0.6B
Q3B
Q4B
SRPO
0.405
0.671
0.632
0.917
IPPO
0.378
0.587
0.552
0.901
Improvement (%)
+7.14%
+14.31%
+14.49%
+1.78%
correct joint outcomes. Furthermore, as shown in Table 2, SRPO substantially improves individual accuracy
when paired with an untuned partner, achieving gains of up to 14.49%. This indicates that SRPO-trained
agents are significantly more robust to severe partner mismatch, maintaining correct reasoning even when
interacting with unreliable teammates. Together, these results highlight SRPO’s effectiveness in promoting
robust cooperative reasoning in multi-agent language environments. In Section D.5, we provide evidence that
SRPO primarily improves collaboration, rather than the individual reasoning ability of each agent.
7
Conclusion
In this work, we introduce strategic risk aversion as a principled inductive bias for learning collaborative policies
that generalize to unseen partners. Using the risk-averse quantal response equilibrium (RQE) framework, we
show that strategic risk aversion can both increase contributions to shared rewards and eliminate free-riding
at equilibrium, demonstrating that robustness need not be purely conservative. Guided by these insights, we
propose Strategically Risk-Averse Policy Optimization (SRPO), a scalable modification of standard policy
optimization. Across cooperative benchmarks (Overcooked, Tag, Hanabi) and an LLM-based debate task
on GSM8K, SRPO yields improved robustness to heterogeneous or unreliable teammates, including across
model scales. Future work includes extending strategic risk aversion to broader agentic AI settings such as
human–AI collaboration and multi-agent foundation model systems.
References
Ahmed, Z., Le Roux, N., Norouzi, M., and Schuurmans, D. (2019). Understanding the impact of entropy on
policy optimization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 151–160. PMLR.
Bai, S., Chen, K., Liu, X., Wang, J., Ge, W., Song, S., Dang, K., Wang, P., Wang, S., Tang, J., et al. (2025).
Qwen2.5-VL technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13923.
Bard, N., Foerster, J. N., Chandar, S., Burch, N., Lanctot, M., Song, H. F., Parisotto, E., Dumoulin, V.,
Moitra, S., Hughes, E., Dunning, I., Mourad, S., Larochelle, H., Bellemare, M. G., and Bowling, M. (2020).
The Hanabi challenge: A new frontier for AI research. Artificial Intelligence, 280(C).
Barrett, S., Agmon, N., Hazon, N., Kraus, S., and Stone, P. (2014). Communicating with unknown teammates.
12


--- Page 13 ---
In International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, page 1433–1434. International
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Bukharin, A., Li, Y., Yu, Y., Zhang, Q., Chen, Z., Zuo, S., Zhang, C., Zhang, S., and Zhao, T. (2023).
Robust multi-agent reinforcement learning via adversarial regularization: Theoretical foundation and stable
algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc.
Cao, Y., Yu, W., Ren, W., and Chen, G. (2013). An overview of recent progress in the study of distributed
multi-agent coordination. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 9(1):427–438.
Carroll, M., Shah, R., Ho, M. K., Griffiths, T., Seshia, S., Abbeel, P., and Dragan, A. (2019). On the utility
of learning about humans for human-ai coordination. In Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Beygelzimer, A.,
d'Alché-Buc, F., Fox, E., and Garnett, R., editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc.
Cemri, M., Pan, M. Z., Yang, S., Agrawal, L. A., Chopra, B., Tiwari, R., Keutzer, K., Parameswaran, A.,
Klein, D., Ramchandran, K., Zaharia, M., Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I. (2025). Why do multi-agent LLM
systems fail? arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.13657.
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J.,
Nakano, R., et al. (2021). Training verifiers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168.
Corchón, L. C. (1994). Comparative statics for aggregative games the strong concavity case. Mathematical
Social Sciences, 28(3):151–165.
Dafoe, A., Bachrach, Y., Hadfield, G., Horvitz, E., Larson, K., and Graepel, T. (2021). Cooperative AI:
Machines must learn to find common ground. Nature, 593(7857):33–36.
de Witt, C. S., Gupta, T., Makoviichuk, D., Makoviychuk, V., Torr, P. H. S., Sun, M., and Whiteson,
S. (2020). Is independent learning all you need in the starcraft multi-agent challenge? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2011.09533.
Dizdarević, T., Hammond, R., Gessler, T., Calinescu, A., Cook, J., Gallici, M., Lupu, A., and Foerster,
J. N. (2025). Ad-hoc human-AI coordination challenge. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
volume 267, pages 13900–13937. PMLR.
Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Mordatch, I. (2024). Improving factuality and reasoning
in language models through multiagent debate. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR.
Eriksson, H., Basu, D., Alibeigi, M., and Dimitrakakis, C. (2022). Risk-sensitive bayesian games for multi-agent
reinforcement learning under policy uncertainty. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10045.
Facchinei, F. and Pang, J.-S. (2003). Finite-dimensional variational inequalities and complementarity problems.
Springer.
Föllmer, H. and Schied, A. (2002). Convex measures of risk and trading constraints. Finance and stochastics,
6:429–447.
Forkel, J. and Foerster, J. (2025). Entropy is all you need for inter-seed cross-play in hanabi. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.22581.
Ganesh, S., Vadori, N., Xu, M., Zheng, H., Reddy, P., and Veloso, M. (2019). Reinforcement learning for
market making in a multi-agent dealer market. arXiv preprint arXiv:1911.05892.
Goeree, J. K., Holt, C. A., and Palfrey, T. R. (2003). Risk averse behavior in generalized matching pennies
games. Games and Economic Behavior, 45(1):97–113.
Goeree, J. K. and Offerman, T. (2002).
Efficiency in auctions with private and common values: An
experimental study. American Economic Review, 92(3):625–643.
Gollier, C. (2001). The economics of risk and time. MIT press.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Grattafiori, A., Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., Mathur, A.,
Schelten, A., Vaughan, A., et al. (2024). The Llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783.
Hu, H., Lerer, A., Cui, B., Pineda, L., Brown, N., and Foerster, J. (2021). Off-belief learning. In International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4369–4379. PMLR.
Hu, H., Lerer, A., Peysakhovich, A., and Foerster, J. (2020). “other-play” for zero-shot coordination. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4399–4410. PMLR.
Kruse, T., Pandey, A. K., Alami, R., and Kirsch, A. (2013). Human-aware robot navigation: A survey. Robot.
Auton. Syst., 61(12):1726–1743.
Lan, G. (2023). Policy mirror descent for reinforcement learning: Linear convergence, new sampling complexity,
and generalized problem classes. Mathematical programming, 198(1):1059–1106.
Lanzetti, N., Bolognani, S., and Dörfler, F. (2025a). First-order conditions for optimization in the Wasserstein
space. SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science, 7(1):274–300.
Lanzetti, N., Fricker, S., Bolognani, S., Dörfler, F., and Paccagnan, D. (2025b). Strategically robust game
theory via optimal transport. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15325.
Lanzetti, N., Terpin, A., and Dörfler, F. (2024). Variational analysis in the Wasserstein space. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.10676.
Lauffer, N., Shah, A., Carroll, M., Seshia, S. A., Russell, S., and Dennis, M. D. (2025). Robust and diverse
multi-agent learning via rational policy gradient. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Leibo, J. Z., Zambaldi, V., Lanctot, M., Marecki, J., and Graepel, T. (2017). Multi-agent reinforcement
learning in sequential social dilemmas. In Conference on Autonomous Agents and MultiAgent Systems,
page 464–473, Richland, SC. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems.
Lerer, A. and Peysakhovich, A. (2019). Learning existing social conventions via observationally augmented
self-play. In Proceedings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES ’19, page
107–114, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Liang, Y., Chen, D., Gupta, A., Du, S. S., and Jaques, N. (2024). Learning to cooperate with humans using
generative agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Liu, B., Pu, Z., Pan, Y., Yi, J., Liang, Y., and Zhang, D. (2023). Lazy agents: A new perspective on solving
sparse reward problem in multi-agent reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 21937–21950. PMLR.
Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mordatch, I. (2017). Multi-agent actor-critic for
mixed cooperative-competitive environments. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS’17, page 6382–6393, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc.
Lupu, A., Cui, B., Hu, H., and Foerster, J. (2021). Trajectory diversity for zero-shot coordination. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 7204–7213. PMLR.
Mazumdar, E., Panaganti, K., and Shi, L. (2024). Tractable equilibrium computation in Markov games
through risk aversion. In International Conference on Learning Representations.
McKelvey, R. D. and Palfrey, T. R. (1995). Quantal response equilibria for normal form games. Games and
economic behavior, 10(1):6–38.
Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR)†, Bakhtin, A., Brown, N., Dinan, E., Farina, G.,
Flaherty, C., Fried, D., Goff, A., Gray, J., Hu, H., et al. (2022). Human-level play in the game of diplomacy
by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science, 378(6624):1067–1074.
14


--- Page 15 ---
Muglich, D., Schroeder de Witt, C., van der Pol, E., Whiteson, S., and Foerster, J. (2022). Equivariant
networks for zero-shot coordination. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35,
pages 6410–6423. Curran Associates, Inc.
Paccagnan, D., Gentile, B., Parise, F., Kamgarpour, M., and Lygeros, J. (2018). Nash and Wardrop equilibria
in aggregative games with coupling constraints. IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, 64(4):1373–1388.
Park, C., Han, S., Guo, X., Ozdaglar, A. E., Zhang, K., and Kim, J.-K. (2025). MAPoRL: Multi-agent
post-co-training for collaborative large language models with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the
63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages
30215–30248. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Qiu, W., Wang, X., Yu, R., Wang, R., He, X., An, B., Obraztsova, S., and Rabinovich, Z. (2021). RMIX:
Learning risk-sensitive policies for cooperative reinforcement learning agents. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 34, pages 23049–23062. Curran Associates, Inc.
Rahman, A., Fosong, E., Carlucho, I., and Albrecht, S. V. (2023). Generating teammates for training robust
ad hoc teamwork agents via best-response diversity. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Ruhdorfer, C., Bortoletto, M., Penzkofer, A., and Bulling, A. (2025). The overcooked generalisation challenge:
Evaluating cooperation with novel partners in unknown environments using unsupervised environment
design. Transactions on Machine Learning Research.
Schulman, J., Levine, S., Abbeel, P., Jordan, M., and Moritz, P. (2015). Trust region policy optimization. In
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 1889–1897. PMLR.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and Klimov, O. (2017). Proximal policy optimization
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347.
Shen, S., Ma, C., Li, C., Liu, W., Fu, Y., Mei, S., Liu, X., and Wang, C. (2023). Riskq: risk-sensitive
multi-agent reinforcement learning value factorization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 36, pages 34791–34825. Curran Associates, Inc.
Sheng, G., Zhang, C., Ye, Z., Wu, X., Zhang, W., Zhang, R., Peng, Y., Lin, H., and Wu, C. (2024). Hybridflow:
A flexible and efficient rlhf framework. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2409.19256.
Shi, L., Mazumdar, E., Chi, Y., and Wierman, A. (2024). Sample-efficient robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning in the face of environmental uncertainty. In International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR.
Slumbers, O., Mguni, D. H., Blumberg, S. B., Mcaleer, S. M., Yang, Y., and Wang, J. (2023). A game-theoretic
framework for managing risk in multi-agent systems. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 32059–32087. PMLR.
Stone, P., Kaminka, G., Kraus, S., and Rosenschein, J. (2010). Ad hoc autonomous agent teams: Collaboration
without pre-coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference On Artificial Intelligence, volume 24,
pages 1504–1509.
Sunehag, P., Lever, G., Gruslys, A., Czarnecki, W. M., Zambaldi, V., Jaderberg, M., Lanctot, M., Sonnerat,
N., Leibo, J. Z., Tuyls, K., and Graepel, T. (2018). Value-decomposition networks for cooperative multi-
agent learning based on team reward. In Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and MultiAgent Systems, page 2085–2087. International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems.
Terry, J. K., Black, B., Grammel, N., Jayakumar, M., Hari, A., Sullivan, R., Santos, L., Perez, R., Horsch,
C., Dieffendahl, C., Williams, N. L., Lokesh, Y., and Ravi, P. (2021). Pettingzoo: Gym for multi-agent
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.14471.
Tran, K.-T., Dao, D., Nguyen, M.-D., Pham, Q.-V., O’Sullivan, B., and Nguyen, H. D. (2025). Multi-agent
collaboration mechanisms: A survey of LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06322.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Treutlein, J., Dennis, M., Oesterheld, C., and Foerster, J. (2021). A new formalism, method and open issues
for zero-shot coordination. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10413–10423. PMLR.
Tsitsiklis, J. (1984). Problems in Decentralized Decision Making and Computation. Massuchusetts Institute
of Technology.
Vinyals, O., Babuschkin, I., Czarnecki, W. M., Mathieu, M., Dudzik, A., Chung, J., Choi, D. H., Powell,
R., Ewalds, T., Georgiev, P., Oh, J., Horgan, D., Kroiss, M., Danihelka, I., Huang, A., Sifre, L., Cai,
T., Agapiou, J. P., Jaderberg, M., Vezhnevets, A. S., Leblond, R., Pohlen, T., Dalibard, V., Budden, D.,
Sulsky, Y., Molloy, J., Paine, T. L., Gulcehre, C., Wang, Z., Pfaff, T., Wu, Y., Ring, R., Yogatama, D.,
Wünsch, D., McKinney, K., Smith, O., Schaul, T., Lillicrap, T., Kavukcuoglu, K., Hassabis, D., Apps, C.,
and Silver, D. (2019). Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature,
575(7782):350–354.
Wang, X., Zhang, S., Zhang, W., Dong, W., Chen, J., Wen, Y., and Zhang, W. (2024). ZSC-eval: An
evaluation toolkit and benchmark for multi-agent zero-shot coordination. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
Wu, Q., Bansal, G., Zhang, J., Wu, Y., Li, B., Zhu, E., Jiang, L., Zhang, X., Zhang, S., Liu, J., Awadallah,
A. H., White, R. W., Burger, D., and Wang, C. (2024). Autogen: Enabling next-gen LLM applications via
multi-agent conversations. In First Conference on Language Modeling.
Yang, A., Li, A., Yang, B., Zhang, B., Hui, B., Zheng, B., Yu, B., Gao, C., Huang, C., Lv, C., et al. (2025).
Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388.
Yekkehkhany, A., Murray, T., and Nagi, R. (2020). Risk-averse equilibrium for games. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.08414.
Yu, C., Gao, J., Liu, W., Xu, B., Tang, H., Yang, J., Wang, Y., and Wu, Y. (2023). Learning zero-
shot cooperation with humans, assuming humans are biased. In International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen, A., and Wu, Y. (2022). The surprising effectiveness of
PPO in cooperative multi-agent games. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35,
pages 24611–24624. Curran Associates, Inc.
Zhang, K., SUN, T., Tao, Y., Genc, S., Mallya, S., and Basar, T. (2020). Robust multi-agent reinforcement
learning with model uncertainty. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, pages
10571–10583.
Zhang, Y. and Mazumdar, E. (2025). Convergent Q-learning for infinite-horizon general-sum Markov games
through behavioral economics. In 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), pages
5899–5904. IEEE.
Zhang, Z., Li, X., Lin, Y., Liu, H., Chandradevan, R., Wu, L., Lin, M., Wang, F., Tang, X., He, Q., and
Wang, S. (2025). Unlocking the power of multi-agent LLM for reasoning: From lazy agents to deliberation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02303.
Zhao, R., Song, J., Yuan, Y., Hu, H., Gao, Y., Wu, Y., Sun, Z., and Yang, W. (2023). Maximum entropy
population-based training for zero-shot human-AI coordination. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 37, pages 6145–6153.
16


--- Page 17 ---
A
Further Discussion on Related Work
In this section, we discuss a broader set of related work to better position our work in the landscape of
collaborative multi-agent learning and risk-averse/robust MARL.
Collaborative MARL and Partner Generalization
Research into solving collaborative decision-making
problems using MARL has a long history (Cao et al., 2013), originating from a desire for solving decentralized
decision-making problems (Tsitsiklis, 1984). Far from fading, these issues remain at the fore of research
interest with the advent of powerful AI systems and a desire to build large teams of AI agents (Tran et al.,
2025) for solving collaborative tasks. Emerging from this literature, is a general consensus that classic
single-agent policy optimization algorithms like PPO (Schulman et al., 2017), used in a decentralized way,
can yield state-of-the-art or near state-of-the-art performance without needing to be overly specialized to the
multi-agent nature of the problem (de Witt et al., 2020; Forkel and Foerster, 2025; Yu et al., 2022). Despite
such results, learned policies resulting from such approaches can fail to generalize to unseen agents (Forkel
and Foerster, 2025) and new environments. We validate this through our experiments and further observe
that these state-of-the-art algorithms are consistently prone to learning free-riding strategies.
Beyond the lines of work mentioned in Section 2, other important lines of work on addressing the partner
generalization problem seek to avoid brittle coordination conventions by learning symmetry-invariant or
partner-agnostic policies (Hu et al., 2020; Muglich et al., 2022; Treutlein et al., 2021). These often require
strong structural assumptions and may not scale to complex collaborative environments. Another set of
approaches attempt to achieve robustness by training against partner policies derived from human data
(Carroll et al., 2019; Liang et al., 2024; Meta Fundamental AI Research Diplomacy Team (FAIR)† et al.,
2022), but their effectiveness is constrained by data availability and coverage. Neither of these approaches are
fully agnostic to the structure of the underlying problem and are thus not general principles that can be
broadly applied across different tasks.
Consequently, it remains unclear how to systematically achieve partner generalization without relying
on human data or ad-hoc constructions. In this paper we showed that strategic risk aversion gives us one
potential approach. Furthermore, we show that it can readily be combined with policy optimization algorithms
like PPO, resulting in scalable and performant algorithms for learning generalizable policies.
Robustness and Risk Aversion in MARL
A second related line of work is the emerging literature on
robust and risk-averse MARL (Qiu et al., 2021; Shi et al., 2024; Slumbers et al., 2023; Yekkehkhany et al.,
2020; Zhang et al., 2020). While most of the papers study robustness or risk aversion to changes in the
underlying environment (Eriksson et al., 2022; Ganesh et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2021; Shen et al., 2023; Shi
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2020) or to tail risks in large populations of agents (Yekkehkhany et al., 2020), in
this work we study strategic risk aversion. Strategic risk aversion and robustness yield solutions that are
more amenable to computation than classic game-theoretic solution concepts (Mazumdar et al., 2024), ensure
robustness to unseen behaviors of the other agents, and sometimes even induce a coordination effect between
the agents (Lanzetti et al., 2025b)—an empirical observation that we make rigorous in Section 4. Despite the
prior work in this area, the broader benefits of the concept in collaborative games are unknown. This is the
problem that we study in this paper.
B
Proofs for Section 4
In this section, we provide the proofs of our two main theorems, Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 4.5, as well as
the derivation of Example 4.2 used in Fig. 1.
B.1
Proof of Theorem 4.1
We begin with the proof of Theorem 4.1. We first show that there exists a RQE in the space of Gaussian
strategies in the aggregative games studied in this section. We then provide the proof of a more general
version of Theorem 4.1.
17


--- Page 18 ---
B.1.1
Preliminaries
Before proving Proposition B.3, we study RQE for quadratic games. We start with the risk-averse quantal
best response. We conduct our analysis in slightly more general settings where the players’ utilities are
ui(ai, a−i) = 1
2
 ai
a−i

,
 Hi,i
Hi,−i
H−i,i
H−i,−i
  ai
a−i

+
 hi
h−i

,
 ai
a−i

,
(10)
where the matrix
 Hi,i
Hi,−i
H−i,i
H−i,−i

is assumed to be symmetric negative semidefinite, and Hi,i is assumed to be symmetric negative definite for
all i. Throughout this section, with slight abuse of notation, we denote by x−i the product measure of the
mixed strategies of all players except i.
Lemma B.1 (risk-averse quantal best response). Let x−i be Gaussian with mean m−i and covariance matrix
Σ−i ≻0. Then, the risk-averse quantal best response, defined as the maximizer of U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i), is uniquely
given by a Gaussian mixed strategy with the following covariance matrix and mean:
Σi = −εiH−1
i,i
mi =
 −Hi,i + Hi,−iP −1
−i H⊤
i,−i
−1 
hi + Hi,−iP −1
−i
 1
τi
Σ−1
−i m−i −h−i

,
where P−i =
1
τi Σ−1
−i + H−i,−i, provided that P−i is positive definite. If instead P−i is not positive definite,
then risk is infinite.
Proof. To start, recall that the duality representation of the entropic risk measure (e.g., see Föllmer and
Schied (2002)) gives
sup
p∈∆(Rn(N−1))
E ai∼xi
a−i∼x−i[−ui(ai, a−i)] −1
τi
KL(p, x−i) = 1
τi
log E ai∼xi
a−i∼x−i[exp (−τiui(ai, a−i))].
Thus, we can reformulate the optimization problem for best responses as follows:
sup
xi∈∆(Rn)
U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i)
= −
inf
xi∈∆(Rn) −U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i)
= −
inf
xi∈∆(Rn)
sup
p∈∆(Rn(N−1))
E ai∼xi
a−i∼x−i[−ui(ai, a−i)] −1
τi
KL(p, x−i) + ϵiH(xi)
= −
inf
xi∈∆(Rn)
1
τi
log Ea−i∼x−i

exp

−τi(1
2⟨a−i, H−i,−ia−i⟩+ Eai∼xi [⟨ai, Hi,−ia−i⟩] + ⟨h−i, a−i⟩)

−Eai∼xi
1
2⟨ai, Hi,iai⟩+ ⟨hi, ai⟩

+ ϵiH(xi)
=
sup
xi∈∆(Rn)
−1
τi
log Ea−i∼x−i

exp

−τi(1
2⟨a−i, H−i,−ia−i⟩+ Eai∼xi [⟨ai, Hi,−ia−i⟩] + ⟨h−i, a−i⟩)

+ Eai∼xi
1
2⟨ai, Hi,iai⟩+ ⟨hi, ai⟩

−ϵiH(xi)
=
sup
xi∈∆(Rn)
−1
τi
log Ea−i∼x−i

exp

−τi
1
2⟨a−i, H−i,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨mi, Hi,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨h−i, a−i⟩

+ Eai∼xi
1
2⟨ai, Hi,iai⟩+ ⟨hi, ai⟩

−ϵiH(xi).
18


--- Page 19 ---
When x−i is Gaussian with mean m−i and variance Σ−i, the expression simplifies to
Ea−i∼x−i

exp

−τi
1
2⟨a−i, H−i,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨ai, Hi,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨h−i, a−i⟩

=
1
p
(2π)n det(Σ−i)
Z
Rn exp

−1
2⟨a−i −¯m, ¯Σ−1
−i (a−i −¯m)⟩
+1
2⟨¯m−i, ¯Σ−1
−i ¯m−i⟩−1
2⟨m−i, Σ−1
−i m−i⟩

da−i
=
s
(2π)n det
 ¯Σ−i

(2π)n det(Σ−i) exp
1
2⟨¯m−i, ¯Σ−i ¯m−i⟩−1
2⟨m−i, Σ−im−i⟩

=
1
q
det
 Σ−i ¯Σ−1
−i
 exp
1
2⟨¯m−i, ¯Σ−1
−i ¯m−i⟩−1
2⟨m−i, Σ−1
−i m−i⟩

,
where ¯Σ−1
−i = Σ−1
−i + τiH−i,−i = τiP−i and ¯m−i = ¯Σ(Σ−1
−i m−i −τi(H⊤
i,−imi + h−i)). Moreover,
det
 Σ−i ¯Σ−1
−i

= det(I + τiΣ−iH−i,−i).
Overall, we therefore have
log Ea−i∼x−i

exp

−τi
1
2⟨a−i, H−i,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨ai, Hi,−ia−i⟩+ ⟨h−i, a−i⟩

= −1
2 log det(I + τiΣ−iH−i,−i) + 1
2⟨¯m−i, ¯Σ−1
−i ¯m−i⟩−1
2⟨m−i, Σ−1
−i m−i⟩.
We can now plug this expression into the optimization problem for best responses and get
sup
xi∈∆(Rn)
U τi,ϵi
i
(xi, x−i) =
sup
xi∈∆(Rn)
1
2τi
log det(I + τiΣ−iH−i,−i) −1
2τi
⟨¯m−i, ¯Σ−1
−i ¯m−i⟩+ 1
2τi
⟨m−i, Σ−1
−i m−i⟩
+ Eai∼xi
1
2⟨ai, Hi,iai⟩+ ⟨hi, ai⟩

−ϵiH(xi).
This is an unconstrained optimization problem in the space of probability measures. We will use the first-order
necessary conditions in the Wasserstein space in Lanzetti et al. (2025a, 2024) to construct an optimal solution
and then use the sufficient conditions to establish optimality. Using Theorem 3.2 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a),
we can set the Wasserstein gradient to 0 to obtain that, at optimality, the following first-order necessary
condition must hold:
1
τi
(−τiHi,−i ¯Σ−i)¯Σ−1
−i ¯m −Hi,iai −hi + ϵi
∇ρ(ai)
ρ(ai)
= 0
for xi-almost all ai ∈Rn,
(11)
where ρ is the density of the optimal xi (if it exists). The first term follows from a generalization of the
chain rule (Proposition 2.16 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)), while the other terms follow from the well-known
Wasserstein gradients of expected values (Proposition 2.20 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)) and of entropy (Example
2.27 in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)). We now make the “ansatz” that xi is Gaussian with mean mi and covariance
Σi. Since xi is Gaussian, we have
∇ρ(ai)
ρ(ai)
= ∇

−1
2

ai −mi, Σ−1
i (ai −mi)

= −Σ−1
i (ai −mi).
Thus, together with the expression for ¯m−i, (11) reduces
−Hi,−i ¯Σ−i(Σ−1
−i m−i −τi(H⊤
i,−imi + h−i)) −Hi,iai −hi −ϵiΣ−1
i (ai −mi) = 0
(12)
We study mean and covariance separately.
19


--- Page 20 ---
• Mean: We can then integrate (12) with respect to xi to obtain
Z
Rn −Hi,−i ¯Σ−i(Σ−1
−i m−i −τi(H⊤
i,−imi + h−i)) −Hi,iai −hi −ϵiΣ−1
i (ai −mi)dxi(ai) = 0.
This yields
−Hi,−i ¯Σ−i(Σ−1
−i m−i −τi(H⊤
i,−imi + h−i)) −(Hi,i + Qi)mi −hi = 0,
and so
 −Hi,i + τiHi,−i ¯Σ−iH⊤
i,−i

mi −Hi,−i ¯Σ−iΣ−1
−i m−i + τiHi,−i ¯Σ−ih−i −hi = 0.
The unique solution to this linear equation is
mi =
 −Hi,i + τiHi,−i ¯Σ−iH⊤
i,−i
−1  hi + Hi,−i ¯Σ−i(Σ−1
−i m−i −τih−i

.
With ¯Σ−i = 1
τi P −1
−i we obtain the desired expression.
• Covariance: We right multiply (12) with (ai −mi)⊤and integrate with respect to xi to get
−
Z
Rn Hi,iai(ai −mi)⊤dxi(ai) −ϵiI = 0
and so
−Hi,i(Σi + mim⊤
i −mim⊤
i ) −ϵiI = 0.
Overall, we therefore have
Σi = −ϵiH−1
i,i .
Finally, we notice that the objective function is strongly geodesically convex in the distribution. Thus, the
candidate solution is the unique minimizer and, therefore, the unique best response to x−i (see Theorem 3.3
in Lanzetti et al. (2025a)).
With this lemma, we obtain a way to compute Gaussian RQE in continuous games:
Lemma B.2. Consider a surrogate “game of the means”, where each player selects a vector mi ∈Rn to
maximize the surrogate concave quadratic utility
¯Ui(mi, m−i) = 1
2⟨mi, (Hi,i −Hi,−iP −1
−i H⊤
i,−i)mi⟩+ 1
τi
⟨mi, Hi,−iP −1
−i Σ−1
−i m−i⟩+⟨mi, hi −Hi,−iP −1
−i h−i⟩. (13)
Then, (m⋆
1, . . . , m⋆
N) is a Nash equilibrium of the game with utility (13) if and only if (x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
N), where x⋆
i
is a Gaussian distribution with mean m⋆
i and variance −ϵiH−1
i,i , is an RQE of the game with utilities (10).
Moreover, (m⋆
1, . . . , m⋆
N) is the unique Nash equilibrium of this surrogate game if and only if (x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
N) is
the unique RQE in which one or more mixed strategies are Gaussian.
Proof. The proof follows directly from Lemma B.1. Uniqueness in Gaussian mixed strategies follows from
uniqueness of the best response.
At this point, we can study RQE for games in which
R(a1, . . . , aN) = −1
2

N
X
i=1
ai −¯a

2
H
= −1
2
* N
X
i=1
ai −¯a, H
 N
X
i=1
ai −¯a
!+
ci(ai) = ρi
2 ∥ai∥2,
where we assume that the matrix H, used in the weighted norm, is symmetric positive definite and ρi > 0.
As we will show below, considering this class is sufficient.
20


--- Page 21 ---
Proposition B.3 (computation of RQE). Let ϵi > 0 and τi > 0 so that
1
τiϵj
(ρj + H) −H ≻0
∀j ̸= i.
(14)
Let (m⋆
1, . . . , m⋆
N) ∈Rn × . . . × Rn be a Nash equilibrium of the surrogate game where the utility of each
player is
¯Ui(mi, m−i) = 1
2
*
mi,

−ρiI −H −
X
j̸=i
HP −1
ij H

mi
+
−1
τi
*
mi, H

X
j̸=i
P −1
ij Σ−1
j mj


+
+
*
mi, H¯a + H
X
j̸=i
P −1
ij H¯a
+
,
where Σi = ϵi(ρiI + H)−1 ≻0 and Pij =
1
τiϵj (ρjI + H) −H ≻0. Then, the Gaussian mixed strategies
(x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
N) form an RQE of the game and, at equilibrium, each player has finite costs. Moreover, if the
equilibrium (m⋆
1, . . . , m⋆
N) is unique, then (x⋆
1, . . . , x⋆
N) is the unique Gaussian RQE. In particular, this is
the case ρi, the degrees of risk aversion, and the degrees of bounded rationality are player-independent (i.e.,
ρi = ρ, τi = τ, and ϵ = ϵi).
Proof. The proof follows directly from Lemma B.2, where we have Hi,i = −H −ρiI, H−i,−i = IN−1 ⊗(−H),
Hi,−i =
−H
. . .
−H
, hi = H¯a, and h−i =

(H¯a)⊤
· · ·
(H¯a)⊤⊤. We now show that if ρi = ρ,
τi = τ, and ϵi = ϵ we have uniqueness. We show this in the case of two players; the general case is then a
straightforward extension. For uniqueness, it suffices to check that the surrogate game is strongly monotone
and therefore will have a unique Nash equilibrium (Facchinei and Pang, 2003). Since ρi = ρ, τi = τ, and
ϵi = ϵ, we also have Σ2 = Σ2 = Σ and P12 = P21 = P. In this case, the game map reads
F(m1, m2) =
∂m1 ¯U1(m1, m2)
∂m2 ¯U2(m2, m1)

= F
m1
m2

+ f,
where
F :=
−ρI −H −HP −1H⊤
−1
τ HP −1Σ−1
−1
τ HP −1Σ−1
−ρI −H −HP −1H⊤

f =
H¯a + HP −1H¯a
H¯a + HP −1H¯a

.
With
−1
τ HP −1Σ−1 = −1
τ H
1
τ Σ−1 −H
−1
Σ−1 = −H(I −τΣH)−1
= −H + τHΣH(I −τΣH)−1 = −H −H
1
τ Σ−1 −H
−1
H = −H −HP −1H
we have
F =

−ρI
0
0
−ρI

+

−H
−H
−H
−H

+

−HP −1H
−HP −1H
−HP −1H
−HP −1H

.
Clearly, F is negative definite, as it results from the sum of a negative definite matrix and two positive
semidefinite matrices. Thus, the game map is strongly monotone, and we have uniqueness.
Discussion
A few observations on this result. First, the surrogate game can be solved by setting the
gradient of each player’s utility to zero, which yields a linear system of equations which can be shown to
possess a unique solution whenever ρi > 0. Second, if the assumption (14) is violated, then the utility of
player i will generally diverge −∞and, thus, the player has “infinite” risk. To rule out this triviality, we
therefore assume (14). Third, uniqueness is in the space of Gaussian mixed strategies. Thus, there might
exist another equilibrium in which all mixed strategies are non-Gaussian.
21


--- Page 22 ---
B.1.2
Proof of Theorem 4.1
We prove a more general version of Theorem 4.1.
Theorem B.4 (risk induces collaboration). Consider the game with utilities in (4.1). On the domain of
τi where (14) and where the Gaussian RQE in unique2, let x⋆
i (τ1, . . . , τN) be the mixed strategy of player i
at the unique Gaussian RQE of the game, as a function of the degrees of risk aversion τ1, . . . , τN. Then,
the expected shared reward (τ1, . . . , τN) 7→J(τ1, . . . , τN), where
J(τ1, . . . , τN) := Eai∼x⋆
i (τ1,...,τN) [R(a1, . . . , aN)] ,
is strictly increasing3That is, players contribute more to the joint reward as they become more risk-averse.
Proof of Theorem B.4. For simplicity of notation, we conduct the proof in the case of two players, with the
extension to more players being straightforward. To start, we show that, without loss of generality, the
problem can be simplified, via the following three steps. First, we notice
R(a1, a2) = 1
2⟨a1 + a2, H(a1 + a2)⟩+ ⟨h, a1 + a2⟩= 1
2⟨a1 + a2 + H−1h, H(a1 + a2 + H−1h)⟩−⟨h, H−1h⟩.
Since the term ⟨h, H−1h⟩is constant, we can therefore without loss of generality focus on the reward
R(a1, a2) = 1
2⟨a1 + a2 + H−1h, H(a1 + a2 + H−1h)⟩.
Additionally, if we let ¯H = −H, which is positive definite, we have
R(a1, a2) = −1
2⟨a1 + a2 −¯H−1h, ¯H(a1 + a2 −¯H−1h)⟩= −1
2∥a1 + a2 −¯a∥2
¯
H
where ¯a := ¯H−1h = −H−1h. Second, up to replacing Qi := ρiI with ρi ¯H and rescaling ¯a, we can assume,
without loss of generality, that ¯H = I (i.e., H = −I). Third, we note that, since the variance of each mixed
strategy x⋆
i (τ1, τ2) does not depend on risk parameters τ1, τ2, it suffices to study the monotonicity of the
function
¯J(τ1, τ2) = −1
2∥m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a∥2,
where m⋆
i (τ1, τ2) is the mean of x⋆
i (τ1, τ2) at the unique Gaussian RQE.
Thus, we now study the monotonicity of ¯J(τ1, τ2). From basic sensitivity analysis, ¯J(τ1, τ2) is smooth and,
thus, all its directional derivatives can be expressed via its gradient. To evaluate the gradient of ¯J(τ1, τ2), we
compute its partial derivatives via the product rule as follows:
∂τi ¯J(τ1, τ2) = −⟨m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a, ∂τim⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + ∂τim⋆
2(τ1, τ2)⟩.
(15)
We evaluate this derivative for i = 1, with the case i = 2 being analogous. As a preliminary, we note that

m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

=
−Q1 −I −P −1
12
−1
τ1 P −1
12 Σ−1
2
−1
τ2 P −1
21 Σ−1
1
−Q2 −I −P −1
21

|
{z
}
S(τ1,τ2)

−¯a −P −1
12 ¯a
−¯a −P −1
12 ¯a

=
Q1 + I + P −1
12
1
τ1 P −1
12 Σ−1
2
1
τ2 P −1
21 Σ−1
1
Q2 + I + P −1
21

|
{z
}
S(τ1,τ2)
¯a + P −1
12 ¯a
¯a + P −1
12 ¯a

|
{z
}
s(τ1,τ2)
,
3Uniqueness holds whenever the game is symmetric or τi is sufficiently small. In general, uniqueness of Gaussian RQE can be
checked studying the uniqueness of Nash equilibria for the surrogate game Proposition B.3, and, amounts to checking positive
(or negative) positiveness of a matrix.
3Here, strictly increasing means that if τ ′
i ≥τi for all i with one inequality strict, then J(τ ′
1, . . . , τ ′
N) > J(τ1, . . . , τN).
22


--- Page 23 ---
where S(τ1, τ2) is a matrix whose symmetric part is positive definite. Thus, by the product and chain rule,
we conclude that
∂τ1m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
∂τ1m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

= −S(τ1, τ2)−1

∂τ1S(τ1, τ2)
m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

−∂τ1s(τ1, τ2)

.
Using
∂τ1P −1
12 = (Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1Σ−1
2 (Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1 = (Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−2Σ−1
2
= ∂τ1
 1
τ1
P −1
12 Σ−1
2

,
we now plug in all expressions to obtain
∂τ1m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
∂τ1m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

= −S(τ1, τ2)−1
∂τ1P −1
12
∂τ1
1
τi P −1
12 Σ−1
2
0
0
 m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

−

∂τ1P −1
12 ¯a
0

= −S(τ1, τ2)−1
 
(Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1Σ−1
2 (Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1
(Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−2Σ−1
2
0
0
 
m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

−

(Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1Σ−1
2 (Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−1¯a
0
 
= −S(τ1, τ2)−1

(Σ−1
2
−τ1I)−2Σ−1
2
0

(m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a)
= −1
τ 2
1
S(τ1, τ2)−1

P −2
2
Σ−1
2
0

(m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a).
Thus, we have
∂τ1m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + ∂τ1m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)
=
I
I 
∂τ1m⋆
1(τ1, τ2)
∂τ1m⋆
2(τ1, τ2)

= −1
τ 2
1
I
I
S(τ1, τ2)−1

P −2
2
Σ−1
2
0

|
{z
}
N
(m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a),
so that (15) becomes
∂τ1 ¯J(τ1, τ2) = 1
τ 2
1
⟨m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a, N(m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) −¯a)⟩.
To conclude the proof, it suffices to show that N is positive definite for all τi ≥0. Indeed, in this case,
∂τi ¯J(τ1, τ2) is always positive (unless m⋆
1(τ1, τ2) + m⋆
2(τ1, τ2) = ¯a, which however cannot happen if ρ1, ρ2 > 0)
and, thus, the shared reward ¯J(τ1, τ2) is strictly increasing. Thus, in the rest of the proof, we will show that
N is positive definite. Using the formula for the inverse of block matrices, we conclude that
N =

I + (Q2 + I + P −1
12 )−1 1
τ2
P −1
21 Σ−1
1

|
{z
}
N1

Q1 + I + P −1
12 + 1
τ1
P −1
12 Σ−1
2 (Q2 + I + P −1
21 )−1 1
τ2
P −1
21 Σ−1
1
−1
|
{z
}
N−1
2
P −2
12 Σ−1
2
|
{z
}
N −1
3
.
Since Q1 = ρ1H and Q2 = ρ2H commute, we have that Σ1, Σ2, P12, P21, and thus N1, N2, N3 belong to the
subalgebra induced by {Q1, Q2} and, thus, commute. Therefore, each Ni results from the sum and product
of symmetric and positive definite matrices (and their inverses) that commute and, as such, is symmetric and
positive definite. As a consequence, the matrix N is also symmetric and positive definite.
23


--- Page 24 ---
The proof of Theorem 4.1 is now a direct consequence:
Proof of Theorem 4.1. The proof follows from Theorem B.4 and Proposition B.3, using ρi = ρ, τi = τ, and
ϵi = ϵ for all agents.
To conclude, we provide more details on Example 4.2:
Example B.5 (Details on Example 4.2). For the game in Example 4.2, we have H = 1, ρi = 1, and ci = 0,
so that Σi = ϵi
2 and Pij =
2
τiϵj −1 = 2−τiϵj
τiϵj
so that
¯Ui(mi, m−i) = −1
2

2 +
τiϵj
2 −τiϵj

m2
i −1
τi
τiϵj
2 −τiϵj
2
ϵj
mim−i + mi

1 +
τiϵj
2 −τiϵj

¯a.
With τ1 = τ2 = τ and ϵ1 = ϵ2 = ϵ, we obtain the expected reward of each player from the shared reward J(τ)
minus the personal reward and it can be shown to be
−1
2
2 −τϵ + ( τϵ
2 )2
(3 −τϵ
2 )2
+ C,
where C is a constant that results from the variance of the mixed strategies and is therefore not dependent
on τ but only on ϵ.
B.2
Proof of Theorem 4.5
In this section, we provide the proof of Theorem 4.5. To do so, we first derive several helper-lemmas which
guarantee us that (i) players’ strategies in an RQE are on the interior of the simplex, (ii) the KL-divergence
between any strategy and an RQE strategy is uniformly bounded, and (iii) that we can relate the degree of
free-riding to a lower bound on the distance between equilibrium strategies. To begin, we define some useful
quantities that capture measures of the spread of players’ costs and reward functions cmax := maxa c(a),
cmin := mina c(a), vmin := mina1,a2 R(a1, a2) −cmax, vmax := maxa1,a2 R(a1, a2) −cmin, and ¯v := vmax −vmin.
Throughout the proof, we let n := |A| be the number of actions and ∆n = ∆(A) be the probability simplex.
For a mixed strategy x ∈∆n, we denote by x(a) ∈[0, 1] the probability mass assigned to the action a.
Lemma B.6. Suppose that players have degree of bounded rationality ϵ. At a RQE, a player’s strategy xi
has support on all actions, with probability at least m = exp(−¯v/ϵ)
n
.
Proof. In a RQE, a player’s strategy x∗
i must satisfy
x∗
i = arg max
xi∈∆n
⟨xi, Rp∗⟩−⟨c, xi⟩−ϵH(xi),
where p∗= arg minp∈∆n⟨xi, Rp∗⟩+ 1
τ KL(p, x∗
−i). Letting v := Rp∗−c, the classic results show that xi is a
Boltzmann distribution of the form:
xi(a) =
exp(v(a)/ϵ)
Pn
a′=1 exp(v(a′)/ϵ),
where xi(a) is the probability mass assigned to action ai. By minimizing the numerator and maximizing the
denominator of the right hand side we find that:
xi(a) ≥exp(−¯v/ϵ)
n
,
which completes the proof.
Lemma B.7. Suppose x2 ∈σ(∆n) where σ(∆n) := {x ∈∆: x(a) ≥m for all a ∈A} where m ∈(0, 1
n).
Then the KL divergence between any distribution p ∈∆n and x2 is bounded by
sup
q∈∆n
KL(q, x2) ≤log
 1
m

.
24


--- Page 25 ---
Proof. We directly have
KL(q, x2) =
X
a∈A
q(a) log
 q(a)
x2(a)

≤
X
a
q(a) log
 1
m

= log
 1
m

since x2(a) ≥m.
Lemma B.8. Let x1, x2 ∈∆n. If |⟨c, x1 −x2⟩| ≥δ, then
∥x1 −x2∥1 ≥
2δ
cmax −cmin
.
Proof. Let d := x1−x2. Since x1, x2 ∈∆n, P
a da = 0. We use the fact that, for any d ∈Rn with P
a d(a) = 0,
|⟨c, d⟩| ≤cmax−cmin
2
∥d∥1. This directly yields
δ ≤|⟨c, d⟩| ≤cmax −cmin
2
∥x1 −x2∥1.
Rearranging yields the lower bound.
We can now prove Theorem 4.5, restated below with all constants made explicit.
Theorem B.9. Let δ > 0. Suppose that players have a degree of bounded rationality ϵ > 0 and degrees of
risk aversion τ > 0 that satisfies
τ > 2(ϵ log n + ¯v)(cmax −cmin)2
ϵδ2
,
then the game cannot admit a RQE with degree of free-riding greater than δ.
Proof. We prove this by contradiction. We assume that τ >
2(ϵ log n+¯v)(cmax−cmin)2
ϵδ2
and that x1 and x2
constitute a resulting RQE with a level of free riding larger than δ; i.e., |⟨c, x1 −x2⟩| ≥δ . Define the
worst-case utility W(x) and the robust-regularized objective Φ(x):
U(x, q) := ⟨x, Rq⟩−⟨c, x⟩
W(x) := inf
q∈∆n U(x, q)
Φ(x) := W(x) −ϵH(x)
Since W is concave (as the infimum of affine functions) and H is strongly convex on ∆n with respect to the
ℓ1 norm, Φ is ϵ-strongly concave on ∆n with respect to the ℓ1 norm.
Let us consider player 1’s risk-adjusted utility. Without loss of generality, we develop the following for x1,
the results hold for x2 by symmetry. We first show that we can lower bound the risk-adjusted objective by
our worst case objective for any x1, x2 ∈∆n:
U τ(x1, x2) = min
q∈∆n U(x1, q) + 1
τ KL(q, x2) ≥min
q∈∆n U(x1, q) = W(x1).
Now consider an RQE made up of strategies (x1, x2), we upper bound the risk-adjusted objective by using
the fact that x1 and x2 are on the interior of the simplex since they are entropy-regularized best responses
(Lemma B.6), and thus the KL term is bounded by Lemma B.7. Letting C := log n + ¯v
ϵ be the resulting
upper bound (which depends solely on R, c, ϵ and the dimension n) we conclude that
U τ(x1, x2) = min
q∈∆n U(x1, q) + 1
τ KL(q, x2) ≤W(x1) + C
τ .
Putting these together, we have
Φ(x1) = W(x1) −ϵH(x1) ≤U τ(x1, x2) −ϵH(x1) ≤W(x1) + C
τ −ϵH(x1) = Φ(x1) + C
τ .
25


--- Page 26 ---
Using the definition of an RQE, we can further develop this to find that, for all x ∈∆n:
Φ(x1) + C
τ ≥U τ(x1, x2) −ϵH(x1) ≥U τ(x, x2) −ϵH(x) ≥Φ(x)
Re-arranging, and using the fact that Φ is strongly concave with respect to the ℓ1 norm on the simplex, we
have
Φ(x) ≤Φ(x⋆) −ϵ
2∥x1 −x⋆∥2
1
where x⋆= arg minx∈∆n Φ(x) is the unique minimizer of Φ over the simplex. Thus,
ϵ
2∥x1 −x⋆∥2
1 ≤Φ(x∗) −Φ(x1) ≤C
τ
=⇒∥x1 −x⋆∥1 ≤
r
2C
τ .
By symmetry the same bound holds for x2, and thus via the triangle inequality we obtain
∥x1 −x2∥1 ≤∥x1 −x⋆∥1 + ∥x2 −x⋆∥1 ≤2
r
2C
τ .
Via Lemma B.8, however we have that
2δ
cmax −cmin
≤∥x1 −x2∥1 ≤∥x1 −x⋆∥1 + ∥x2 −x⋆∥1 ≤2
r
2C
τ .
Re-arranging, we find that
τ ≤2C(cmax −cmin)2
δ2
.
Plugging in our value for C = log n + ¯v
ϵ , this implies that
τ ≤2(ϵ log n + ¯v)(cmax −cmin)2
ϵδ2
.
However, we assumed that the RQE resulted from the use of a τ >
2(ϵ log n+¯v)(cmax−cmin)2
ϵδ2
which is a
contradiction.
C
Mathematical Background of SRPO
In this section, we provide a formal framework for risk aversion and bounded rationality in MARL, and
present the motivation for our algorithm SRPO. We first introduce the mathematical framework of discounted
general-sum Markov games, and then discuss how to extend risk aversion and bounded rationality from
normal-form games to Markov games. Next, we present the pseudocode of SRPO and a short discussion. To
better motivate SRPO, we provide policy gradient theorems for each original player and adversary as well as
their performance difference lemmas (PDLs), and introduce how to (mathematically) obtain the SRPO loss
from the PDLs.
C.1
Discounted General-sum Markov Games
We consider a discounted N-player general-sum Markov game is specified by a tuple:
MG = {S, {Ai}N
i=1, {ri}N
i=1, γ, P, ρ0},
where S is the state space of the underlying MDP, Ai is the action space of player i ∈[N], and we use the
notation A = QN
i=1 Ai to denote the product action space of both players. We assume that |S| and |Ai| are
all finite. Here, ri : S × A →[0, 1] is the reward function of player i, which we assume to be deterministic.
We use r to denote the joint reward function r := (ri)N
i=1. Moreover, γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor and
P : S × A →∆(S) is the transition kernel, where ∆(S) is the probability simplex of S and P(s′|s, a) is the
26


--- Page 27 ---
probability of the next state being s′ given the current state s and the current actions a = (ai)N
i=1 of the
players. We use ρ0 ∈∆(S) to denote the initial state distribution.
We focus on Markov policies, the class of policies where the action selection probability only depends on
the current state instead of the entire gameplay trajectory, i.e., π = (πi)N
i=1 where πi : S →∆(Ai), i ∈[N].
Given a product Markov policy π, without considering risk aversion and bounded rationality, player i has an
expected discounted cumulative reward given by Eπ[P∞
t=0 γtri(st, at)].
To incorporate risk aversion and bounded rationality in discounted infinite-horizon Markov games, we
slightly overload the notations in normal-form games and consider the following risk-adjusted objective of
player i that minimizes fi(πi, π−i) = maxpi:S→∆(A−i) Ji(πi, π−i, pi) where Ji is defined as
Ji(πi, π−i, pi) = Eπ,p,s0∼ρ0
 ∞
X
t=0
γt

ri(st, at) + 1
τi
Di (pi, π−i; st) −ϵiνi(πi; st)

(16)
where the joint actions at are sampled through ai,t ∼πi(·|st) and a−i,t ∼pi(·|st) and the next state st+1
is sampled from st+1 ∼P(·|st, at), and the notations of Di(pi, π−i; s) and νi(πi; s) are abbreviations of
Di(pi(·|s), π−i(·|s)) and νi(πi(·|s)) respectively. Here, we allow for more generality of the regularizers, and, if
we want to be consistent with the main body, we can choose Di to be KL, and νi to be negative entropy H.
Given a set of original player policies πi and adversarial policies pi, we define the value function for each
state s ∈S as:
V π,p
i
(s) = Eπ,p,s0=s
 ∞
X
t=0
γt

ri(st, at) + 1
τi
Di (pi, π−i; st) −ϵiνi(πi; st)

(17)
so that Ji(π, p) = Es∼ρ0[V π,p
i
(s)], and the Q function as:
Qπ,p
i
(s, a) = ri(s, a) + γEs′∼P (·|s,a)V π,p
i
(s′).
(18)
It is easy to verify that
V π,p
i
(s) =πi(·|s)T Qπ,p
i
(s, ·)pi(·|s) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s).
(19)
Finally, we define given policies πi, pi, we define the discounted state visitation probability as
dπi,pi
s0
(s) := (1 −γ)
∞
X
t=0
γt Pr
πi,pi(st = s|s0) = (1 −γ)
∞
X
t=0
γteT
s0(P πi,pi)tes,
(20)
where es denotes the one-hot vector corresponding to state s. To learn the RQE of the Markov game, we
have to optimize the policies πi to minimize (and pi to maximize) the risk-adjusted objective (16). Here, we
provide some useful tools for optimizing these policies.
C.2
Details of SRPO
We present the pseudocode for SRPO in Algorithm 1. Notice that although the agents and adversaries are
maximizing two losses LSRPO
i
and ¯LSRPO
i
respectively, we unify these two losses by considering the joint loss:
LSRPO
i,joint(θi, θ−i, β) = LCLIP
i
(θi, β) + 1
τi
KL(β, θ−i) −ϵiH(θi)(ot
i).
(21)
The update of agent i can be seen as maximizing LSRPO
i,joint as a function of θi, and the update of adversary i
can be seen as minimizing LSRPO
i,joint as a function of β.
Discussion
The iteration structure of SRPO is very similar to that of IPPO. In the data collection phase,
unlike IPPO, agent i computes the advantage estimate based on rollouts played against adversary i instead
of other real agents. In the optimization phase, both agent i and their adversary update their policies to
maximize the SRPO losses (8) and (9). Here, we have introduced an additional critic with parameter ψi with
the MSE loss function LV F
i
(θi, θ−i), as a standard practice for variance reduction in IPPO, which is only
used when computing the advantage estimates.
27


--- Page 28 ---
Algorithm 1 Strategically Risk-averse Policy Optimization (SRPO) for 2n-agents
1: Initialize: Policies {πθi}n
i=1, adversaries {πϕi}n
i=1, and critics {Vψi}n
i=1.
2: Parameters: Risk aversion {τi}n
i=1, bounded rationality {ϵi}n
i=1, learning rates ηθ, ηϕ, ηψ, clipping δ.
3: for iteration k = 1, 2, . . . do
4:
for each agent i ∈{1, . . . , n} do
5:
// Data Collection
6:
Run joint policy πθi,ϕi = (πθi, πϕi) of agent i and adversary i in the environment for T steps.
7:
Store trajectories Di = {(ot
i, at
i, rt
i)}n,T
i=1,t=1.
8:
Compute advantage estimates ˆAt
i using local critic Vψi.
9:
// Maximin-Optimization
10:
for step in steps do
11:
# Update Agent by maximizing LSRPO
i
12:
θi ←θi + ηθ∇θiLSRPO
i
13:
# Update Adversary by maximizing ¯LSRPO
i
14:
ϕi ←ϕi + ηϕ∇ϕi ¯LSRPO
i
15:
# Update Local Critic
16:
ψi ←ψi −ηψ∇ψiLV F
i
(ψi)
17:
end for
18:
end for
19:
Update old policy parameters: θi,old ←θi for all i.
20: end for
C.3
Policy Gradient Theorems
Policy gradient theorems are the most fundamental theoretical tool for nearly all policy-based algorithms. As
the foundation of our framework, we provide the expression of policy gradients for the original agents and
the adversaries under the risk-adjusted objectives, respectively. Although our results are the first to present
these, similar results for single-agent version can be found in (Lan, 2023).
For the original agents, the policy gradient theorem has the following form:
Lemma C.1 (Policy Gradient for πi). The gradient ∇πiV π,p
i
(s) can be written as
∇πi(·|x)V π,p
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ dπi,pi
s
(x)

Ea−i∼pi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ·, a−i)] −ϵi∇πiνi(πi; x)

.
If πi is parameterized by θi, we have
∇θiV π,p
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ Ex∼d
πi,pi
s
,a∼(πi⊗pi)(·|x)
"
∇θi log πi(ai|x)

Qπ,p
i
(x, a) −ϵi
∂νi(πi; x)
∂πi(ai|x)
 #
,
where a = (ai, a−i).
Proof. We have
∇πi(·|x)V π,p
i
(s) =⟨
∂
∂πi(·|x)Qπ,p
i
(s, ·), (πi ⊗pi)(·|s)⟩
+
 Ea−i∼pi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ·, a−i)] −ϵi∇πiνi(πi; s)

I[s = x]
=γEs′∼P πi,pi(s)[∇πiV π,p
i
(s′)] +
 Ea−i∼pi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ·, a−i)] −ϵi∇πiνi(πi; s)

I[s = x]
= . . .
=
1
1 −γ dπi,pi
s
(x)

Ea−i∼pi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ·, a−i)] −ϵi∇πiνi(πi; x)

.
28


--- Page 29 ---
Similarly, for the parameterized case, we have
∂
∂πi(ai|x)V π,p
i
(s)
=

∂
∂πi(ai|x)Qπ,p
i
(s, ·), (πi ⊗pi)(·|s)

+

Ea−i∼pi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ai, a−i)] −ϵi
∂
∂πi(ai|x)νi(πi; s)

I[s = x]
=γEs′∼P πi,pi(s)[
∂
∂πi(ai|x)V π,p
i
(s′)] +

Ea−i∼pi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ai, a−i)] −ϵi
∂
∂πi(ai|x)νi(πi; s)

I[s = x]
= . . .
=
1
1 −γ dπi,pi
s
(x)

Ea−i∼pi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ai, a−i)] −ϵi
∂
∂πi(ai|x)νi(πi; x)

,
therefore,
∇θiV π,p
i
(s) =
X
x,ai
∂
∂πi(ai|x)V π,p
i
(s)∇θiπi(ai|x)
=
1
1 −γ
X
x,ai
dπi,pi
s
(x)

Ea−i∼pi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ai, a−i)] −ϵi
∂
∂πi(ai|x)νi(πi; x)

∇θiπi(ai|x)
=
1
1 −γ Ex∼d
πi,pi
s
Ea∼(πi⊗pi)(·|x)

∇θi log πi(ai|x)

Qπ,p
i
(x, a) −ϵi
∂
∂πi(ai|x)νi(πi; x)

.
This concludes the proof.
Similarly, we have the policy gradient for pi as follows:
Lemma C.2 (Policy gradient for pi). The gradient ∇piV π,p
i
(s) can be written as
∇pi(·|x)V π,p
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ dπi,pi
s
(x)

Eai∼πi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ai, ·)] + 1
τi
∇piDi(pi, π−i; x)

and if pi is parameterized by ¯θi, we have
∇¯θiV π,p
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ Ex∼d
πi,pi
s
,a∼(πi⊗pi)(·|x)

∇¯θi log pi(a−i|x)

Qπ,p
i
(x, a) + 1
τi
∂Di(pi, π−i; x)
∂pi(a−i|x)

,
where a = (ai, a−i).
Proof. We have
∇pi(·|x)V π,p
i
(s) =∇pi(·|x)(⟨Qπ,p
i
(s, ·), (πi ⊗pi)(·|s)⟩) + 1
τi
∇piDi(pi, π−i; s)I[s = x]
=⟨
∂
∂pi(·|x)Qπ,p
i
(s, ·), (πi ⊗pi)(·|s)⟩
+

Eai∼πi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ai, ·)] + 1
τi
∇piDi(pi, π−i; s)

I[s = x]
=γEs′∼P πi,pi(s)[∇pi(·|x)V π,p
i
(s′)] +

Eai∼πi(·|s)[Qπ,p
i
(s, ai, ·)] + 1
τi
∇piDi(pi, π−i; s)

I[s = x]
= . . .
=
1
1 −γ dπi,pi
s
(x)

Eai∼πi(·|x)[Qπ,p
i
(x, ai, ·)] + 1
τi
∇piDi(pi, π−i; x)

,
29


--- Page 30 ---
and similarly for the parameterized case,
∇¯θiV π,p
i
(s)
=
1
1 −γ Ex∼d
πi,pi
s
Ea∼(πi⊗pi)(·|x)

∇¯θi log pi(a−i|x)

Qπ,p
i
(x, a) + 1
τi
∂
∂pi(a−i|x)Di(pi, π−i; x)

.
This concludes the proof.
C.4
Performance Difference Lemmas
Another crucial tool for quantifying the difference in value functions (hence expected returns) between
different policies through the advantage function is the performance difference lemma (PDL). For our 4-player
risk-adjusted game, we state the PDLs for original agents and adversaries below:
Lemma C.3 (Performance Difference Lemma for πi). For two policies πi and π′
i of player i, we have
V πi,z
i
(s) −V π′
i,z
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ Es′∼d
πi,pi
s
,a∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s′)
h
Aπ′
i,z
i
(s′, a) −ϵiνi(πi; s′)
i
(22)
where the advantage function Ai is defined as:
Aπi,z
i
(s, a) = Qπi,z
i
(s, a) −V πi,z
i
(s) + 1
τi
Di(z; s).
Here, z is the shorthand notation of z = (π−i, pi).
Proof. We can write the difference in value function as
V π′
i,z
i
(s) −V πi,z
i
(s)
=Eπ′
i,z,s0=s
" ∞
X
t=0
γt

ri(st, at) + 1
τi
Di (z; st) −ϵiνi(π′
i; st)
#
−V πi,z
i
(s)
=V π′
i,z
i
(s) −E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

ri(s, a0) + 1
τi
Di(z; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s) + γEs′∼P (·|s,a0)V π′
i,z
i
(s′)

+ E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

ri(s, a0) + 1
τi
Di(z; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s) + γEs′∼P (·|s,a0)V π′
i,z
i
(s′)

−V πi,z
i
(s)
=E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

V π′
i,z
i
(s) −Qπ′
i,z
i
(s, a0) −1
τi
Di(z; s) + ϵiνi(πi; s)

+ γE(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)Es′∼P (s,a0)
h
V π′
i,z
i
(s′) −V πi,z
i
(s′)
i
= · · ·
=
1
1 −γ Es′∼d
πi,pi
s
Ea∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s′)

V π′
i,z
i
(s′) −Qπ′
i,z
i
(s′, a) −1
τi
Di(z; s′) + ϵiνi(πi; s′)

This concludes the proof.
Lemma C.4 (Performance Difference Lemma for pi). For two policies pi and p′
i of adversary i, we have:
V pi,π
i
(s) −V p′
i,π
i
(s) =
1
1 −γ Es′∼d
πi,pi
s
,a∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s′)

Ap′
i,π
i
(s′, a) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s′)

where
Api,π
i
(s, a) = Qpi,π
i
(s, a) −V pi,π
i
(s) −ϵiνi(πi; s).
Proof. We can write the value function difference as
V pi,π
i
(s) −V p′
i,π
i
(s)
30


--- Page 31 ---
=V pi,π
i
(s) −E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

ri(s, a0) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s) + γEs′∼P (·|s,a0)V p′
i,π
i
(s′)

+ E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

ri(s, a0) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s) + γEs′∼P (·|s,a0)V p′
i,π
i
(s′)

−V p′
i,π
i
(s)
=γE(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)Es′∼P (·|s,a0)[V pi,π
i
(s′) −V p′
i,π
i
(s′)]
+ E(ai,0,a−i,0)∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s)

Qp′
i,π
i
(s, a0) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s) −ϵiνi(πi; s) −V p′
i,π
i
(s)

= . . .
=
1
1 −γ Es′∼d
πi,pi
s
Ea∼(πi⊗pi)(·|s′)

Qp′
i,π
i
(s′, a0) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s′) −ϵiνi(πi; s′) −V p′
i,π
i
(s′)

.
This concludes the proof.
C.5
Motivating the SRPO Objective
Having stated the policy gradient theorems and PDLs, we now motivate our SRPO objective following the
same rationale as that in TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015). Let z = (π0, p0) be the joint policy at the current
timestep, by Lemma C.3, consider policy update for πi, we can write the value function for any policy πi as
J
πi,π0
−i,p0
i
i
= Jπ0,p0
i
+
1
1 −γ Es∼dπi,p0
i ,a∼(πi⊗p0
i )(·|s)

A
π0
i ,π0
−i,p0
i
i
(s, a) −ϵiνi(πi; s)

,
where dπi,p0
i is the state distribution for the initial state distribution ρ0. When πi is constrained to be close to
π0
i , we use the following surrogate objective first proposed in TRPO (Schulman et al., 2015) to approximate
the expectation term by replacing the sample distribution from dπi,p0
i to dπ0
i ,p0
i :
Es∼dπ0
i ,p0
i ,a∼(π0
i ⊗p0
i )(·|s)
 πi(ai|s)
π0
i (ai|s)Aπ0,p0
i
i
(s, a) −ϵiνi(πi; s)

,
(23)
where the approximation dπ0
i ,p0
i ≈dπi,p0
i holds when π0 stays close to π, and importance sampling through
the ratio πi(ai|s)
π0
i (ai|s) on ai. Similarly by Lemma C.4, we have the following surrogate objective for pi as follows:
Es∼dπ0
i ,p0
i ,a∼(π0
i ⊗p0
i )(·|s)
"
pi(a−i|s)
p0
i (a−i|s)Ap0
i ,π0
i
(s, a) + 1
τi
Di(pi, π−i; s)
#
.
(24)
The original TRPO objective suggests optimizing (23) and (24) subject to the constraints
Edπ0
i ,p0
i [KL(πi(·|s)∥π0
i (·|s))] ≤δ,
and
Edπ0
i ,p0
i [KL(pi(·|s)∥p0
i (·|s))] ≤δ,
respectively. A later adaptation PPO (Schulman et al., 2017) replaces these hard constraints with the clipped
surrogate objective. Following this adaptation and replacing the policy to condition on observations instead
of the global states, we obtain our SRPO losses (8) and (9) respectively.
D
Experimental Details
D.1
Overall Setup
Across all experiments, we compare SRPO against IPPO under a unified training and evaluation protocol.
Each method is trained from scratch using multiple random seeds, and performance is reported as episodic
return averaged over rollouts.
31


--- Page 32 ---
Figure 5: The Overcooked Gridworld envi-
ronment.
Figure 6: The Tag environment.
Training.
Agents are trained for a fixed interaction budget per environment, with periodic evaluation during
training. Unless otherwise specified, SRPO and IPPO agents share the same architecture, optimizer settings,
amount of interaction with the environment, and entropy regularization, differing only in the inclusion of the
strategic risk-averse objective. Given the same total amount of interactions, SRPO and IPPO take roughly
the same time to train in all environments we have.
Cross-play evaluation.
To assess unseen partner generalization, we adopt a cross-play protocol. For each
environment, we collect a population of independently trained agents and evaluate all pairwise combinations
without further learning. Cross-play performance is reported as a matrix, where each entry corresponds to
the average episodic return of a fixed agent pair evaluated over multiple episodes. This protocol measures
zero-shot coordination with previously unseen partners.
D.2
Overcooked Gridworld
Environments.
We implemented a revised version of Overcooked AI, shown in Fig. 5. The task is defined
on a 5 × 5 grid with two agents acting simultaneously. Agents start from one of two symmetric initial
configurations in the top left and must cooperatively pick up onions from two fixed sources and deliver them
to a central pot. Each agent selects from five discrete actions (up, down, left, right, stay); non-stay actions
incur a private movement cost of 0.2. Agent updates are applied sequentially in random order each step, with
collisions blocked and penalized by 2.0. An agent can carry at most one onion; stepping onto an available
onion grants a shared reward of +1 and removes the onion, while delivering an onion by attempting to move
into the (solid) pot yields a shared reward of +10. Each onion independently respawns with probability
0.2 per step. Observations are fully shared and consist of both agents’ positions, carry status, and onion
availability. In this setup, rewards combine private movement penalties with shared team rewards, inducing
cooperative behavior under individual costs.
Training and evaluation.
Each agent is trained for approximately 2 × 106 environment interactions.
Training statistics are recorded every 10240 interactions, where each evaluation point reports the average
return over 5 rollouts of length 128. We perform 30 independent runs for each method. IPPO agents use an
entropy coefficient of ϵ = 0.1, while SRPO agents use τ = 10 with the same entropy coefficient. For the main
experiments, we construct a 60 × 60 cross-play matrix consisting of 30 IPPO agents and 30 SRPO agents.
Each entry is averaged over 100 evaluation episodes of length 100. We report cross-play results for both the
training environment and the held-out test environment. The results are shown in Fig. 2.
32


--- Page 33 ---
D.3
Tag
Environment.
We evaluate on the PettingZoo Multi-Agent Particle Environment (MPE) simple_tag_v3
(Terry et al., 2021), configured with 1 runner (prey), 2 chasers, and 2 static obstacles, using discrete actions
and a horizon of 100 cycles per episode. The environment is shown in Fig. 6. Rewards are taken directly from
the environment and scaled by 0.1, and an episode terminates when any agent is terminated or truncated.
Training and evaluation.
Each agent is trained for approximately 3 × 107 environment interactions.
Training performance is recorded every 40960 interactions, where each evaluation point reports the average
episodic return over 64 rollouts of length 100. We perform 30 independent runs for each method. IPPO
agents use an entropy coefficient of ϵ = 0.01, while SRPO agents use the risk aversion parameter τ = 10 with
the same entropy coefficient. To evaluate partner generalization, we construct a 60 × 60 cross-play matrix
consisting of 30 IPPO agents and 30 SRPO agents. Each matrix entry corresponds to the average return
obtained by a fixed agent pair, evaluated over 100 episodes of length 100 without further learning. In addition
to cross-play on the training environment, we evaluate all agent pairs in a held-out test environment with a
different runner configuration and report these results separately. The results are shown in Fig. 3.
D.4
Hanabi
Environments.
Hanabi is a cooperative card game where players act as distracted pyrotechnicians who
must work together to launch a spectacular fireworks display by playing cards in the correct sequence, with
the twist that you can see everyone’s cards except your own and is a canonical benchmark for collaboration.
At each turn, the active player chooses from moves such as playing a card to the shared firework piles,
discarding a card to regain an information token, or hinting another player about the color or rank of cards in
their hand; hints consume a finite pool of information tokens, and illegal plays consume life tokens. Following
Lauffer et al. (2025), we consider a version with 3 colors and 3 ranks. We conduct our experiments in both
the 2 player and the 4 player settings.
Training and evaluation.
Each run uses a single GPU with 1 training thread and 1000 rollout threads,
collecting trajectories of episode length 100. We train for 3 × 107 environment steps with PPO updates
using 15 epochs and 1 minibatch per update. We set the learning rates to 7 × 10−4 (actor) and 1 × 10−3
(critic), and set the initialization gain to 0.01. We set the entropy regularization to 0.001 and the risk aversion
parameter τ = 0.01. In the 2-player setting, policies use a 2-layer MLP with hidden size 128. In the 4-player
setting, policies use a 2-layer MLP with hidden size 256, and each agent is randomly set to be adversary
agent during each rollout for SRPO. For each setting, we construct a 20 × 20 cross-play matrix consisting of
10 IPPO agents and 10 SRPO agents, trained independently with different seeds. Each entry is averaged over
50 evaluation episodes of length 100. The results are shown in Figs. 7 and 8.
D.5
Multi-agent debate on GSM8k
Environment.
In this setup, two agents engage in a three-round iterative debate protocol. In the first
round, each agent independently observes the question and produces its own reasoning and answer. In
subsequent rounds, each agent observes the original question as well as both agents’ outputs from the
previous round, and then refines its response. Successfully solving a problem therefore requires more than
producing a correct answer in isolation: each agent must reinforce correct reasoning while remaining robust
to potentially misleading or incorrect proposals from its teammate. This naturally induces a cooperative
yet adversarial interaction, where robustness to the partner’s policy plays a critical role in achieving reliable
joint performance. Both IPPO (the existing state-of-the-art) and SRPO agents are trained using multiple
base language models, including Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct (Q0.5B) and Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct (Q3B) (Bai et al.,
2025), as well as Qwen3-0.6B (Q0.6B) and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (Q4B) (Yang et al., 2025), using the verl
training framework (Sheng et al., 2024). Here, we set the entropy coefficient to be ϵ = 0 for both IPPO and
SRPO, and τ = 10 for SRPO. Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct is trained with 200 epochs, and Qwen3-0.6B is trained
with 300 steps. Every 10 epochs, we evaluate the performances on a held-out validation set using the same
debate setup. The results are shown in Figs. 9 to 12. Specifically, the initial accuracy before debate reflects
33


--- Page 34 ---
IPPO
Agent 1
SRPO
Agent 1
IPPO
Agent 2
SRPO
Agent 2
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(a) Hanabi 2-player.
IPPO Agent 1&2
SRPO Agent 1&2
IPPO Agent 3&4
SRPO Agent 3&4
2.50
2.75
3.00
3.25
3.50
3.75
4.00
4.25
(b) Hanabi 4-player.
Figure 7: Cross-play performances of SRPO (ϵ = 0.001, τ = 0.01) and IPPO (ϵ = 0.001) in both 2-player and
4-player hanabi games. Each square represents the average reward of two agents across 50 runs of length 100.
TP
CP
TP
CP
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
-64.3%
-47.7%
IPPO
SRPO
(a) Hanabi 2-player.
TP
CP
TP
CP
0
1
2
3
4
-24.8%
-15.8%
IPPO
SRPO
(b) Hanabi 4-player.
Figure 8: Performance change (mean and standard deviation) between Training Performance (TP) and
Cross-play Performance (CP): the performance of IPPO drastically decreases, with lower average and larger
standard deviation in cross-play, while the performance of SRPO drops less severely.
the agent’s reasoning abilities, while the final accuracy after debate reflects the agent’s coordination abilities.
The results show that, compared to IPPO, SRPO only changes the agent’s coordination abilities, instead of
the reasoning abilities. The final debate accuracy achieved by SRPO during training is slightly lower than
that of IPPO, as SRPO is trained in the presence of an adversarial partner, whereas IPPO is not.
D.6
Ablation study
We conduct ablation studies on both the risk aversion parameter τ and the entropy coefficient ϵ in the
Overcooked and Tag environments. The results are shown in Figs. 13 and 14. While prior work (Forkel and
Foerster, 2025) demonstrates that tuning the entropy coefficient ϵ can improve cross-play performance of
IPPO in the Hanabi environment, we find that this strategy does not generalize to Overcooked or Tag. In
these environments, entropy tuning alone fails to yield robust partner generalization, suggesting that entropy
regularization is not a principled mechanism for addressing coordination under partner shifts.
34


--- Page 35 ---
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
training epochs
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
accuracy
Initial accuracy before debate
IPPO
SRPO
(a) Initial accuracy before debate.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
training steps
0.35
0.40
0.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
accuracy
Final accuracy after debate
IPPO
SRPO
(b) Final accuracy after debate.
Figure 9: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen2.5-0.5B-Instruct. We point out that SRPO
is trained against an adversary—meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary
learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
training steps
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
accuracy
Initial accuracy before debate
IPPO
SRPO
(a) Initial accuracy before debate.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
training steps
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
accuracy
Final accuracy after debate
IPPO
SRPO
(b) Final accuracy after debate.
Figure 10: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen3-0.6B. We point out that SRPO is trained
against an adversary—meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary learns to
mislead the agent to minimize reward.
35


--- Page 36 ---
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
training steps
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
accuracy
Initial accuracy before debate
IPPO
SRPO
(a) Initial accuracy before debate.
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
training steps
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
accuracy
Final accuracy after debate
IPPO
SRPO
(b) Final accuracy after debate.
Figure 11: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen2.5-3B-Instruct. We point out that SRPO
is trained against an adversary—meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary
learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
training steps
0.725
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
accuracy
Initial accuracy after debate
IPPO
SRPO
(a) Initial accuracy before debate.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
training steps
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
accuracy
Final accuracy after debate
IPPO
SRPO
(b) Final accuracy after debate.
Figure 12: The training curve for SRPO and IPPO with Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507. We point out that SRPO
is trained against an adversary—meaning lower training reward (post debate) is expected as the adversary
learns to mislead the agent to minimize reward.
36


--- Page 37 ---
5
1
0.5
0.1
0.05 0.01
5
1
0.5
0.1
0.05 0.01
5
1
0.5
0.1
0.05
0.01
5
1
0.5
0.1
0.05
0.01
IPPO
Agent 1
SRPO
Agent 1
IPPO
Agent 2
SRPO
Agent 2
-100
0
100
200
300
(a) Overcooked.
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.001 0.0001
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.001 0.0001
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.001
0.0001
0.1
0.05
0.01
0.001
0.0001
IPPO
Agent 1
SRPO
Agent 1
IPPO
Agent 2
SRPO
Agent 2
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
(b) Tag.
Figure 13: Ablation study on the entropy parameter ϵ.
0
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0 1000.0
0
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
1000.0
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
(a) Overcooked.
0
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0 1000.0
0
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
1000.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
(b) Tag.
Figure 14: Ablation study on the degree of risk aversion parameter τ; τ = 0 refers to the risk-neutral case,
i.e., IPPO.
37
