--- Page 1 ---
1
BRAIN: Bayesian Reasoning via Active Inference for Agentic and
Embodied Intelligence in Mobile Networks
Osman Tugay Basaran, Student Member, IEEE, Martin Maier, and Falko Dressler, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Future sixth-generation (6G) mobile networks will
demand artificial intelligence (AI) agents that are not only
autonomous and efficient, but also capable of real-time adaptation
in dynamic environments and transparent in their decision-
making. However, prevailing agentic AI approaches in net-
working, exhibit significant shortcomings in this regard. Con-
ventional deep reinforcement learning (DRL)-based agents lack
explainability and often suffer from brittle adaptation, including
catastrophic forgetting of past knowledge under non-stationary
conditions. In this paper, we propose an alternative solution
for these challenges: Bayesian reasoning via Active Inference
(BRAIN) agent. BRAIN harnesses a deep generative model of
the network environment and minimizes variational free energy
to unify perception and action in a single closed-loop paradigm.
We implement BRAIN as O-RAN eXtended application (xApp)
on GPU-accelerated testbed and demonstrate its advantages over
standard DRL baselines. In our experiments, BRAIN exhibits
(i) robust causal reasoning for dynamic radio resource alloca-
tion, maintaining slice-specific quality of service (QoS) targets
(throughput, latency, reliability) under varying traffic loads, (ii)
superior adaptability with up to 28.3% higher robustness to
sudden traffic shifts versus benchmarks (achieved without any
retraining), and (iii) real-time interpretability of its decisions
through human-interpretable belief state diagnostics.
Index Terms—Active inference, Embodied-AI, mobile net-
works, trustworthiness, 6G.
I. INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence (AI) has achieved remarkable ad-
vances in recent years, from mastering complex games and
control tasks with reinforcement learning (RL) to producing
human-like content with large language models (LLMs) and
Generative AI. These achievements, however, remain largely
disembodied; models operate in simulated or data-driven do-
mains without direct physical grounding. LLMs, for example,
excel at pattern recognition and generation from static datasets
but cannot interact with a changing environment. Similarly,
deep reinforcement learning (DRL) agents typically train in
carefully crafted simulations with fixed reward functions, and
they often struggle when faced with real-world dynamics
outside their training distribution. In essence, today’s AI
systems lack the holistic, adaptive intelligence of an embodied
agent that can continually perceive, act, and learn in the real
world [1].
O.T. Basaran and Falko Dressler are with the School of Electrical Engi-
neering and Computer Science, TU Berlin, Berlin, 10587, Germany. E-mail:
basaran@ccs-labs.org, dressler@ccs-labs.org
Martin Maier is with Optical Zeitgeist Laboratory, INRS, Montreal, QC
H5A 1K6, Canada. E-mail: martin.maier@inrs.ca
This work has been funded by the Federal Ministry of Research, Technology
and Space (BMFTR, Germany) as part of the technology transfer hub for the
medicine and mobility of the future xG-RIC.
This gap becomes especially critical in the context of
emerging sixth-generation (6G) and beyond networks [2].
These future networks are expected to connect tens of billions
of devices and support unprecedented services with stringent
performance demands, necessitating AI-native design princi-
ples that tightly integrate learning and control intelligence into
the infrastructure [2, 3]. The wireless environment is inherently
complex and non-stationary: channel conditions, user mobility,
and traffic patterns fluctuate constantly [4]. Moreover, 6G must
cater to a diverse array of quality of service (QoS)/quality of
experience (QoE) requirements across use cases [5]. Yet, most
“AI-enabled” networking solutions to date simply apply off-
the-shelf deep learning models (e.g., convolutional networks
[6] or deep autoencoders [7]) to specific tasks, without funda-
mentally rethinking the network’s cognitive architecture [8].
While these models can learn mappings from historical data,
they often fail to generalize when network conditions deviate
from the training set. RL introduces a degree of agency by
enabling AI to learn through direct interaction with the envi-
ronment [9]. Indeed, DRL-based implementations have shown
promise in wireless domains, tackling problems from dynamic
spectrum allocation and power control to handoff optimization
and end-to-end network slicing [10–12]. However, conven-
tional DRL solutions suffer from two major shortcomings that
limit their suitability as the “brains” of an autonomous 6G net-
work. First, DRL policies are typically realized by deep neural
networks that act as opaque black boxes [13]. Second, standard
DRL has very limited adaptability to changing conditions [14].
Once a DRL agent is trained for a given environment or
traffic scenario, it tends to overfit to those conditions. Neural
policies are prone to catastrophic forgetting: when learning
or fine-tuning on new data, they overwrite previously learned
behaviors [4]. Figure 1 illustrates this challenge in a network
slicing scenario: a baseline DRL agent quickly “forgets” how
to serve an enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) slice once
it has adapted to an ultra-reliable low-latency communication
(URLLC) slice, and so on, necessitating expensive relearning
for each recurrence of prior conditions.
These limitations point to the need for a fundamental
reimagining of network AI. There is a growing consensus
that next-generation networks should incorporate higher-level
cognitive capabilities; integrating elements of memory, per-
ception, and reasoning rather than relying solely on low-level
pattern recognition [8, 15]. In essence, AI agents in such a
system are no longer just offline models, but active participants
in the physical network environment. This agentic vision
naturally leads to active inference as a promising next step
for network intelligence. Active inference has been described
as an ideal framework for realizing such embodied AI, as it
arXiv:2602.14033v1  [cs.IT]  15 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
x
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
f(x)
P1
P2
P3
(a) Data distribution shifts during learning.
T0
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
Time
Train Episodic Pattern
Data Distribution
Performance
Forgetting: Retrain!
Learning
Learning
Forgetting: Retrain!
P1
P2
P3
(b) Catastrophic forgetting.
Fig. 1.
Preliminary experiment on catastrophic forgetting issue for DRL
agent in network slicing. (a) Sequential distribution shifts: DRL agent trains
initially on Slice 1 (eMBB, green), then shifts to Slice 2 (URLLC, red), and
finally Slice 3 (mMTC, blue), each with distinct QoS requirements and traffic
patterns. (b) The impact of distribution shifts on performance. Initially, at 1⃝
the agent learns Slice 1 effectively. When data distribution transitions at 2⃝
to Slice 2, the agent learns new policies while starting to forget previously
acquired knowledge (Slice 1). At 3⃝, another shift to Slice 3 occurs, further
reducing performance on previously learned Slices 1 and 2. Eventually, at
4⃝, the scenario cycles back, requiring costly retraining due to performance
degradation caused by catastrophic forgetting.
biomimics how natural intelligent systems learn and adapt
via an action–perception loop grounded in the free energy
principle [16]. Originally developed in cognitive neuroscience
[17], active inference offers a unified theory of perception,
learning, and action based on Bayesian reasoning. In contrast
to conventional RL, an active inference agent does not rely on
hand-crafted reward signals; instead, it maintains an internal
generative model of its environment and desired outcomes.
The agent constantly updates its beliefs about the hidden state
of the world (perception) and selects actions to fulfill its goals
by minimizing variational free energy; a measure of prediction
error or “surprise” between the agent’s expectations and its
observations. In essence, the agent tries to anticipate what
should happen (given its model and goals) and then acts to
make reality align with those expectations, thereby reducing
surprise.
In this paper, we introduce an explainable deep active
inference agent for mobile network resource management
on AI-RAN testbed. This work is a detailed and expanded
version of a workshop paper currently under review. Be-
yond the original core concept, we i) broaden the experi-
mental depth with additional advanced agent baselines and
detailed ablations, ii) add a controlled non-stationarity stress
test across all agents to quantify robustness and recovery,
and iii) include policy-entropy analysis to make exploration-
exploitation dynamics comparable across DRL and active
inference, alongside expanded sections and discussions. We
call our framework BRAIN (Bayesian Reasoning via Active
Environment
Agent
State
Reward
Action
(a) Traditional DRL Agent.
Environment
Agent
Generative Model
Generative Process
Observation
True state
Probability of
outcome prior beliefs
(b) Our BRAIN Agent.
Fig. 2.
Architecture of conventional DRL and proposed explainable deep
active inference agents.
INference), envisioning it as the “telecom brain” of an AI-
native RAN controller. Figure 2 contrasts the paradigm of a
conventional DRL agent with that of our proposed BRAIN
agent. The BRAIN architecture employs a deep generative
active inference model to design the relationship between la-
tent network states (e.g., congestion levels, channel conditions,
user mobility) and observed performance metrics, while also
encoding desired outcomes (e.g., slice-specific QoS targets)
as prior beliefs. At each control interval, the agent performs
active inference by minimizing variational free energy: it infers
the most probable current network state (perception step) and
then computes the optimal resource allocation action (action
step) that will drive the network’s predicted performance closer
to the target (i.e., correcting the deviation between expected
and desired outcomes). This cycle of inference and action
effectively allows BRAIN to carry out online learning and
control simultaneously. Unlike a DRL agent, which would
require retraining whenever the environment changes, BRAIN
continuously updates its beliefs in real time as new obser-
vations arrive, endowing it with a form of lifelong learning
that gracefully handles distribution shifts. Moreover, because
our agent’s internal computations revolve around probabilistic
beliefs and free-energy contributions, we can tap into these
intermediate results to understand and explain its behavior.
The core outcomes of our study are summarized as new
contributions (“C”) and new findings (“F”) as follows:
C1. We introduce BRAIN, the first deep active-inference agent
for AI-RAN closed-loop RAN slicing in O-RAN.
C2. We designed BRAIN agent intrinsically explainable by
exposing posterior beliefs over latent slice conditions
and an expected free energy (EFE) decomposition that
justifies each action in terms of goal alignment (extrinsic)
and uncertainty reduction (epistemic).
F1. In dynamic slicing experiments, BRAIN demonstrates
continual adaptation to non-stationary conditions. BRAIN
more reliably maintains heterogeneous slice intents under
dynamic loads.
F2. Unlike black-box DRL, BRAIN exposes interpretable
internal variables, enabling causal and auditable expla-
nations for resource-allocation decisions.
II. RELATED WORK
This section situates BRAIN within three complementary
research threads that underpin agentic intelligence in mobile


--- Page 3 ---
3
networking. First, we review how RL/DRL has been opera-
tionalized for network control and orchestration, particularly
in open radio access network (O-RAN) and slicing, as the
dominant agentic paradigm in practice. Second, we summarize
explainability efforts in wireless AI, including explainable
artificial intelligence (XAI) and emerging explainable rein-
forcement learning (XRL) approaches, highlighting the extent
to which interpretability is typically introduced post hoc rather
than being intrinsic to the decision process. Third, we discuss
active inference as an embodied intelligence framework that
unifies perception and action through probabilistic genera-
tive modeling and variational inference, and we identify the
limited evidence to date on deploying deep active inference
with operator-facing explanations in communications systems.
Together, these bodies of work clarify the methodological gap
addressed by our approach: an intrinsically interpretable, con-
tinually adaptive agent for real-time mobile network control.
RL on Mobile Networks. RL as well as DRL models
have been increasingly adopted for dynamic resource man-
agement and control tasks in wireless networks. Liu et al.
[11] propose OnSlicing, an online DRL framework for end-
to-end network slicing across RAN, transport, core, and edge
domains. ORANSlice [12], an open source, modular platform
for 5G network slicing tailored to the O-RAN ecosystem.
It integrates slice lifecycle management, resource orchestra-
tion, monitoring, and analytics within a flexible framework.
While RL policies can yield remarkable efficiency gains, their
opaque nature often manifested as “black-box” neural net-
works hinders understanding and debugging, limiting practical
deployment. Therefore, recent research has begun to explore
XRL methodologies to improve transparency by explicitly
elucidating policy decisions and learned behaviors.
XAI on Mobile Networks. To overcome the transparency
problem, researchers have turned to XAI techniques [18,
19] in the mobile networking domain [20]. In recent years,
several works have explored using popular XAI methods (e.g.,
SHAP [21] and LIME [22]) to interpret complex models for
wireless network tasks [23–25]. While useful, such generic
XAI approaches have proven insufficient for the needs of
mobile networks. They provide only superficial insight and
often struggle with the temporal and high-dimensional nature
of network data. Recognizing these gaps, some studies have
begun to pursue domain-specific XAI and inherently inter-
pretable models for wireless communications. Researchers
introduced custom time-series explainers for network traffic
models, which track how feature importance evolves over
time and identify anomalous patterns leading to errors [26,
27]. In general, these efforts underline that explainability in
wireless AI may require expert-driven designs to meet the
reliability and insight demands of network operations. It is
worth noting that XRL is also gaining traction in other fields
(like robotics and autonomous systems), aiming to extract
human-comprehensible policies from RL agents. However, in
the wireless networking literature, explainable RL or DRL has
seen very limited exploration so far. One notable approach
is SYMBXRL [28], which introduces a symbolic explanation
layer on top of black-box DRL models. In this framework,
a symbolic representation generator converts numerical state
and action variables into discrete first-order logic predicates.
In contrast, our proposed framework adopts a fundamentally
different paradigm by embedding explainability directly within
the agent’s generative and inferential processes. Therefore,
there remains a significant need for new methods that can
interpret and justify the actions of different learning agents.
Active Inference. In recent years, it has been applied in
engineering domains, showing promise for state estimation,
planning, and control under uncertainty [29]. These early stud-
ies suggest that active inference can serve as a flexible, biologi-
cally inspired approach to sequential decision-making, distinct
from reinforcement learning [30]. Note that RL formalisms
for adaptive decision-making in unknown environments are
subsumed by active inference. Researchers have applied active
inference to robot control tasks, where the agent’s generative
model enables it to handle ambiguous sensory inputs and still
pursue goal-directed behavior [31, 32]. An intriguing aspect
of active inference is its potential for built-in explainability,
though this aspect has yet to be concretely validated [16, 33].
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION FOR AGENTIC AI DESIGN
A. Reinforcement Learning
We model the closed-loop RAN slicing control problem as
a sequential decision-making task under uncertainty, which
can be formulated as a Markov decision process (MDP).
The agent in our scenario is the Near-RT RIC control eX-
tended application (xApp), and the environment consists of the
gNB and its slices (eMBB, URLLC, massive machine-yype
communications (mMTC)) along with their traffic and radio
conditions. At each discrete control interval t, the environment
is in some state st that captures the current slice performance,
st can be defined to include each slice’s downlink throughput,
buffer occupancy, and transmitted transport block count (as
obtained from O-RAN key performance measurement (KPM)
reports). The agent observes this state (or an observation
derived from it) and then selects an action at from its action
space. In our use case, the action at consists of setting the
fraction of physical resource blocks (PRBs) allocated to each
slice and choosing a scheduling policy (e.g., PF, RR, WFQ)
for each slice’s traffic. After the agent’s decision is applied,
the environment transitions to a new state st+1 according to
the network dynamics (influenced by the agent’s action and
external factors such as user traffic and channel variability),
and the agent receives a numerical reward rt+1 reflecting the
outcome.
The reward function R(st, at, st+1) is designed to quantify
how well the slice-specific QoS objectives are met at time
t. In particular, we assign positive reward for high eMBB
throughput, negative reward for large URLLC buffer occu-
pancy (penalizing latency), and positive reward for successful
mMTC transmissions. Selected formulation is to define the
immediate reward as a weighted sum of key performance
metrics for the slices:
rt+1 = α · throughput(eMBB)
t+1
−β · buffer(URLLC)
t+1
+ γ · TBcount(mMTC)
t+1
,
(1)


--- Page 4 ---
4
where throughput(eMBB)
t+1
is the eMBB slice downlink data rate
at time t+1, buffer(URLLC)
t+1
is the URLLC slice’s queue length
(a proxy for its latency), TBcount(mMTC)
t+1
is the number of
transport blocks successfully delivered for the mMTC slice,
and α, β, γ are weighting coefficients reflecting the priority
of each slice’s KPI. This reward design encourages the agent
to maximize eMBB throughput, minimize URLLC queuing
delay, and ensure reliable mMTC delivery, in line with the
slices’ requirements.
The agent’s goal in RL is to learn an optimal policy π∗
that maximizes the expected cumulative discounted reward.
Starting from state st, the objective (also called return) can be
written as:
Gt = E
" ∞
X
k=0
γk rt+k+1
 st
#
,
(2)
with γ ∈[0, 1) denoting a discount factor that prioritizes
immediate rewards over future rewards. By maximizing this
return, the RL agent attempts to jointly satisfy the slices’ per-
formance objectives over time (e.g., sustaining high throughput
for eMBB, low latency for URLLC, and robust throughput for
mMTC) even as network conditions evolve.
It is worth noting that the agent does not have direct access
to all underlying network information (such as exact channel
conditions or future traffic arrivals); it relies on the observed
slice metrics as its state representation. In other words, the en-
vironment is partially observable from the agent’s perspective.
We can view the problem as a partially observable Markov
decision process (POMDP), where the O-RAN KPM reports
constitute the observation ot that provides a noisy, partial view
of the true state st. In our design, we assume these reported
metrics are a sufficient statistic of the network’s condition,
and the agent (potentially using function approximation or
recurrent networks) can internally maintain any additional state
context needed.
B. Active Inference
Active inference is a novel decision-making paradigm stem-
ming from cognitive neuroscience that offers a unified ap-
proach to action and perception under uncertainty [34]. Instead
of learning a policy purely from external reward feedback, an
active inference agent leverages an internal generative model
of its environment and acts so as to minimize the “surprise”
(prediction error) of its observations. In our scenario, this
means the agent (our BRAIN xApp) is designed with prior
expectations about the RAN slicing system; for example, that
the URLLC slice’s buffer should remain low (to indicate low
latency) and the eMBB slice’s throughput should be high.
The agent then continuously adjusts its actions to align the
observed slice performance with these internal expectations,
thereby reducing unexpected deviations from desired behavior.
Mathematically, active inference casts the problem of
closed-loop control as a variational inference process. The
agent possesses a probabilistic generative model of the RAN
environment and treats the true network state as a latent (hid-
den) variable to be inferred. We can formalize this generative
model over a time horizon T by the joint distribution:
P(o1:T , s0:T ) = P(s0)
T
Y
t=1
P(st | st−1, at−1) P(ot | st) ,
(3)
where st represents the hidden state of the network at time
t and ot is the observation (slice performance metrics) at
time t. Here P(s0) is the prior distribution over the initial
state, P(st | st−1, at−1) is the state transition model encoding
the dynamics of the slices (how the true state evolves given
the previous state and control action), and P(ot | st) is the
observation likelihood model (mapping the hidden state to the
probability of seeing a particular set of KPM observations).
In our context, st may encompass the underlying radio and
traffic conditions for each slice (e.g., actual backlog, channel
quality, etc.), while ot includes the reported throughput, buffer
occupancy, and TB count for each slice. The agent never
directly observes st; instead it receives ot and must infer st
from these measurements.
To enable principled inference, the agent maintains an
approximate posterior belief q(st) over the hidden state and
refines this belief with each new observation. The quality of
the agent’s belief relative to the true state is quantified by the
variational free energy (VFE) [35]:
F(q, ot) = Eq(st)
h
ln q(st) −ln P(ot, st)
i
,
(4)
which measures how “surprising” the observation ot is under
the agent’s current belief (it can be viewed as the negative
evidence lower bound for the model). By minimizing F with
respect to q(st), the agent updates its posterior to better explain
the observed data; in effect, performing a Bayesian update
to reduce prediction error. This continual belief update (often
implemented via gradient descent or closed-form Bayesian fil-
tering) corresponds to the perception phase of active inference:
the xApp assimilates the latest KPM measurements and adjusts
its internal state estimate so that its predictions about slice
performance become more accurate.
What truly distinguishes active inference from passive infer-
ence schemes is that the agent also acts to minimize expected
future surprise. In other words, beyond updating its beliefs,
the agent plans and takes actions that it expects will lead
to observations aligning with its preferences (and reducing
uncertainty). This is formalized through the EFE of a policy
π. A policy π = {at, at+1, . . . , at+H} is a sequence of future
actions of length H (the planning horizon). The EFE for such
a policy can be expressed as:
G(π) = Eq(o>t, s>t|π)
h
ln q(s>t | o>t) −ln P(o>t, s>t)
i
,
(5)
where o>t and s>t denote the future observations and states
from time t + 1 up to T (under the hypothesis that policy π
is executed). Intuitively, G(π) predicts how much “surprise”
would be encountered if the agent were to follow policy π.
Policies that are expected to produce observations close to the
agent’s preferred outcomes (and that reduce uncertainty about
the state) will have lower G(π). Thus, the action selection
rule in active inference is to choose the policy (or action,


--- Page 5 ---
5
in a look-ahead setting) that minimizes G(π). In our RAN
slicing use case, this means the agent will favor actions that
it believes will drive the slice metrics towards their ideal
ranges; keeping the URLLC buffer near empty and the eMBB
throughput high; while also gathering information to improve
its state estimates when needed. In effect, the agent balances
exploitation and exploration automatically: actions are chosen
both to fulfill slice QoS goals (according to the agent’s internal
goal preferences) and to resolve significant uncertainties (if the
agent is unsure about some aspect of the network state).
Generative Model
1 States (S): Hidden state variables s ∈S represent-
ing the true underlying condition of the RAN slices.
This can include factors like actual traffic load and
channel quality for each slice, which are not directly
observed but influence performance. The hidden state
at time t mediates the generation of observations ot.
2
Observations (O): Measurable outputs o ∈O
that the agent can perceive from the environment. In
our case, these are the slice-level KPMs (throughput,
buffer occupancy, TB count per slice) reported at
each control interval. In a fully observable setting one
might have ot = st, but here ot provides a partial,
noisy view of st.
3
Actions (U): Control inputs
u ∈U that the BRAIN agent can take to influence
the state. For the slicing scenario, an action defines
how resources are allocated to slices (PRB fractions)
and which scheduling policy is applied, thereby af-
fecting how the state s evolves (e.g., altering how
quickly a slice’s queue is drained or how throughput is
shared). 4 Observation Model (A): The probabilistic
mapping from states to observations. A specifies the
likelihood of each possible observation given a state,
Ao,s = P(o | s). In our model, A captures how
a particular network state (with certain true through-
put demand, backlog, channel conditions, etc.) would
probabilistically produce the observed KPM metrics.
This includes any measurement noise or uncertainty
in observation.
5 Transition Model (B): The state
transition dynamics under actions. B is defined such
that B(u)
s′,s = P(st = s′ | st−1 = s, ut−1 = u),
describing the probability of the state moving from s
to s′ given that action u was taken. In the RAN slicing
context, B encodes the effect of control actions on the
network state.
In summary, our active inference-based controller contin-
uously updates its internal model of the RAN slices and
selects resource control actions that minimize the expected
free energy. This leads to a closed-loop behavior wherein the
agent seeks to make its observations unsurprising by ensuring
slice performance meets the target objectives. Notably, this
framework naturally handles partial observability (treating the
true network conditions as latent variables to be inferred)
and accommodates multiple slice objectives through built-in
preference encoding (each slice’s QoS target is reflected in
the agent’s model as a preferred outcome). The result is a
principled control strategy that, unlike standard RL, does not
require an externally defined reward function for each scenario
but rather emerges from the agent’s intrinsic drive to minimize
prediction error and uphold its modeled service goals.
IV. EXPLAINABLE DEEP ACTIVE INFERENCE DESIGN
A. Generative Model Design
At the core of our framework is a generative model that
describes the network slicing environment without hierarchical
abstractions. We define a set of hidden state variables st
that characterize the real-time status of the network and its
slices at time t. st include latent features such as per-slice
traffic load, channel quality indicators, or queue lengths for
each network slice. The agent receives observations ot (e.g.,
measured throughput, latency, or slice performance metrics)
that are probabilistically generated from the hidden state. The
agent can also perform actions at (or controls) corresponding
to slice resource allocation decisions. Without loss of gen-
erality, we refer to scenarios such as distributing a limited
pool of PRB among slices or selecting scheduling policies
for each slice, as typically encountered in O-RAN systems.
In Algorithm 1, BRAIN’s generative model is expressed as a
joint distribution over states, observations, and actions across
time, P(s0:T , o0:T , a0:T ), which factorizes into dynamical and
observational components:
P(s0:T , o0:T , a0:T ) =
P(s0)
T −1
Y
t=0
P(ot | st), P(st+1 | st, at), P(at).
(6)
B. Variational Inference and Policy Selection via Free Energy
Minimization
Perception as Variational Inference: Upon receiving new
observation ot (e.g., current slice throughput levels), the agent
must infer the latent state st (e.g., actual demand or user
load causing those throughput levels). BRAIN performs this
by minimizing the variational free energy Ft, which serves as
a proxy for Bayesian inference. We define the free energy at
time t as:
Ft(Q(st)) = EQ(st)[−ln P(ot | st)−
ln P(st | st−1, at−1)] + H[Q(st)],
(7)
where H[Q] is the entropy of the approximate posterior Q.
Intuitively, minimizing Ft encourages the posterior Q(st) to
explain the observation well (high likelihood P(ot | st))
while staying close to the prior prediction P(st | st−1, at−1)
(which is the generative model’s forecast from the previous
time, ensuring temporal consistency). In practice, we assume
a tractable form for Q(st) (i.e., Gaussian distribution or delta
at a point estimate) and perform a gradient-based update
(or closed-form update if linear-Gaussian) to find Q∗(st) ≈
P(st | o≤t, a<t). This posterior belief Q(st) encapsulates
the agent’s current understanding of network conditions after
seeing the data. Notably, because the generative model is
explicit, this belief is fully transparent: each variable in st (say,


--- Page 6 ---
6
Algorithm 1: Proposed BRAIN Agent
Input: Generative model P(st+1, ot+1 | st, at);
Preference distribution Ppref(o); Action set A;
Time horizon T; Prior belief Q(s0).
Output: Selected action sequence {a0, a1, . . . , aT −1};
Logged beliefs and free-energy terms for
explainability.
Initialize Q(s0) (prior belief over states)
for t ←0 to T −1 do
ot ←observe new data from environment
// Receive observation ot (e.g.,
current network slice metrics)
Q(st) ←BayesianUpdate(Q(st−1), ot)
// Update posterior state belief
given ot
// Belief update yields Q(st)
foreach at ∈A do
Compute Q(ot+1 | at) using generative model
// Predict observation
distribution if action at is
taken
KLpref ←DKL

Q(ot+1 | at)
 Ppref(ot+1)

// Divergence from preferred
outcomes (extrinsic term)
Igain ←I(st+1; ot+1 | at)
// Expected information gain
(epistemic term)
G(at) ←KLpref −Igain
// Expected free energy G(at)
a∗
t ←arg minat∈A G(at)
// Select action that minimizes
expected free energy
Execute a∗
t on environment
// Apply chosen action (Adjust
network slice resources)
Log Q(st), {G(a) : a ∈A}, and a∗
t for analysis
// Record beliefs and free-energy
terms for explainability
the estimated load on slice 1) has a quantitative posterior that
can be reported or visualized. The ability to inspect Q(st)
at any time means that the agent’s situational awareness is
interpretable and auditable.
C. Action Selection as Expected Free Energy Minimization
After updating its beliefs, the agent must decide on the
next action at (e.g., how to reallocate resources among slices)
before the next observation arrives. Instead of using a learned
Q-value or policy network as in RL, BRAIN evaluates prospec-
tive actions by their expected free energy G(π), where π
denotes a candidate policy (a sequence of future actions, or
simply the single action at in a one-step horizon case). The
agent chooses the policy that minimizes G(π), reflecting the
principle of active inference: actions are chosen to minimize
expected surprise and fulfill preferences. We formulate G(π)
(for simplicity, with a one-step horizon π = at) as:
G(at) = EQ(st+1 | st, at)
h
−ln P(ot+1 | C)+
DKL
 Q(st+1 | ot+1)|Q(st+1)
i
,
(8)
where the expectation is taken with respect to the predicted
next-state distribution under action at, and inside we consider
two quantities for the next time step t + 1:
1⃝Expected “Surprise” w.r.t Preferences: −ln P(ot+1 | C)
is the surprisal (negative log-probability) of a future ob-
servation ot+1 under the preference model. If an action is
likely to produce outcomes aligned with C (e.g., all slices
meet their targets), this term will be low; if the action
would result in poor performance for some slice, yielding
an observation far from the preferred range, this term will
be high. Thus, the expected value E[−ln P(ot+1 | C)]
serves as a risk or phenotypic cost for that action.
2⃝Expected Information Gain (Epistemic Value): The sec-
ond term DKL[Q(st+1 | ot+1)|Q(st+1)] is the KL diver-
gence between the posterior and prior predicted state at
t+1, which quantifies how much we expect to learn about
the hidden state by observing ot+1. Equivalently, it can
be expressed as the mutual information I[st+1; ot+1] be-
tween state and observation under that action. An action
that is expected to resolve uncertainty (e.g., probing an
uncertain slice’s condition by allocating it resources to see
if throughput improves) will have a high information gain,
reducing G. This corresponds to the perceptual ambiguity
term in active inference, encouraging exploratory actions
that reduce uncertainty.
D. Introspective Explainability of Decisions
At each time t, the BRAIN agent maintains a posterior belief
distribution over the latent slice states st (e.g., each slice’s
current demand level or reliability). We denote this belief as:
Q(st) = P(st | o1:t, a1:t−1),
(9)
with the probability of each hidden state given all past obser-
vations o1:t and actions a1:t−1. In practice, Q(st) is computed
via the agent’s variational Bayes update after receiving obser-
vation ot. For example, if slice demand can be high or low,
Q(st) might be a probability P(st = high) or P(st = low)
that is updated as new traffic measurements come in. These
posterior beliefs are introspective variables because they rep-
resent the agent’s internal knowledge about the network (and
can be exposed for explainability). The distribution Q(st) is
normalized and reflects the agent’s confidence in different slice
conditions at time t.
The agent encodes prior preferences about desirable out-
comes for the network slices. Let Ppref(o) denote the pre-
ferred distribution over observations (or performance metrics).
Ppref(o) could assign high probability to outcomes where each
slice’s throughput or latency meets its target. At each decision
step, the agent predicts the distribution of next observations
Q(ot+1 | at) for a candidate action at (by marginalizing over
its state beliefs). We define a preference alignment cost as


--- Page 7 ---
7
Fig. 3. Overview of GPU-Accelerated Testbed.
the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence between the predicted
outcome distribution and the preferred distribution. Formally,
for action at:
DKL

Q(ot+1 | at)
Ppref(ot+1)

=
∞
X
t=0
Q(ot+1 | at) ln Q(ot+1 | at)
Ppref(ot+1) .
(10)
This term measures how well the agent’s expected obser-
vations align with its preferences (a form of phenotypic risk).
A lower KL value means the predicted network performance
under action at is closer to the ideal (preferences), indicat-
ing good extrinsic alignment with the slice QoS goals. A
high value indicates a misalignment; particularly the agent
expects outcomes (like a slice throughput shortfall) that deviate
from what is desired. Minimizing this term drives the agent
to choose actions that fulfill slice requirements (extrinsic
reward-seeking behavior). In parallel, the agent quantifies
the epistemic value of actions, i.e., the expected information
gain about the latent slice states. This captures the action’s
exploratory benefit: how much taking action at will reduce
uncertainty in st+1. Mathematically, we can define the epis-
temic value as the mutual information between future states
and observations, conditioned on at. One convenient form
is the expected reduction in entropy of the state-belief after
observing ot+1:
I(st+1, ot+1 | at) = H

Q(st+1 | at)

−
EQ(ot+1 | at)
h
H

Q(st+1 | at, ot+1)
i
,
(11)
where H[Q(s)] = −P
s Q(s) ln Q(s) is the entropy. Intu-
itively, H[Q(st+1 | at)] is the agent’s prior uncertainty about
the next state before taking action at, and the second term
is the expected posterior uncertainty after seeing the new
observation. Their difference is the expected information gain.
If action at is purely informational (i.e., a probing action that
reveals a slice’s condition), this quantity will be high, meaning
the agent anticipates learning a lot (large epistemic value). If
an action is not informative, i.e., it does not affect observations,
the epistemic value is low. In many active inference formula-
tions, this corresponds to reducing perceptual ambiguity.
V. EXPERIMENT DESIGN
A. GPU-Accelerated AI-RAN Testbed
We deploy a private 5G testbed (see Figure 3) featuring
a GPU-accelerated O-RAN architecture built on the NVIDIA
Aerial Research Cloud (ARC) platform [36, 37] and Aerial
SDK [38]. In our setup, the gNB’s protocol stack is split into
an O-DU Low (Layer-1 PHY) running on an NVIDIA GPU
and an O-DU High/CU (higher layer protocols) running on
x86 CPUs with OpenAirInterface (OAI) [39]. The two halves
communicate via the Small Cell Forum’s FAPI interface,
enabling inline acceleration of PHY-layer DSP tasks on the
GPU while maintaining a standard OAI software stack for
MAC/RLC/PDCP/RRC. Foxconn O-RU [40] operating in the
n78 TDD band (mid-band FR1) provides the radio front-end,
connected over a standard O-RAN 7.2 fronthaul interface.
This O-RU supports a 100 MHz channel bandwidth (273
PRBs at 30 kHz subcarrier spacing) in TDD mode, with
a TDD pattern configured according to 3GPP Release 15
specifications (e.g., DDDSU slots). The testbed is equipped
with both commercial and softwarized UEs to generate multi-
slice traffic. In particular, we use a COTS 5G UE (Sierra
Wireless EM9191 modem module) and an OAI-based soft UE
(nrUE) as two end devices.
The Sierra Wireless EM9191 provides a real 5G NR user
equipment that connects over-the-air to the gNB. The OAI
nrUE is a software UE stack (also running on a server with an
SDR front-end) that emulates a second 5G UE, allowing fine-
grained control of its traffic and slicing configuration. Both
UEs support establishing multiple PDU sessions concurrently,
which we map to different network slices (as described next).
B. Use Case: Intelligent Orchestration
We consider a multi-slice RAN scenario where an intelligent
xApp is deployed as an autonomous agent for closed-loop slice
resource orchestration. O-RAN near-RT RIC hosts our BRAIN
xApp, which observes network state and dynamically controls
a gNB serving multiple slices. In our setup, a single 100 MHz
cell (one O-RU/gNB) serves two UEs with three slice types;
eMBB, URLLC, and massive mMTC each with distinct QoS
requirements (high throughput for eMBB, low latency for
URLLC, high reliability for mMTC). The gNB’s MAC is slice-
aware, maintaining separate buffers and scheduler queues per
slice, and the UEs generate traffic for their respective slices
(e.g., one UE carries a video stream on eMBB and a real-
time control flow on URLLC via separate PDU sessions, while
the other carries sporadic IoT telemetry on mMTC). This
forms a rich environment for the xApp agent to orchestrate
intelligently.
The BRAIN xApp continuously monitors slice performance
via the O-RAN E2 interface. A lightweight KPM monitor
xApp streams real-time telemetry [41]; such as slice-specific
downlink throughput, buffer occupancy (queue length), and
downlink transport block count into the RIC’s data layer (using
the standard O-RAN KPM service model). These metrics,
shown in prior work [42] to effectively capture slice traffic
demand and QoS conditions, constitute the state s that our
agent observes. At each control interval (on the order of tens of


--- Page 8 ---
8
0
2000
4000
6000
8000 10000 12000 14000
Episode
0
100
200
300
400
500
Mean Reward
BRAIN
Tuned Heuristic
DQN
SAC
A2C
PPO
REINFORCE
(a) Mean cumulative reward.
0
2000
4000
6000
8000 10000 12000 14000
Episode
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Average Loss
BRAIN
A2C
DQN
REINFORCE
Tuned Heuristic
PPO
SAC
(b) Average loss (stability).
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000 12000 14000
Episode
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Policy Entropy
BRAIN
Tuned Heuristic
A2C
PPO
DQN
SAC
REINFORCE
(c) Policy entropy.
Fig. 4. Training dynamics of agentic (RL/DRL) and embodied (active-inference) Agents on AI-RAN testbed: i) Mean cumulative reward per episode (higher
is better), showing convergence speed and asymptotic control performance. ii) Average training loss (lower is better), used as a stability proxy for optimization
dynamics during online learning. iii) Policy entropy (higher indicates more exploration), capturing the exploration-exploitation evolution over training.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time Step
Low
Medium
High
Demand State
Check
Check
0.0
0.5
1.0
Belief Probability
(a) Belief State H. - eMBB Slice.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time Step
Low
Medium
High
Demand State
Check
Check
0.0
0.5
1.0
Belief Probability
(b) Belief State H.- URLLC Slice.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Time Step
Low
Medium
High
Demand State
Check
Check
0.0
0.5
1.0
Belief Probability
(c) Belief State H. - mMTC Slice.
Fig. 5. Agent’s posterior belief trajectory over hidden traffic demand levels (Low, Medium, High) for each network slice across episodes. Time on the x-axis
indexes discrete decision epochs (e.g., observation-update intervals ×103), and the y-axis enumerates the three demand states (Low at bottom to High at top).
Color encodes the belief probability Q(st) (brighter/yellow = higher, darker/purple = lower). White arrows mark the agent’s explicit information-gathering
Check actions.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Time Step
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Expected Free En.
Extrinsic (Preference Cost)
Epistemic (Information Gain)
(a) EFE Components - eMBB Slice.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Time Step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Expected Free En.
Extrinsic (Preference Cost)
Epistemic (Information Gain)
(b) EFE Components - URLLC Slice.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Time Step
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Expected Free En.
Extrinsic (Preference Cost)
Epistemic (Information Gain)
(c) EFE Components - mMTC Slice.
Fig. 6. Interpretation of the EFE (G(π)) decomposition. At each time step, the chosen action’s epistemic (soft green) and extrinsic (soft red) terms presented.
Epistemic value dominates early on (favoring exploration) and then gives way to extrinsic value (favoring QoS/exploitation).
TABLE I
HYPERPARAMETERS OF BASELINE RL MODELS.
Model
Learning
R.
Discount
F.
Replay
Buffer
Deep Q-Network (DQN)
1 × 10−3
0.99
105 exp.
Actor-Critic (A2C)
1 × 10−3
0.99
on-policy
Policy Gradient (REINFORCE)
5 × 10−4
0.99
on-policy
Proximal Policy Opt. (PPO)
5 × 10−4
0.99
on-policy
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC)
1 × 10−3
0.99
105 exp.
milliseconds), BRAIN computes an action a to adjust the RAN
slicing policy. The action space includes tuning the PRB allo-
cation fraction for each slice (partitioning the cell’s bandwidth
among eMBB/URLLC/mMTC) and selecting the scheduling
algorithm per slice (e.g., proportional fair, round-robin, or
weighted fair queueing). These commands are dispatched to
the gNB via an O-RAN E2 control message (using a custom
control service model aligning with O-RAN specifications),
thereby closing the control loop. In this agentic deployment,
the xApp autonomously adapts network parameters in real
time to satisfy slice service-level objectives.
Slice-specific QoS priorities are encoded into the agent’s
reward (or utility) function to drive its behavior. In our design,
the eMBB slice is throughput-oriented (the agent rewards high
eMBB data rates), the URLLC slice is latency-sensitive (the
agent penalizes large URLLC buffer occupancy to minimize
queuing delay), and the mMTC slice is reliability-focused
(the agent rewards successful delivery of mMTC transport
blocks, which correlates with reliable coverage for sporadic
IoT traffic). Guided by these objectives, the BRAIN xApp can,
for example, allocate extra PRBs to URLLC during congestion
to promptly drain its queue, or switch the mMTC slice’s
scheduler to a more opportunistic mode when sporadic uplink
packets arrive. The constantly updated KPM state from the
monitor xApp allows BRAIN to verify if slice performance
indicators are being met and react quickly if not.
C. Baseline Agents and Training Methodology
Tuning Baseline Agents. To evaluate our BRAIN agent,
we compare it against a broader suite of baseline agents,
including both learned policies and a heuristic scheduler.
Specifically, we implement: 1 Tuned Heuristic that statically
partitions PRBs among slices (according to fixed priority
weights) and uses a weighted round-robin scheduler (a non-
learning baseline),
2
Deep Q-Network (DQN) agent for
slice control [43],
3
Advantage Actor-Critic (A2C) agent
[44],
4 Vanilla Policy Gradient agent (REINFORCE [45]),


--- Page 9 ---
9
3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.4
Throughput [Mbps]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
Better
BRAIN
A2C
DQN
REINFORCE
Tuned Heuristic
PPO
SAC
(a) eMBB Slice.
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
PRB ratio
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
Better
BRAIN
A2C
DQN
REINFORCE
Tuned Heuristic
PPO
SAC
(b) URLLC Slice.
0
20
40
60
80 100 120 140
PHY TBs [tb/s]
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
Better
BRAIN
A2C
DQN
REINFORCE
Tuned Heuristic
PPO
SAC
(c) mMTC Slice.
Fig. 7. Comparative network slicing performance of the proposed BRAIN agent against a broader set of baselines: Tuned Heuristic (weighted round-robin),
and DRL agents DQN, A2C (AC), REINFORCE (PG), PPO, and SAC, evaluated across three heterogeneous network slices under the same state/action
interface for a fair comparison.
5 Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) agent [46], and
6
Soft Actor-Critic (SAC) agent [47]. All learning-based xApps
observe the same state (slice KPM metrics) and produce the
same type of actions (PRB allocations and scheduler choices)
as BRAIN, ensuring a fair comparison. For fairness, we also
give each RL agent a comparable model architecture (a 5-layer
fully-connected neural network with ∼30 neurons per layer)
and tune their hyperparameters accordingly (see Table I). In
particular, all use a discount factor γ = 0.99 and learning
rates on the order of 10−3, with on-policy methods (A2C,
REINFORCE, PPO) relying on fresh trajectory rollouts and
off-policy methods (DQN, SAC) utilizing experience replay
buffers. All custom agents are implemented in PyTorch and
deployed as containerized xApps, making them compatible
with the O-RAN near-RT RIC platform. We train each agent
through direct interaction with our RAN testbed in an on-
line learning fashion (agentic xApps continuously updates
its policy as it receives new observations and rewards). To
ensure a fair evaluation, every learning agent is trained for the
same number of time steps (on the order of 105 environment
interactions, which equates to several hours of network time at
a 20 ms control interval). We repeat each training experiment
across multiple random seeds (e.g., 5 independent runs per
agent) and report the mean performance with 95% confidence
intervals to account for stochastic variability. We compare both
convergence speed in terms of training iterations and actual
wall-clock time, since on-policy methods like PPO require
more interactions but less computation per step, whereas off-
policy methods like SAC can learn from fewer interactions at
the cost of more intensive updates.
Tranining. To characterize the exploration-exploitation be-
havior of all controllers with a common scalar, we report pol-
icy entropy over training time. For each episode, we compute
the Shannon entropy of the action-selection distribution used
to generate decisions at each time step and average it across
the episode:
Ht = −
X
a∈A
pt(a) log
 pt(a)

,
(12)
¯Hep = 1
T
T
X
t=1
Ht,
(13)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Time Step
×106
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
QoS Satis.
BRAIN
A2C
DQN
REINFORCE
Tuned Heuristic
PPO
SAC
Fig. 8. Resilience to a controlled non-stationarity event (traffic distribution
shift) measured via all-slices QoS satisfaction. The vertical dashed line at time
step 0.5x106 marks the non-stationary event traffic surge.
where A denotes the (discrete) action space and pt(a) is
the probability of selecting action a at time step t. For
comparability across methods, we compute entropy over the
same action abstraction used by the xApps, i.e., the joint
decision over PRB allocation templates and scheduler choices.
For or on-policy methods, the action-selection distribution
is the learned stochastic policy, hence pt(a) = πθ(a | st). We
compute Ht directly from the categorical action probabilities
output by the actor network at each time step and then average
over the rollout trajectory within the episode using (13). This
measure is consistent with the entropy quantities commonly
used for entropy regularization in on-policy RL, and it captures
how quickly the learned policy collapses from broad explo-
ration (high entropy) to confident decisions (lower entropy)
during training. For SAC, the action-selection distribution is
also the learned stochastic actor, i.e., pt(a) = πθ(a | st). We
compute entropy from the actor distribution at each time step
and average per episode. Because SAC explicitly optimizes
an entropy-regularized objective, its entropy often remains
higher for longer than standard on-policy methods, reflecting
sustained stochasticity in the learned control policy even after
rewards stabilize.
DQN does not parameterize an explicit stochastic policy; it
learns action-values Qθ(s, a). To enable a meaningful entropy
comparison, we define pt(a) as the behavior policy used to
select actions during training. With ϵ-greedy exploration, this


--- Page 10 ---
10
distribution is:
pt(a) = ϵt
|A| + (1 −ϵt) I
h
a = arg max
a′ Qθ(st, a′)
i
,
(14)
and the corresponding entropy is computed via (12)–(13).
This yields an episode-wise entropy curve that reflects the
exploration schedule (e.g., annealing ϵt) and the induced
concentration of behavior on the greedy action over time. The
tuned heuristic applies a deterministic rule (static PRB parti-
tioning with weighted round-robin scheduling). Consequently,
the induced action-selection distribution is approximately a
point mass and its entropy is near zero, serving as a reference
that highlights the absence of learned exploration in the non-
learning baseline.
For BRAIN, we define policy entropy using the posterior
distribution over actions inferred from EFE. At each time step,
BRAIN evaluates the EFE G(a | st) for each candidate action
and forms an action posterior:
qt(a) = softmax(−γ G(a | st)) =
exp(−γ G(a | st))
P
a′∈A exp(−γ G(a′ | st)),
(15)
where γ is a precision (inverse-temperature) parameter con-
trolling decisiveness. We then set pt(a) = qt(a) and compute
Ht and ¯Hep using (12)-(13). This entropy has a principled
interpretation in active inference: it quantifies uncertainty in
the inferred control decision given the agent’s beliefs and
preferences, and it typically decreases as the posterior sharpens
with experience (without necessarily collapsing to zero if
stochasticity is retained for robustness). In addition to overall
performance, we design experiments to probe each controller’s
adaptability and robustness. We introduce controlled non-
stationary during training/deployment. For instance, a sudden
change in traffic intensity or a switch in channel conditions
partway through an experiment to evaluate how quickly each
agent re-adjusts to new network dynamics. This tests for
resilience to changing conditions and potential catastrophic
forgetting in the RL baselines (i.e., whether a policy trained
under one traffic profile fails when the profile shifts). We
also conduct sensitivity analyses on key parameters of our
BRAIN agent, including the slice preference model and reward
weighting (extrinsic QoS objectives vs. epistemic exploration
bonus), the planning horizon length used in its decision-
making, and the level of observation noise in the state input.
By varying these factors, we assess how robust the agent’s
performance is to mis-specified preferences or uncertainty.
VI. EVALUATION
Analyzing Performance of Intelligent Agents. Fig. 4 sum-
marizes the training performance of the BRAIN agent versus a
tuned heuristic baseline and various DRL agents (A2C, PPO,
DQN, SAC, REINFORCE) in AI-RAN testbed. In Fig. 4a,
BRAIN agent’s reward curve climbs steeply, converging in far
fewer episodes and reaching a higher asymptotic reward than
all baselines (including the tuned heuristic). This indicates that
BRAIN learns an effective policy with significantly higher
sample efficiency; extracting more cumulative reward from
limited interactions. By contrast, the DRL agents exhibit
slower reward growth and lower plateaus, reflecting the heavy
trial-and-error search typical of model-free RL. Faster reward
convergence means BRAIN can attain near-optimal control de-
cisions with much less training data than the DRL benchmarks
which is a critical advantage in real-world networks where
each training episode (e.g. a timeslot of suboptimal decisions)
has tangible costs. Fig. 4b plots the average training loss,
where again BRAIN distinguishes itself with a markedly lower
and more stable loss trajectory throughout training. BRAIN
agent’s loss remains near an order of magnitude lower than
the deep RL agents’ losses and shows minimal oscillation.
This stability indicates that BRAIN’s learning updates are
well-behaved, preventing the large gradient swings or diver-
gence issues that often plague DRL training. In contrast,
the RL baselines (especially more volatile ones like DQN
or REINFORCE) exhibit higher loss values with noticeable
fluctuations, signaling less stable learning. Such instability
in RL can arise from the algorithms struggling to adjust to
the RAN’s non-stationary dynamics: when the environment’s
“rules” (e.g. user load, channel conditions) change continually,
a conventional RL agent has trouble re-using prior knowledge
and may need to relearn repeatedly. Fig. 4 illustrates the
policy entropy over time, shedding light on each agent’s
exploration–exploitation balance. BRAIN’s entropy starts high
(encouraging exploration) and then declines gradually as train-
ing progresses. Importantly, it never collapses to zero; instead,
BRAIN’s entropy tapers to a moderate level, indicating a
controlled exploration strategy. This steady entropy reduction
suggests BRAIN is systematically exploring the action space
early on and then confidently exploiting its learned policy as
it converges, all without prematurely losing diversity in its
decisions.
Explainability Analysis. We model each slice’s demand as
a hidden state (Low/Medium/High) and visualize the agent’s
posterior belief over time as heatmaps in Fig. 5. In the eMBB
Slice (Fig. 5a), the agent quickly concentrates its belief on
the High demand state (bright band in the top row) once high
traffic is observed. Around t ≈40, the underlying demand
drops and the belief becomes less concentrated, spreading
across states before refocusing on Medium. After the arrow-
labeled Check actions, the belief sharpens again and returns
to High by t ≈70. This matches the intuition that the
agent becomes more certain when informative observations
arrive (a single dominant bright band) and remains more
uncertain otherwise (belief distributed across multiple states).
In Fig. 5b, the posterior initially alternates mainly between
High and Low, reflecting ambiguity in early observations. At
t ≈30, a demand shift drives rapid belief concentration toward
Low. Following the epistemic Check at t ≈60, the belief
becomes more peaked and consolidates strongly on Medium
demand. In Fig. 5c, the agent begins with low uncertainty,
confidently focusing on Low. After Check at t ≈20, the
belief shifts decisively toward High. Around t ≈50, changing
conditions increase uncertainty (belief spreads across states)
before gradually concentrating toward the Medium state by
t ≈70.
In Fig. 6a for the eMBB Slice, we observe that the
epistemic value dominates in the early phase, where the green
area is most prominent. This indicates that the agent is initially


--- Page 11 ---
11
exploring uncertain aspects of eMBB traffic demands, likely
performing observation-driven or probing actions to refine
its internal beliefs about bandwidth requirements. Over time,
the epistemic term steadily declines, while the extrinsic cost
increases. This transition reflects that the agent has gained
enough confidence in its beliefs and begins to shift toward ex-
ploitative behavior, focusing on aligning slice resource alloca-
tions with performance preferences. In Fig. 6b for the URLLC
Slice, a slightly different pattern emerges. The epistemic
and extrinsic components are more balanced during the early
stages, implying that the agent simultaneously explores and
regulates URLLC’s latency-critical requirements. This behavior
reflects the tight QoS constraints of URLLC, which necessitate
that even early decisions consider extrinsic risks. In Fig. 6c
for mMTC Slice, we see the strongest and longest-lasting
epistemic engagement. The green region dominates the first
half of the plot, suggesting that the agent initially dedicates
extensive exploration effort to understand mMTC’s demand
dynamics, which are likely bursty and sparse in nature. After
t = 2000, a sharp increase in extrinsic value occurs as the
agent begins enforcing goal-directed behavior.
Slicing Performance. Fig. 7 reports per-slice empirical
CDFs of KPMs for the three heterogeneous slices, measured
on the AI-RAN testbed under the same state/action interface
for all agents. Using CDFs (rather than only means) is
important because it exposes tail behavior and reliability:
a right-shift of the CDF indicates that an agent achieves
larger KPM values more frequently ("Better →"), while
a steeper CDF indicates reduced variability (more predictable
operation). Fig. 7a shows that BRAIN yields the most fa-
vorable throughput distribution; relative to all DRL baselines
and the tuned heuristic, indicating higher throughput across
essentially the entire operating range. Qualitatively, BRAIN
improves not only the median throughput but also the upper
quantiles, suggesting that the agent learns a slicing policy
that preserves eMBB capacity even while meeting stricter
URLLC/mMTC requirements. In contrast, baselines exhibit
either i) lower medians or ii) larger dispersion, implying
less consistent eMBB service under the same traffic mix and
control budget. Fig. 7b reports the distribution of the URLLC
PRB ratio (i.e., the fraction of physical resources effectively
assigned/available to URLLC by the slicing and scheduling
decisions). Higher URLLC PRB-ratio CDF reflects stronger
resource protection for URLLC, which is consistent with
meeting latency-sensitive objectives under congestion. BRAIN
exhibits the most right-shifted curve, indicating that it allo-
cates/maintains higher URLLC resource shares more reliably
when needed. This behavior aligns with the embodied active-
inference design: the agent’s action posterior (formed via
EFE) naturally increases precision toward URLLC-protective
actions when beliefs indicate rising queue pressure, rather
than relying on brittle reward shaping or episodic retraining.
Several DRL baselines (notably REINFORCE and the tuned
heuristic) show substantially more mass at lower PRB ratios,
which typically corresponds to periods where URLLC is
under-provisioned and thus more vulnerable to queue build-
up and latency violations. Fig. 7c compares the distribution of
delivered downlink PHY TBs for the mMTC slice, which we
use as a reliability-oriented proxy in our setup (successful TB
deliveries reflect sustained service for sporadic IoT/telemetry
traffic). BRAIN provides a modest but consistent for the
TB distribution versus DRL baselines, suggesting improved
reliability without sacrificing eMBB throughput or URLLC
protection. Importantly, the low-performance tail is reduced:
BRAIN yields fewer ”near-starvation” intervals (very low TB
rates), which is critical for mMTC where sporadic bursts must
still be delivered predictably.
Beyond average reward, we evaluate whether controllers
maintain slice-specific service guarantees under distribution
shifts. Concretely, we measure how reliably each agent keeps
all slices within their QoS targets before and after a controlled
non-stationarity event. In Fig. 8, before the non-stationarity
event (kshift ≈0.5×106), BRAIN achieves the highest all-slices
QoS satisfaction, indicating it most consistently keeps all slice
constraints within target under the nominal regime. At kshift,
all learning-based agents exhibit an abrupt drop in QoS Sat(t)
due to the traffic surge; however, BRAIN shows the smallest
degradation and the fastest recovery toward its pre-shift level.
In contrast, DRL baselines suffer a larger post-shift drop and
recover more slowly, stabilizing at lower QoS-satisfaction lev-
els; consistent with reduced adaptability and partial forgetting
under distribution shift. The tuned heuristic remains largely flat
and well below the learned agents throughout, confirming that
static slicing policies cannot react to sudden regime changes.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work demonstrates that deep active inference is not
only a conceptual fit for agentic and embodied intelligence
in mobile networks, but also a practical control paradigm
on a real open AI-RAN stack. We introduced BRAIN as an
xApp that closes the network action–perception loop through
two tightly coupled operations: (i) Bayesian belief updating
over latent slice conditions from streaming KPMs, and (ii)
expected free-energy minimization to select resource-allocation
actions that jointly satisfy slice intents and reduce uncertainty.
Across a GPU-accelerated AI-RAN testbed with heteroge-
neous slices, BRAIN yielded three concrete outcomes. First, it
achieved stronger slicing performance than a tuned heuristic
and a broad set of DRL baselines. Second, it provided robust
adaptation under non-stationarity: when the traffic distribu-
tion shifted abruptly, BRAIN exhibited the smallest QoS-
satisfaction degradation and the fastest recovery without re-
training. Third, it delivered operator-facing interpretability at
runtime. Beyond the empirical advantage, the broader insight
is that active inference enables genuinely agentic, embodied
control by grounding decisions in principled Bayesian belief
updating rather than reward engineering.
For future work, promising directions include extending the
framework to hierarchical, multi-timescale active inference in
O-RAN, where near-RT xApps operate under non-RT intent
and policy coordination using structured generative models.
Another important research can be to scale to multi-cell and
multi-agent deployments, enabling coordination among xApps
under interference and mobility coupling and studying dis-
tributed belief sharing under realistic telemetry and fronthaul
constraints.


--- Page 12 ---
12
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Liu, D. Guo, and A. Cangelosi, “Embodied Intelligence: A Synergy
of Morphology, Action, Perception and Learning,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1–36, Mar. 2025.
[2]
W. Saad, O. Hashash, C. K. Thomas, C. Chaccour, M. Debbah, N.
Mandayam, and Z. Han, “Artificial General Intelligence (AGI)-Native
Wireless Systems: A Journey Beyond 6G,” Proceedings of the IEEE,
vol. 113, no. 9, pp. 849–887, Sep. 2025.
[3]
M. Polese, M. Dohler, F. Dressler, M. Erol-Kantarci, R. Jana, R.
Knopp, and T. Melodia, “Empowering the 6G Cellular Architecture
with Open RAN,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 245–262, Feb. 2024.
[4]
X. Cheng, Z. Huang, and L. Bai, “Channel Nonstationarity and
Consistency for Beyond 5G and 6G: A Survey,” IEEE Communications
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 1634–1669, 2022.
[5]
W. Saad, M. Bennis, and M. Chen, “A Vision of 6G Wireless Systems:
Applications, Trends, Technologies, and Open Research Problems,”
IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 134–142, May 2020.
[6]
Y. LeCun and Y. Bengio, “Convolutional Networks for Images, Speech,
and Time Series,” in Handbook of Brain Theory and Neural Networks,
M. A. Arbib, Ed., MIT Press, 2003, pp. 255–258.
[7]
D. Bank, N. Koenigstein, and R. Giryes, “Autoencoders,” arXiv, cs.NI
2003.05991, Apr. 2021.
[8]
C. K. Thomas, C. Chaccour, W. Saad, M. Debbah, and C. S.
Hong, “Causal Reasoning: Charting a Revolutionary Course for Next-
Generation AI-Native Wireless Networks,” IEEE Vehicular Technology
Magazine, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 16–31, Mar. 2024.
[9]
R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduc-
tion. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998, p. 322.
[10]
F.-L. Vincent, H. Peter, I. Riashat, G. B. Marc, and P. Joelle, “An Intro-
duction to Deep Reinforcement Learning,” Foundations and Trends®
in Machine Learning, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 219–354, Dec. 2018.
[11]
Q. Liu, N. Choi, and T. Han, “OnSlicing: Online End-to-End Network
Slicing with Reinforcement Learning,” in 17th ACM International
Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments and Technologies
(CoNEXT 2021), Virtual Conference: ACM, Dec. 2021, pp. 141–153.
[12]
H. Cheng, S. D’Oro, R. Gangula, S. Velumani, D. Villa, L. Bonati,
M. Polese, T. Melodia, G. Arrobo, and C. Maciocco, “ORANSlice:
An Open Source 5G Network Slicing Platform for O-RAN,” in 30th
ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MobiCom 2024), Washington, D.C.: ACM, Nov. 2024, pp. 2297–2302.
[13]
G. A. Vouros, “Explainable Deep Reinforcement Learning: State of
the Art and Challenges,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 5,
pp. 1–39, Dec. 2022.
[14]
X. Yang, Y. Shi, J. Liu, Z. Xie, M. Sheng, and J. Li, “Generalization-
Enhanced DRL-Based Resource Allocation in Wireless Communica-
tion Networks With Dynamic User Loads,” IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations Letters, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 3902–3906, Dec. 2025.
[15]
L. Bariah and M. Debbah, “AI Embodiment Through 6G: Shaping
the Future of AGI,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 31, no. 5,
pp. 174–181, Oct. 2024.
[16]
M. Maier, “From artificial intelligence to active inference: the key
to true AI and the 6G world brain [Invited],” Journal of Optical
Communications and Networking, vol. 18, no. 1, A28–A43, Jan. 2026.
[17]
K. J. Friston, T. FitzGerald, F. Rigoli, P. Schwartenbeck, J. ODoherty,
and G. Pezzulo, “Active inference and learning,” Neuroscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews, vol. 68, pp. 862–879, Sep. 2016.
[18]
S. Ali, T. Abuhmed, S. El-Sappagh, K. Muhammad, J. M. Alonso-
Moral, R. Confalonieri, R. Guidotti, J. Del Ser, N. D´ıaz-Rodr´ıguez,
and F. Herrera, “Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI): What we
know and what is left to attain Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence,”
Elsevier Information Fusion, vol. 99, p. 101 805, Nov. 2023.
[19]
L. Longo, M. Brcic, F. Cabitza, J. Choi, R. Confalonieri, J. D. Ser, R.
Guidotti, Y. Hayashi, F. Herrera, A. Holzinger, R. Jiang, H. Khosravi,
F. Lecue, G. Malgieri, A. P´aez, W. Samek, J. Schneider, T. Speith, and
S. Stumpf, “Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI) 2.0: A manifesto
of open challenges and interdisciplinary research directions,” Elsevier
Information Fusion, vol. 106, p. 102 301, Jun. 2024.
[20]
W. Guo, “Explainable Artificial Intelligence for 6G: Improving Trust
between Human and Machine,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 39–45, Jun. 2020.
[21]
S. M. Lundberg and S.-I. Lee, “A Unified Approach to Interpreting
Model Predictions,” in 31st International Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA: Curran
Associates Inc., Dec. 2017, pp. 4768–4777.
[22]
M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, ““Why Should I Trust You?”:
Explaining the Predictions of Any Classifier,” in 22nd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
San Francisco, CA: ACM, Aug. 2016, pp. 1135 –1144.
[23]
O. T. Basaran and F. Dressler, “XAInomaly: Explainable, Interpretable
and Trustworthy AI for xURLLC in 6G Open-RAN,” in 3rd Inter-
national Conference on 6G Networking (6GNet 2024), Paris, France:
IEEE, Oct. 2024, pp. 93–101.
[24]
C. Fiandrino, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, M. Polese, T. Melodia, and J.
Widmer, “EXPLORA: AI/ML EXPLainability for the Open RAN,”
Proceedings of the ACM on Networking, vol. 1, pp. 1–26, Nov. 2023.
[25]
A. K. Gizzini, Y. Medjahdi, A. J. Ghandour, and L. Clavier, “Towards
Explainable AI for Channel Estimation in Wireless Communications,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 7389–
7394, May 2024.
[26]
P. F. P´erez, I. Bravo, A. Kamath, C. Fiandrino, and J. Widmer,
“ChronoProf: Profiling Time Series Forecasters and Classifiers in
Mobile Networks with Explainable AI,” in 26th IEEE International
Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks
(WoWMoM 2025), Fort Worth, TX: IEEE, May 2025, pp. 41–50.
[27]
C. Fiandrino, E. P. G´omez, P. F. P´erez, H. Mohammadalizadeh,
M. Fiore, and J. Widmer, “AIChronoLens: Advancing Explainability
for Time Series AI Forecasting in Mobile Networks,” in 43rd IEEE
International Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM
2024), Vancouver, Canada: IEEE, May 2024, pp. 1521–1530.
[28]
A. Duttagupta, M. Jabbari, C. Fiandrino, M. Fiore, and J. Widmer,
“SYMBXRL: Symbolic Explainable Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Mobile Networks,” in 44th IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Communications (INFOCOM 2025), London, United Kingdom:
IEEE, May 2025, pp. 1–10.
[29]
L. Da Costa, T. Parr, N. Sajid, S. Veselic, V. Neacsu, and K. J. Friston,
“Active inference on discrete state-spaces: A synthesis,” Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, vol. 99, p. 102 447, Dec. 2020.
[30]
A. Tschantz, B. Millidge, A. K. Seth, and C. L. Buckley, “Reinforce-
ment Learning through Active Inference,” arXiv, cs.LG, Feb. 2020.
[31]
G. Oliver, P. Lanillos, and G. Cheng, “An Empirical Study of Active
Inference on a Humanoid Robot,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and
Developmental Systems, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 462–471, Jun. 2022.
[32]
K. Fujii, T. Isomura, and S. Murata, “Real-World Robot Control Based
on Contrastive Deep Active Inference With Demonstrations,” IEEE
Access, vol. 12, pp. 172 343–172 357, 2024.
[33]
M. Albarracin, I. Hip´olito, S. E. Tremblay, J. G. Fox, G. Ren´e,
K. J. Friston, and M. J. D. Ramstead, “Designing explainable arti-
ficial intelligence with active inference: A framework for transparent
introspection and decision-making,” arXiv, cs.AI, Jun. 2023.
[34]
T. Parr, G. Pezzulo, and K. J. Friston, Active Inference: The Free
Energy Principle in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. The MIT Press, 2022.
[35]
K. J. Friston, “The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory?”
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 127–138, Jan. 2010.
[36]
A. Kelkar and C. Dick, “Aerial: A GPU Hyperconverged Platform for
5G,” in ACM SIGCOMM 2021, Demo Session, Virtual Conference:
ACM, Aug. 2021, pp. 79–81.
[37]
A. Kelkar and C. Dick, “NVIDIA Aerial GPU Hosted AI-on-5G,” in
4th IEEE 5G World Forum (5GWF 2021), Montr´eal, Canada: IEEE,
Oct. 2021, pp. 64–69.
[38]
NVIDIA. “NVIDIA Aerial SDK. ”[Online]. Available: https : / /
developer.nvidia.com/aerial-sdk (accessed: 15.01.2026).
[39]
F. Kaltenberger, A. P. Silva, A. Gosain, L. Wang, and T.-T. Nguyen,
“OpenAirInterface: Democratizing innovation in the 5G Era,” Elsevier
Computer Networks, vol. 176, p. 107 284, Jul. 2020.
[40]
Foxconn. “Foxconn RPQN. ”[Online]. Available: https://fcc.report/
FCC-ID/2AQ68RPQN7801/5573870.pdf (accessed: 15.01.2026).
[41]
O-RAN SC. “OSC Near Realtime RIC. ”[Online]. Available: https:
//wiki.o-ran-sc.org/display/RICP/2022-05-24+Release+E (accessed:
15.01.2026).
[42]
M. Polese, L. Bonati, S. D’Oro, S. Basagni, and T. Melodia, “ColO-
RAN: Developing Machine Learning-Based xApps for Open RAN
Closed-Loop Control on Programmable Experimental Platforms,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 5787–
5800, Oct. 2023.
[43]
V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D.
Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing Atari with Deep Reinforcement
Learning,” arXiv, cs.LG 1312.5602, Dec. 2013.
[44]
H. van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep Reinforcement Learning
with Double Q-learning,” in 30th AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI 2016), Phoenix, AZ: AAAI Press, Feb. 2016,
pp. 2094–2100.


--- Page 13 ---
13
[45]
R. J. Williams, “Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for
connectionist reinforcement learning,” Machine Learning, vol. 8,
no. 3–4, pp. 229–256, May 1992.
[46]
J. Schulman, R. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms,” arXiv, cs.LG, Jul. 2017,
pp. 1–12.
[47]
T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft Actor-Critic:
Off-Policy Maximum Entropy Deep Reinforcement Learning with a
Stochastic Actor,” arXiv, cs.LG 1801.01290, Aug. 2018.
Osman Tugay Basaran is a 6G/AI Research Scien-
tist at Prof. Dr.-Ing. Falko Dressler’s Telecommuni-
cations Networks Group (TKN), School of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Technical Uni-
versity of Berlin, Germany, while holding two Vis-
iting Research Scientist positions at the Fraunhofer
Heinrich Hertz Institute, Wireless Communications
and Networks Department, Signal and Information
Processing Research Group of Prof. Dr.-Ing. Sla-
womir Stanczak and at Optical Zeitgeist Laboratory
of Prof. Dr. Martin Maier, Montr´eal, Canada. Within
the scope of 6G-Platform, 6G-RIC and xG-RIC projects, he is focusing on
Domain-specific Generative AI (GenAI) and Explainable AI (XAI) algorithms
for the implementation and execution of Next-Generation, AI-Native 6G and
Beyond as well as cognitive skilled agents for future wireless systems. He has
been selected as one of the Research Fellow (36 Fellow selected across all
German Technical Universities) in the Software Campus Executive Leadership
Cohort 2025. As a Principal Investigator in collaboration with Huawei, he is
leading collaborative project titled “NEXT-G: Explainable and Trustworthy
AI/ML for 6G and Beyond”. He also serves as a Scientific Reviewer in
top-tier IEEE Journal/Conferences such as different Transactions, Magazines,
INFOCOM, ICC, and GLOBECOM.
Martin Maier is a full professor with INRS,
Montr´eal, Canada. He was educated at the Technical
University of Berlin, Germany, and received M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees both with distinctions (summa
cum laude) in 1998 and 2003, respectively. In 2003,
he was a postdoc fellow at the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA. He
was a visiting professor at Stanford University, Stan-
ford, CA, 2006 through 2007. In 2017, he received
the Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel Research Award from
the Alexander von Humboldt (AvH) Foundation in
recognition of his accomplishments in research on FiWi-enhanced mobile
networks. In 2017, he was named one of the three most promising scientists
in the category “Contribution to a better society” of the Marie Sklodowska-
Curie Actions (MSCA) 2017 Prize Award of the European Commission.
In 2019/2020, he held a UC3MBanco de Santander Excellence Chair at
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (UC3M), Madrid, Spain. Recently, in
December 2023, he was awarded with the 2023 Technical Achievement Award
of the IEEE Communications Society (ComSoc) Tactile Internet Technical
Committee for his contribution on 6G/Next G and the design of Metaverse
concepts and architectures as well as the 2023 Outstanding Paper Award of the
IEEE Computer Society Bio-Inspired Computing STC for his contribution on
the symbiosis between INTERnet and Human BEING (INTERBEING). He is
co-author of the book “Toward 6G: A New Era of Convergence” (Wiley-IEEE
Press, January 2021) and author of the sequel “6G and Onward to Next G:
The Road to the Multiverse” (Wiley-IEEE Press, February 2023).
Falko Dressler is full professor and Chair for
Telecommunication Networks at the School of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, TU
Berlin. He received his M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees
from the Dept. of Computer Science, University
of Erlangen in 1998 and 2003, respectively. Dr.
Dressler has been associate editor-in-chief for IEEE
Trans. on Network Science and Engineering, IEEE
Trans. on Mobile Computing and Elsevier Computer
Communications as well as an editor for journals
such as IEEE/ACM Trans. on Networking, Elsevier
Ad Hoc Networks, and Elsevier Nano Communication Networks. He has
been chairing conferences such as IEEE INFOCOM, ACM MobiSys, ACM
MobiHoc, IEEE VNC, IEEE GLOBECOM. He authored the textbooks Self-
Organization in Sensor and Actor Networks published by Wiley & Sons and
Vehicular Networking published by Cambridge University Press. He has been
an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer as well as an ACM Distinguished Speaker.
Dr. Dressler is an IEEE Fellow, an ACM Fellow, and an AAIA Fellow. He
is a member of the German National Academy of Science and Engineering
(acatech). He has been serving on the IEEE COMSOC Conference Council
and the ACM SIGMOBILE Executive Committee. His research objectives
include next generation wireless communication systems in combination with
distributed machine learning and edge computing for improved resiliency.
Application domains include the internet of things, cyber-physical systems,
and the internet of bio-nano-things.
