--- Page 1 ---
1
Blockchain-Enabled Routing for Zero-Trust
Low-Altitude Intelligent Networks
Ziye Jia, Member, IEEE, Sijie He, Ligang Yuan, Fuhui Zhou, Senior Member, IEEE, Qihui Wu, Fellow, IEEE,
Zhu Han, Fellow, IEEE, and Dusit Niyato, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Due to the scalability and portability, low-altitude
intelligent networks (LAINs) are essential in various ﬁelds such
as surveillance and disaster rescue. However, in LAINs, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) are characterized by the distributed topol-
ogy and high mobility, thus vulnerable to security threats, which
may degrade routing performances for data transmissions. Hence,
how to ensure the routing stability and security of LAINs is
challenging. In this paper, we focus on the routing with multiple
UAV clusters in LAINs. To minimize the damage caused by
potential threats, we present the zero-trust architecture with
the software-deﬁned perimeter and blockchain techniques to
manage the identify and mobility of UAVs. Besides, we formulate
the routing problem to optimize the end-to-end (E2E) delay
and transmission success ratio (TSR) simultaneously, which is
an integer nonlinear programming problem and intractable to
solve. Therefore, we reformulate the problem into a decentralized
partially observable Markov decision process. We design the
multi-agent double deep Q-network-based routing algorithms to
solve the problem, empowered by the soft-hierarchical experience
replay buffer and prioritized experience replay mechanisms.
Finally, extensive simulations are conducted and the numerical
results demonstrate that the proposed framework reduces the
average E2E delay by 59% and improves the TSR by 29% on
average compared to benchmarks, while simultaneously enabling
faster and more robust identiﬁcation of low-trust UAVs.
Index Terms—Low-altitude intelligent network, trust routing,
blockchain, zero-trust environment, multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning.
This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 62301251, in part by the Natural Science Foundation on
Frontier Leading Technology Basic Research Project of Jiangsu under Grant
BK20222001, in part by the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program
by CAST 2023QNRC001, and in part by NSF ECCS-2302469, and Japan
Science and Technology Agency (JST) Adopting Sustainable Partnerships for
Innovative Research Ecosystem (ASPIRE) JPMJAP2326.
Ziye Jia, Sijie He, and Qihui Wu are with the College of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing 211106, China (e-mail: jiaziye@nuaa.edu.cn; hesijie@nuaa.edu.cn;
wuqihui@nuaa.edu.cn).
Ligang Yuan is with the College of Civil Aviation, Nanjing University
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China (e-mail: yuanli-
gang@nuaa.edu.cn).
Fuhui Zhou is with the College of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Nanjing Uni-
versity of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing 211106, China (e-mail:
zhoufuhui@nuaa.edu.cn).
Zhu Han is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering at the University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004 USA (e-mail:
hanzhu22@gmail.com).
Dusit Niyato is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore 639798 (e-mail: dniyato@ntu.edu.sg).
I. INTRODUCTION
A
S key components of the six generation communication
networks, the low-altitude intelligent network (LAIN) is
widely applied to multiple tasks, such as disaster rescue and
real-time monitoring [1]–[3]. In the applications, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) can collect the data from sensor devices
(SDs), and then transmit them to the ground base stations
(BSs). Besides, in LAINs, the UAV networking can cooper-
atively accomplish complex tasks, thereby providing low-cost,
ﬂexible, and versatile services [4], [5]. While transmitting the
demanded data, routing is a signiﬁcant issue [6].
However, since UAVs are characterized by the complex ap-
plication environment, high dynamic, and distributed topology,
they are vulnerable and unreliable against security threats, such
as attacks and node failures [7]. To mitigate the impact of
potential attacks, a dynamic identity authentication mechanism
is essential. Traditional strategies based on static network
boundaries are widely studied, such as ﬁrewalls and virtual
private networks (VPNs) [8]. Nevertheless, when a node passes
the initial authentication, it remains trusted and its subsequent
malicious behaviors are often ignored due to a lack of dynamic
monitoring. This static nature makes traditional strategies un-
suitable for highly dynamic LAINs. On the contrary, a zero-
trust network security architecture is based on the dynamic
veriﬁcation of nodes and behaviors, adhering to the principle
of “never trust, always verify” [9]. In zero-trust architectures
(ZTAs), the software-deﬁned perimeter (SDP) plays a signiﬁ-
cant role. It achieves secure access control through verifying
identities, dynamic authorization, and detailed management,
etc., reducing the illegal access to network resources and
ensuring the security of data transmissions [10].
Moreover, due to the malice and failure of UAVs, the
reliability of LAINs and the availability of communication
links are variational, which may degrade the routing perfor-
mance. Therefore, it is signiﬁcant to efﬁciently evaluate the
trust of UAVs and manage the mobility of UAVs in LAINs.
Speciﬁcally, to manage the trust of UAVs, a couple of works
introduce the ground control station (GCS) as a center manager,
which is not resilient to fault tolerance and suffered from
tampering, long distances, and interferences [15]. Hence, how
to effectively manage the node trust and guarantee the routing
security remains challenging in the distributed and unreliable
networks. In particular, the blockchain is a distributed ledger
that provides veriﬁable and traceable records of interactions,
arXiv:2602.23667v1  [cs.NI]  27 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
TABLE I
COMPARISONS OF OUR ADAPTIVE FRAMEWORK OVER EXISTING SECURE ROUTING SCHEMES FOR UAV NETWORKS
Reference
Trust Management
Blockchain
Algorithm
Key Characteristic
Our Work
Decentralized
(Adaptive weights)
Yes
SP-MADDQN
Provides a comprehensive, adaptive, and
Byzantine-resistant secure routing framework.
[11]
Decentralized
(Fixed weights)
Yes
Security-aware distributed routing protocol
Static trust model lacks dynamic adjustability
and the routing method is non-adaptive.
[12]
Decentralized
(Fixed weights)
No
Adaptive snow geese algorithm
Static trust models lack adaptability, incur high
audit overhead, and are vulnerable to tampering.
[13]
Centralized
No
Centralized trust based secure routing
Trust management suffers from both single point of
failure and the lack of scalability.
[14]
Without trust
No
Multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL)
The lack of effective solutions against malicious
nodes/behaviors results in insecurity.
in which transaction details and records are stored and hard to
be tempered with [11], [16]. Therefore, the blockchain can be
applied to recording opinions of UAVs and building the decen-
tralized trust management mechanism [17], [18]. Meanwhile,
several works related to the node trust evaluation calculate the
values through ﬁxed weights, which lack adaptabilities and
ﬂexibilities [19]. Therefore, the evaluation method based on
adaptive weights is required to improve the timeliness.
Besides, the performance of the end-to-end (E2E) delay and
transmission success ratios (TSRs) are the key basises for
optimizing routing in LAINs, since the low delay and high
TSR can signiﬁcantly enhance the reliability and timeliness
of various emergency applications [20], [21]. Consequently,
it is necessary to propose dynamic routing algorithms to
facilitate the efﬁcient, reliable, and timely data transmission
in the varying network topology. However, most traditional
routing algorithms (e.g., A*, Floyd-Warshall, and Dijkstra) are
designed for static environments or ﬁxed rules, which cannot
directly adapt to moving UAVs and varying topologies [22].
Hence, to tackle the issue, the multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning (MADRL) is an effective algorithm that dynamically
interacts with the environment in real-time and can achieve
satisfactory results with limited information [23]. To more
clearly illustrate the signiﬁcance of the article, Table I is
presented.
To deal with the above challenges, in this paper, the UAVs in
LAINs is ﬁrstly divided into multiple clusters to collaboratively
transmit the demands from SDs to BSs with security threats and
dynamic distributed topologies. Considering the joining and
exiting of UAVs, we present the ZTA with the SDP controller
for the identity authentication and dynamic management of
UAVs. Then, we design the adaptive weight trust model to
update the credit values of UAVs, including the direct trust via
the forwarding rate of demands, trust interaction degree, and
the reception rate of probe packets, as well as the indirect
trust via aggregating the opinions from neighboring nodes.
Furthermore, in order to mitigate the impact of security threats,
we propose the lightweight consortium blockchain to store the
immutable transaction record and credit values of the trust
evaluation. In the lightweight blockchain, the cluster head
UAVs (CHUs) are designated as full UAVs and deployed as
decentralized managers, thereby participating in the consensus
for blocks, while other UAVs act as light UAVs and only
store the block. Particularly, when credit values are lower
than the given safety threshold, UAVs are isolated from the
network by the consensus among CHUs. According to the
constructed zero-trust LAIN, we formulate the routing problem
to optimize the E2E delay and TSR simultaneously, which is an
integer nonlinear programming (INLP) problem and intractable
to solve. Besides, since it is challenging to obtain the global
information in distributed LAINs, we reformulate the routing
problem into a decentralized partially observable Markov deci-
sion process (Dec-POMDP). Furthermore, the improved multi-
agent double deep Q-network (MADDQN) based algorithm
is designed and empowered by the proposed soft-hierarchical
experience replay buffer (SHERB) and prioritized experience
replay (PER) mechanisms. Finally, numerical simulations are
conducted to verify the performance of proposed algorithms.
In short, the major contributions of the work are summarized
as follows.
• To enhance the transmission efﬁciency of demands, UAVs
are divided into multiple clusters in LAINs. Besides, we
design the ZTA based network model to minimize the
damage of the potential security threats through con-
tinuous veriﬁcations. The SDP controller is applied to
the identity management and authentication of UAVs,
addressing the security threats and the dynamic joining
and exiting of UAVs.
• The adaptive weight trust model is designed to com-
prehensively evaluate the credit values of UAVs com-
bining the direct and indirect factors, thereby mitigating
the impact of low-trust UAVs on network performances.
Furthermore, the blockchain technique is introduced to
record the transactions and credit values of UAVs and
support the SDP controller for the mobility management
of UAVs. Meanwhile, we propose the lightweight con-
sortium blockchain to reduce the consensus delay cost
and improve the efﬁciency in LAINs. Furthermore, we
present an improved practical Byzantine fault tolerance
(IPBFT) to enhance the network security, in which the
primary UAV is selected via considering the credit value
and resources of the storage and computation power.
• We formulate the routing problem to optimize both the
total E2E delay and TSR of transmitting demands, which


--- Page 3 ---
3
is an INLP problem and tricky to solve by traditional
optimization schemes. Then, the routing problem is re-
formulated into a Dec-POMDP form, dealing with the
challenge of obtaining global information in the decentral-
ized LAIN. Furthermore, the SHERB and PER empow-
ered MADDQN (SP-MADDQN) algorithm is proposed to
learn the dynamically varying network topology with the
mobility of UAVs and make optimized decisions.
• Extensive simulations are conducted to evaluate the SP-
MADDQN algorithms with the mobility and malicious
UAVs. The adaptive weight trust method is demonstrated
to identify the malicious UAV more quickly than the
average and random evaluation methods. Numerical re-
sults show that the proposed SP-MADDQN algorithm
decreases the E2E delay and increases the TSR, com-
pared to the multi-agent deep Q-network (MADQN) based
methods and the MADDQN without the SHERB and PER
mechanisms.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we introduce the related works. The system model and
problem formulation are illustrated in Section III. Then, we
design the algorithms in Section IV. Simulations are conducted
and analyzed in Section V. Finally, the conclusions are future
works are presented in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
There exist some works related to the network security
mechanism. For example, in [24], the authors introduced the
VPN technique for network boundaries and indicated the
existing challenges posed by the partial protection and privacy
concerns. In [25], to protect the security, the authors combined
the next generation ﬁrewall with the self authentication due
to the inability to deal with targeted and data-focused attacks.
The authors in [26] integrated the Internet protocol security
(i.e., IPSec/IPv6) and secure socket layer to solve the security
issue of VPNs. Through VPNs or ﬁrewalls as boundaries,
these works can enhance network securities. However, they
are easily bypassed by attackers. When the boundary defenses
are bypassed, the security protection of the internal network
is compromised. To mitigate the harm, the ZTA is applied
to secure networks. For instance, in [27], to enhance the
resilience of the traditional static protection against various
attacks through VPNs, the authors introduced the authenti-
cation mechanism based on the SDP controller to create a
dynamic and secure zero-trust network environment. Authors
in [28] proposed a zero-trust strategy to establish continuous
trust while remaining skeptical of potential betrayal attacks,
and a Dirichlet-based trust evaluation method was developed to
select trustworthy participants. In [29], to address the potential
security risks, the authors proposed a ZTA with SDP for 5G
core networks, providing secure communications through an
authorization-based method. The above works illustrate that it
is possible to employ the ZTA and SDP technique to ensure
the routing security in LAINs.
Besides, there exist a couple of works related to node
management mechanisms. In [30], according to the status infor-
mation sent by UAVs, the GCS played a role in managing the
connections among nodes, which were limited by the control
range. The authors in [31] presented that the GCS remotely
controlled UAVs by sending the controlling information, in
which UAVs were limited within the communication range of
the GCS, restricting the scope of operations. [32] stated that as
the center controller, the GCS received the data transmitted by
UAVs, which suffered from long distances, undulating terrains
or other interferences. The above works rely on a center
controller, which is not resilient to fault tolerance and may
be susceptible to tampering. Therefore, how to guarantee the
reliability and security of routing remains challenging in the
distributed LAINs.
With the decentralized and tamper-proof characteristics, the
blockchain technique is introduced to build decentralized trust
mechanisms and secure networks [33]. For example, in [34],
a blockchain-based decentralized registration framework was
proposed to solve the problem of misconﬁguration and ma-
licious attacks. Authors in [35] proposed a blockchain-based
data storage solution for autonomous vehicle networks, aiming
to address the signiﬁcant challenges posed by the frequent
data transmission to the network efﬁciency and security. In
[36], a blockchain-based spectrum sharing framework for UAV
networks was designed to maintain decentralization, ensuring
the fairness and reliability in transactions. The authors in [37]
proposed a blockchain-based multi-wireless sensor network
authentication scheme, in which nodes were classiﬁed into
BSs, cluster heads and ordinary nodes according to different
capabilities. In [38], the authors proposed a novel lightweight
authentication scheme for Internet of things devices. To study
the issue of the identity privacy leakage caused by malicious
attacks, the authors utilized the blockchain to enhance the reli-
ability through the hyperledger and ring signature method [39].
The above schemes demonstrate that based on the blockchain, a
decentralized identity management method enables to eliminate
the vulnerable central point and enhance the reliability.
Speciﬁcally, there exist some works focusing on MARL-
based routing problems in dynamic scenarios. For example,
the authors in [40] utilized a value decomposition network-
based MARL algorithm to minimize the E2E delay of routing
in dynamic aerial-terrestrial hybrid networks. In [41], the
routing problem was formulated as a max-min problem via
the Lagrange method, and a constrained MARL dynamic
routing algorithm was proposed for the objective-constraint
balance. The authors in [42] developed the mean-ﬁeld enhanced
heterogeneous MARL framework to optimize the routing com-
munication energy efﬁciency. The above studies illustrate that
the MARL can solve the routing problem effectively. However,
these works do not consider the credit evaluation and mobility
management of UAVs in the vulnerable environment.
In this work, we consider designing the trust evaluation
method based on the adaptive weights. In the zero-trust LAIN,
the SDP controller is supplemented by the blockchain tech-


--- Page 4 ---
4
nology to achieve the identity authentication and permission
management. Additionally, we propose the SP-MADDQN al-
gorithm to tackle the adaptive dynamic routing issue.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Zero-Trust Architecture Based Network Model
1) Network Model: The routing process in zero-trust LAINs
is shown in Fig. 1, including I SDs, U UAVs, and B BSs.
Thus, in the network, the total number of nodes is I + U + B,
and each node holds a unique identity. B = {1, ..., b, ..., B},
I ={1, ..., i, ..., I}, and U ={1, ..., u, ..., U} denote the sets of
BSs, SDs, and UAVs, respectively. Additionally, according to
different abilities, the UAV set U can be classiﬁed as three types
of Us, Ur, and Ud for the data collection, relay forwarding,
and downlinking, respectively. Speciﬁcally, each type of UAV
sets is divided into multiple clusters, and in each cluster, the
UAV with the most energy and computing power is selected
as the cluster head. E = Eiu ∪Euu ∪Eub indicates the set of
communication link statuses among all nodes, where eiu ∈
Eiu, eub ∈Eub, and euu ∈Euu represent the connection links
between the SD and UAV, BS and UAV, as well as UAV and
UAV, respectively. enm ∈E indicates whether there exists a
communicable link between nodes n ∈I ∪U and m ∈U ∪B.
Speciﬁcally, enm = 1 indicates the link is effective, and enm =
0 denotes that there exist no direct links.
In particular, the time period is divided into T slots and the
length of each time step is τ. T = {1, ..., t, ..., T} represents
the set of time steps. At the start of time step t, demand r ∈R
is transmitted from SD i ∈I to destination BS b ∈B, and the
information is denoted by Υ r = {sr, Lr, dr, T r
max}, in which
the source is sr =i, and the destination is dr =b. Here, the size
of demand r is Lr (in bit), and T r
max is the maximum delay
tolerance of the demand transmission. Moreover, the demands
are uploaded from SD i ∈I to UAV u ∈Us, relayed by UAV
u ∈Ur, and downloaded from UAV u ∈Ud to BS b ∈B.
Pr
ib = (eiu, . . . , eub) indicates a completed routing path for
transmitting demand r from source SD i∈I to corresponding
destination BS b∈B.
The coordinates of SD i and BS b remain ﬁxed and are
denoted as Θi = (xi, yi, 0) and Θb = (xb, yb, 0), respec-
tively. The location of UAV u is indicated by Θu(t) =
(xu(t), yu(t), zu(t)) in three-dimensional Cartesian coordi-
nates at time step t.
At time step t, the velocity of UAV u is deﬁned by the
magnitude νu(t) ∈[νmin, νmax], along with a horizontal az-
imuth ϕu(t) and a vertical elevation δu(t), based on the random
walk mobility model [43]. Thus, the corresponding velocity
vector in 3D Cartesian coordinates is expressed as νu(t) =
(νx
u(t), νy
u(t), νz
u(t)), where νx
u(t) = νu(t) cos δu(t) cos ϕu(t),
νy
u(t) = νu(t) cos δu(t) sin ϕu(t), and νz
u(t) = νu(t) sin δu(t).
The collective velocities of all U UAVs are represented by
V (t) = {ν1(t), ν2(t), . . . , νU(t)}. At the start of each slot t,
each UAV can instantaneously update its speed and orientation,
then maintain them constant throughout the slot. From a kine-
matic perspective, the position Θu(t) evolves with the velocity
νu(t). Speciﬁcally, if UAV u begins slot t with velocity νu(t)
and remains at uniform speed, its displacement over the slot
is approximated by ∆Θu(t) ≈νu(t)τ, where τ is the slot
duration. Thus, the position at the next slot is updated as
Θu(t + 1) = Θu(t) + νu(t)τ.
Additionally, the Euclidean distance between nodes n ∈I ∪
U and m ∈U ∪B is indicated by dnm(t) at time step t, i.e.,
dnm(t)=
√
(xn(t)−xm(t))2+(yn(t)−ym(t))2+(zn(t)−zm(t))2.
(1)
In particular, the distance between UAVs must satisfy
dmin ⩽dnm(t), ∀n, m ∈U, n ̸= m, t ∈T.
(2)
Here, dmin represents the safe distance to avoid collisions
among UAVs. At time step t, the set of connected UAVs for
UAV u is denoted as Γu(t), and distance duκ(t) between UAV
u and UAV κ ∈Γu(t) satisﬁes
duκ(t) ⩽du,max, ∀κ ∈Γu(t), u ∈U, t ∈T,
(3)
in which du,max is the maximum communication distance of
UAV u.
2) Zero-Trust Architecture Scheme: In the distributed LAIN,
malicious UAVs are more possible to survive and undermine
network performances. To ensure the security of LAINs, a ZTA
scheme is proposed to achieve the certiﬁcation and authoriza-
tion of joining or exiting requests, combining blockchain and
SDP techniques. In the ZTA, there are four essential units: the
GCS, UAV, SDP controller, and blockchain, shown in Fig. 1.
• UAVs are the clients for joining or exiting LAINs, which
need to obtain the legal registration information from
GCS.
• The GCS serves as the root certiﬁcate authority within the
public key infrastructure that supports the system security.
Its primary responsibility is designed to register UAVs and
provide them with foundational digital certiﬁcates at the
start of tasks.
• The SDP controller is logically centralized for the uniﬁed
access control and physically distributed among trust
UAVs for the high-availability, thereby avoiding the failure
of single point. Furthermore, it dynamically manages and
controls access to network resources, based on the identity
information of UAVs. Particularly, only the authenticated
and authorized UAV has permissions to join LAINs.
• The blockchain stores immutable and trustworthy records
for the trust management and identity states, including a
certiﬁcate revocation list, to enforce the secure authenti-
cation by SDP in the zero-trust environment. In detail,
the consensus UAVs periodically record credit values
Tu(t) onto the chain, establishing the reliable basis for
trust certiﬁcations. The SDP controller monitors these
updates and automatically triggers policy reevaluation. If
the trust of a UAV falls below the threshold Tthr, its
token is revoked and the revocation is broadcast via the
blockchain. It ensures that all peers can independently
deny connections to revoked UAVs, enabling distributed
and timely policy enforcement.


--- Page 5 ---
5
2) The mobility management of UAVs
3) Routing delay model
Queue buffer
Transmission delay
…
BSs
Routing paths
Intra-communication links
Inter-communication links
SDs
Consensus UAVs
Non-consensus UAVs
UAV joining
UAV exiting
Collected data
SC
SC
SC
SC
Blocks
Movement requests
UAVs
SDP controller
2) Query
Blockchain
2) Update
Pre-prepare
Prepare
Commit
Primary UAV 1
Replica UAV 2
Replica UAV 3
Replica UAV 4
Light UAV X
Collect
1) Join request
4) Join the cluster
1) Exit request
4) Exit the cluster
GCS
The UAV cluster
1) The routing scenario in ZTA-based LAINs 
UAV clusters
Malicious UAVs
Fig. 1.
An illustration of blockchain-enabled routing for zero-trust LAINs. Part 1) presents the routing scenario in ZTA-based LAINs with the security threats.
Part 2) introduces the mobility management of UAVs via the blockchain and SDP techniques. Part 3) illustrates the model of the E2E delay during routing.
3) Joining and Exiting of UAVs: Before applying to join
a cluster, UAVs must obtain the unique identity information
via registering at the GCS. Then, UAVs pack the identity
information, signature of the GCS, and identity document
of the joined cluster into a transaction, which is broadcast
to LAINs for veriﬁcations by the selected CHUs. After the
consensus approval, the UAV is allowed to join the cluster
network. When a UAV exits, the CHU of the exiting UAV
is required to send the corresponding transaction to LAINs
for dynamically updating the statuses and changes of link
availabilities.
The designed architecture is independent of the underlying
cryptographic primitives. The analytical models rely on abstract
costs, allowing the system to adopt future standards. Besides,
the security is anchored in the continuous veriﬁcation of
immutable on-chain records, not in any speciﬁc algorithm.
Besides, the system derives its resilience from an integrated
adaptive trust and consensus loop, which identiﬁes and iso-
lates the malicious activity regardless of its speciﬁc form,
eliminating the need for predeﬁned threat models. In addition,
we design a trust model to assess the impact of malicious
behaviors, ignoring speciﬁc attack types.
B. Trust Model
In LAINs, to enhance the routing efﬁciency, UAVs are
assigned with credit values representing the trustworthiness,
which are updated via comprehensively considering direct
and indirect factors, avoiding the single assessment factor
and insufﬁciently reasonable calculation. Additionally, T(t) =
{T1(t), . . . , TU(t)} is the set of credit values, and for UAV u,
the value of Tu(t) ∈T(t) is within the range of [0, 1]. Based
on the given safety threshold Tthr determined by security
requirements, UAVs are divided into two states of trust and
malice [44]. ξu(t) denotes whether UAV u is trusted, i.e.,
ξu(t) =
{
1, Tu(t) > Tthr,
0, Tu(t) ≤Tthr.
(4)
Therefore, the set and number of malicious UAVs are denoted
as Uf(t) = {u | ξu(t) = 1, ∀u ∈U}, and Uf(t) = |Uf(t)|,
respectively. Furthermore, UAVs may reject to forward the
received demands and frequently interact with the low trust
UAVs, which are related to the trust evaluation, overviewed
for the following.
1) Direct Trust Calculation: The direct trust combines the
following factors.
• Demand forwarding rate TD1
u (t): TD1
u (t) represents the
ratio of the total transmitted demand ∑t
k=1 εtr
u (k) to the
total received demand ∑t
k=1 εre
u (k) by UAV u from time
step 1 to t, to evaluate the malicious behaviors rejecting
to transmit received demands, i.e.,
T
D1
u (t)=
t∑
k=1
εtr
u (k)
t∑
k=1
εre
u (k)
, ∀u ∈U,
t
∑
k=1
εre
u (k)>0, t ∈T.
(5)
Besides, ∑t
k=1εre
u (k) = 0 denotes that UAV u does not
receive demands, and the credit remains the initial value.
• Trusted interaction degree TD2
u (t): For each node, a higher
interaction frequency with high-trust UAVs yields a higher
credit value, and vice versa. Thus, the degree of trust


--- Page 6 ---
6
interaction is deﬁned as
T
D2
u (t)= ρH
u(t)
ρu(t), ∀u ∈U, t ∈T.
(6)
ρH
u(t) and ρu(t) denote the numbers of UAV u ∈U inter-
acting with high-trust UAVs and all UAVs, respectively.
• Probe packet reception rate TD3
u (t): To capture the condi-
tions of surroundings, UAVs periodically probe the links
of neighboring UAVs via Hello messages. In particular,
the reception rate is the probability that probe messages
successfully reach the receiver, i.e.,
T
D3
u (t) = Θu(t −ℑ, t)
ℑ/ℓ
,
(7)
where Θu(t −ℑ, t) is the number of probe messages
actually received by the evaluated UAV u during time
window ℑu, and ℓu is the probing period. Hence, ℑu/ℓu
is the theoretical number of the received probe messages.
Considering the above three factors, the comprehensive
direct credit value of UAV u at time step t is
T
D
u(t) =϶1 T
D1
u (t)+ ϶2 T
D2
u (t)+ ϶3 T
D3
u (t), ∀u ∈U, t ∈T,
(8)
where ϶1, ϶2, and ϶3 indicate the weights of TD1
u (t), TD2
u (t), and
TD3
u (t), respectively. Additionally, ϶1 + ϶2 + ϶3= 1.
2) Indirect Trust Calculation: The direct trust evaluation
mainly derives from the experience of UAVs and is subjective
and limited. Nevertheless, the indirect trust evaluation can
mitigate the limitation through fully utilizing the knowledge
of networks, which is obtained from the trusted neighboring
UAVs and calculated as
T
I
u(t)=
∑
κ∈Γu(t)
Pκ(t)
Pκ(t)+Nκ(t), Tκ(t)⩾Tthr, ∀u∈U, t ∈T.
(9)
Here, for UAV u, Pκ(t) and Nκ(t) are the positive and negative
recommendations from UAV κ, respectively.
Therefore, the credit value Tu(t + 1) of UAV u at time step
t + 1 is calculated as
Tu(t + 1) = ψ0
u(t)Tu(t) + ψ1
u(t)T
D
u(t) + ψ2
u(t)T
I
u(t),
∀u ∈U, t ∈T,
(10)
where Tu(0) indicates the initial credit value for UAV u.
ψ0
u(t) + ψ1
u(t) + ψ2
u(t)=1. In detail, ψt
u(t), ψ1
u(t), and ψ2
u(t)
denote the weights of Tu(0), TD
u(t), and TI
u(t), respectively.
Moreover, we propose the adaptive model to dynamically
adjust the weights, detailed as

















ψ0
u(t)=β × Tthr
Tu(t),
ψ1
u(t)= (1−ψ0
u(t))(1−TD
u(t))
2−TDu(t)+TIu(t)
, 0 ≤T
D
u(t)+T
I
u(t)≤2,
ψ2
u(t)= (1−ψ0
u(t))(1−TI
u(t))
2−TDu(t)+TIu(t)
.
(11)
The design of ψ0
u(t) = β × Tthr/Tu(t) is motivated by
the principle of adaptive historical inertia. The weight of the
historical credit value Tu(t) is inversely proportional to the
current magnitude Tu(t+1). When a UAV consistently behaves
well (i.e., the Tu(t) value is relatively high), the formula
assigns a lower weight to history, making the update process
focus more on recent direct and indirect evidences (i.e., TD
u(t)
and TI
u(t)). The mechanism enables the model to respond
quickly to the latest behaviors of UAVs. On the contrary,
when Tu(t) is low, the weight of history increases. The system
pays more attentions to long-term behavioral records, thereby
avoiding a sharp drop in credit values due to a single or a few
negative reports, and enhancing the robustness of the model.
The parameter β ∈(0, 1] controls the overall sensitivity of
the historical behaviors and limits the range of ψ0
u(t). Tthr
serves as a normalization benchmark to evaluate if the UAV
needs to be isolated from the LAIN. As Tu(t) increases,
ψ0
u(t) decreases, and thus ψ1
u(t) and ψ2
u(t) increases, enlarging
the impact of malicious behaviors on the evaluation of credit
values. When TD
u(t)+TI
u(t)=2, ψ1
u(t)=ψ2
u(t)= 1
2(1−ψ0
u(t)).
Meanwhile, the centralized trust manager relies on the third-
party authentic center and is susceptible to diverse attacks,
causing the entire network to break down [30]. To overcome
the challenge posed by the above security threats, the scheme
based on the blockchain technology is introduced to provide
the distributed and reliable managers for credit values, ensuring
the secure routing in LAINs [34].
C. Blockchain Model
Due to decentralization and the distributed ledger maintained
by multiple nodes, the consortium blockchain can be applied
for LAINs to create the secure and reliable communication
network. In detail, we design the lightweight consortium
blockchain, in which only UAVs with the high credit value,
storage, and computation power are assigned as full UAVs (i.e.,
CHU) to participate in the consensus [45], [46]. Particularly,
since only Uf full UAVs are required for the consensus instead
of U UAVs, the resource consumption of the consensus is
reduced to Uf/U, beneﬁting for the sustainability and relia-
bility. Meanwhile, as the major consensus mechanism of the
consortium blockchain, the PBFT is applied to the consensus
process which can tolerate 1/3 malicious UAVs [47]. However,
within the PBFT, the random selection of the primary UAV may
lead to the entire consensus process to fail when the nominated
primary UAV is malicious [48]. Therefore, to enhance the
security of LAINs and the reliability of the PBFT, we designate
the full UAV with the largest credit value and strongest ability
as the primary UAV that is updated periodically. The details
are as follows.
1) Role Selection: In the lightweight blockchain, the set of
UAVs U = Uf ∪Ul is divided into the full UAV set Uf =
{1, 2, 3, . . . , Uf} and light UAV set Ul = {1, 2, 3, . . . , Ul}.
a) Full UAV: Full UAVs have the full blockchain ledger
and are mainly responsible for the blockchain consensus in-
cluding the broadcasting and veriﬁcation of transactions.
b) Light UAV: In LAINs, apart from the full UAVs, the
other UAVs act as light UAVs that can only store the header
of blocks and are mainly responsible for generating local
transactions and forwarding transactions.


--- Page 7 ---
7
c) Primary UAV: The primary UAV serves as the client of
the blockchain. It gathers all transactions, veriﬁes the signature
and message authentication code (MAC) of each transaction,
and then compiles the collected transactions into a block [49].
d) Replica UAV: Except for the primary UAV, the other
full UAVs operate as non-primary (replica) UAVs.
The hierarchical role mechanism effectively reduces the
computational and storage overhead of the entire network,
thereby enhancing the scalability of the network. By con-
centrating security and management responsibilities on highly
reliable full UAVs, the probability of single-point failures in
the network is reduced. Therefore, the balance between the
security and resource consumption centers on the scales of full
UAVs. In addition, based on the hierarchical role method, the
IPBFT mechanism is detailly introduced in the following.
2) IPBFT based Consensus Process: At time step t, the
numbers of total and malicious consensus UAVs are indicated
as K(t) and U c
f (t), respectively. To achieve the consensus,
every node needs to aggregate a minimum of 2⌈F(t)⌉+ 1
consistent prepare messages from the diverse replica, where
F(t) = (K(t) −1)/3. If U c
f (t) > F(t), the IPBFT based
consensus may fail, leading to untimely information updates. In
Fig. 1, the consensus process is detailed, in which the time cost
of the cryptographic operations is considered, including gener-
ating signatures, verifying signatures, and generating/verifying
MACs, with costs of ϵs, ϵv, and ϵm cycles, respectively. Thus,
the consensus process and corresponding delay are discussed
as follows [48].
a) Collection: In this phase, the primary UAV collects
routing information from UAVs and then veriﬁes. Speciﬁcally,
the light UAV sends its own information to the nearest sur-
rounding full UAVs after transmitting demands. Then, each
replica UAV generates a transaction according to the received
information from surroundings. Particularly, the transactions
are signed by the private key of replica UAVs and forwarded
to the primary UAV with an MAC.
At this step, the delay is mainly caused by the primary
UAV in verifying all the packaged transactions. Speciﬁcally,
to verify the signatures and MACs of the transactions from the
K(t)−1 UAVs, (K(t)−1)(ϵv +ϵm) CPU cycles are required.
Additionally, ϵv + ϵm CPU cycles are needed to verify the
request messages. Hence, the delay of this step is
T1 = K(t)(ϵv + ϵm)
∂p(t)
,
(12)
where ∂p(t) is the computation resource, e.g., CPU speed,
assigned by the primary UAV for the block consensus.
b) Pre-prepare: In this stage, the primary UAV ﬁrst
packages the validated transactions into a block and then
generates a signature for the block and K(t) −1 MACs for
K(t) −1 replica UAVs individually. Hence, the delay of the
primary UAV isolate
T2,1 = ϵs + (K(t) −1)ϵm
∂p(t)
.
(13)
Subsequently, each replica UAV consumes ϵv + ϵm CPU
cycles for verifying the pre-prepare message, and K(t)(ϵv +
ϵm) CPU cycles for verifying the signatures and MACs of K(t)
transactions. Therefore, the delay is
T2,2 = max
c∈Uc
(K(t) + 1)(ϵν + ϵm)
∂np
c (t)
.
(14)
∂np
c (t) is the allocated CPU cycles of replica UAV c for the
blockchain consensus. Therefore, the total delay of the pre-
prepare step is T2 = T2,1 + T2,2.
c) Prepare: In the phase, since the primary UAV only
needs to verify 2⌈F(t)⌉+ 1 MACs and signatures of the
received prepare messages, the delay of the primary UAV is
T p
3 = (2⌈F(t)⌉+ 1)(ϵν + ϵm)
∂p(t)
.
(15)
Compared with the primary UAV, the replica UAVs consume
extra ϵs +(K(t)−1)ϵm CPU cycles to generate a signature for
the prepare message, and K(t) −1 MACs for other K(t) −1
full UAVs. Hence, the delay of each replica UAV c is
T np
3,c = (2⌈F(t)⌉+ 1)(ϵν + ϵm) + ϵs + (K(t) −1)ϵm
∂np
c (t)
. (16)
Based on the above analysis, the delay of this stage is
T3 = max{T p
3 , T np
3,c }, ∀c ∈Uc,
(17)
where Uc is the set of all replica UAVs.
d) Commit: After receiving 2⌈F(t)⌉+ 1 consistent pre-
pare messages, each UAV broadcasts a commit message to all
other consensus UAVs and must accumulate at least 2⌈F(t)⌉+1
consistent commit messages. At this step, each UAV generates
one signature for the commit message and K(t)−1 MACs for
K(t)−1 full UAVs. Besides, each full UAV veriﬁes 2⌈F(t)⌉+1
signatures and MACs. Therefore, the total delay of this step is
T4 = ϵs+(K(t)−1)ϵm+(2⌈F(t)⌉+1)(ϵv+ϵm)
min {∂p(t), ∂np
c (t)}
, ∀c∈Uc.
(18)
Therefore, the total consensus delay Tb(t) is
Tb(t) = T1(t) + T2(t) + T3(t) + T4(t).
(19)
3) Transaction Generation and Broadcasting: After rout-
ing, the transaction waiting for the consensus is generated
periodically by UAVs and includes the status of UAVs, i.e.,
the queue buffer, location, and information of neighboring
UAVs. Then, all generated transactions are broadcast to the
entire network via the Gossip protocol for verifying [50].
After veriﬁcation, the transactions are added to the transaction
pool of the blockchain and then synchronized to the entire
blockchain. Once a consensus is reached, the data transaction
is recorded in the blockchain with tamper-proof.
It is noted that message complexity O(K2) of IPBFT
is controlled via a small ﬁxed K, and its radio airtime is
a predictable overhead in per slot. This validates that the
design of the lightweight blockchain does not affect real-time
performance.
D. Routing Delay Model
In LAINs, the E2E routing delay is the total transmission
delay of multiple demands from different source UAVs to


--- Page 8 ---
8
different destination UAVs, shown in Fig. 1. Binary variable
ηr
nm(t) ∈{0, 1} denotes whether demand r passes link enm
(n∈I ∪U, m∈U ∪B), i.e.,
ηr
nm(t)=
{
1, if r is transmitted via enm at time step t,
0, otherwise.
(20)
Binary variable ζr
n(t) ∈{0, 1} indicates the UAV where the
demand is located, i.e.,
ζr
n(t)=
{
1, if r is located on n ∈I ∪U at time step t,
0, otherwise.
(21)
Since the transmission delay is constrained by channel
transmission rate G, we analyze the channel characteristics of
both ground-to-air and air-to-air wireless communication links
[51]–[53]. Speciﬁcally, the path loss between nodes n ∈I ∪U
and m ∈U ∪B is denoted as Lnm(t), which remains constant
within time step t, i.e.,
Lnm(t) = 20 log
(4πλ
c dnm(t)
)
+ ω
[
Prnm(t)
(
ηLoS
nm (t) −ηNLoS
nm
(t)
)
+ ηNLoS
nm
(t)
]
,
(22)
where λ denotes the carrier frequency, and c is the speed of
light. ηLoS
nm (t) and ηNLoS
nm
(t) represent the additional path losses
under line of sight (LoS) and non-LoS (NLoS) propagations,
respectively. When ω = 0, Lnm(t) indicates the path loss
between UAVs, and otherwise if ω = 1, Lnm(t) denotes the
path loss from n ∈I to m ∈U, or from n ∈U to m ∈B.
Besides, Prnm(t) is the probability of an LoS link between
SDs/BSs and UAVs, i.e.,
Prnm(t)=
1
1+ϱ1exp
{
−ϱ2
[
180
π arctan
(
hnm(t)
χnm(t)
)
−ϱ1
]},
(23)
where hnm(t) and χnm(t) are the differences of altitudes and
horizontal distances, respectively. ϱ1 and ϱ2 are the constant
parameters [51]. In particular, the antenna gains for UAVs, BSs,
and SDs are modeled as constants incorporated into the link
budget, thus not affecting the relative performance comparison
of the algorithms.
Due to high mobility and unstable data trafﬁc ﬂuctuations
of LAINs, the queue buffer is introduced for each node n ∈
I ∪U to mitigate the congestion of networks. Speciﬁcally, at
time step t−1, the amount of demands received by node n is
εre
n (t−1). Additionally, at time step t, Cn(t), Cmax
n
, Cn(t) =
{r, ζr
n(t) = 1, ∀r ∈R}, and εtr
n (t) denote the queue length,
maximum queue capacity, queued demand set, and the number
of transmitted demands of node n∈I ∪U, respectively, i.e.,

















εre
n (t−1)=
∑
r∈R
∑
m∈I∪U
ηr
mn(t−1), 0≤εre
n (t−1)≤Cmax
n
,
Cn(t) =
∑
r∈R
ζr
n(t), 0 ≤Cn(t)≤Cmax
n
, Cn(t)=|Cn(t)| ,
εtr
n (t)=
∑
r∈Cn(t)
∑
m∈U∪B
ηr
nm(t), εtr
n (t)=Cn(t).
(24)
Here, UAVs transmit demands simultaneously, which indicates
that all demands received from time step t−1 are forwarded
at time step t. Besides, to narrow the transmission delay gap
of different demands in one time step, we design an adaptive
channel bandwidth allocation scheme, based on the bit length
of demand r∈Cn(t) and total bandwidth Bn(t) at time step t.
Hence, the allocated bandwidth Br
n(t) is
Br
n(t)= LrBn(t)
∑
k∈Cn(t)
Lk , ∀n∈I∪U, r∈Cn(t), t∈T.
(25)
Based on Shannon theory, at time step t, the transmission rate
Gr
nm(t) for demand r from nodes n∈I∪U to m∈U ∪B is
Gr
nm(t)=Br
n(t) log2
(
1+ P tr
nm(t)·10
−Lnm(t)
10
σ2nm(t)
)
, ∀r∈Cn(t),
(26)
where P tr
nm(t) and σ2
nm(t) are the transmission and noise
powers between nodes n and m, respectively. Furthermore, the
delay for transmitting demands from node n to node m at time
step t is
T tr
nm(t)=max
r∈R T tr,r
nm (t), ∀n∈I ∪U, m∈U ∪B, t∈T,
(27)
where T tr,r
nm (t) =
Lr
Grnm(t)ηr
nm(t). When routing path Pr
ib for
transmitting demand r from source SD i to destination BS b
is determined, the E2E delay T r(t) is
T r(t)=
∑
t∈T
∑
enm∈Pr
ib
T tr
nm(t), ∀r∈R, n∈I∪U, m∈U∪B. (28)
E. Problem Formulation
The objective is designed to minimize the total E2E delay T r
in (28) and improve TSR R during the transmision in LAINs,
with the mobility of UAVs and the malicious UAVs. Therefore,
the optimization problem is formulated as
P0 : max
η,ζ
R
T r
s.t. (2), (3), (20), (21), (24),
∑
m∈U∪B
ηr
nm(t)=1, ∀r∈R, t∈T, enm ∈E,
∀n ∈I ∪U, m ∈U ∪B,
(29)
where η = {ηr
nm(t), ∀t ∈T, enm ∈E, n ∈I ∪U, m ∈U ∪
B, r ∈R}, and ηr
nm(t) denotes whether demand r passes link
enm between n∈I∪U and m∈U∪B. The set ζ = {ζr
n(t), ∀t ∈
T, n ∈I ∪U, r ∈R}, and ζr
n(t) indicates whether demand r
is located on n ∈I ∪U. It is noted that demand r from node
n∈I ∪U can only be received by one another node m∈U ∪B.
Speciﬁcally, R is calculated through the number Nfail of un-
successfully transmitted demands and the number Ntotal = |R|
of totally transmitted demands, detailed as R=1−[Nfail/Ntotal].
In particular, a failed transmission may be caused by the
following situations: a) T r is longer than T r
max. b) T tr
nm(t) or
Tb(t) is longer than τ. c) T r + Tb(t) is longer than τ. d) The
demands are not transmitted to the corresponding destination
BS, denoted as arrive = 0.


--- Page 9 ---
9
Based on the above deﬁnition, up to time step t, the total
number of failures is
Nfail(t) = Nfail(t −1)+





1,
if T r ≥T r
max or T tr
nm(t) ≥τ or Tb(t) ≥τ
or T r + Tb(t) > τ or arrive=0,
0,
otherwise,
∀t ∈T.
(30)
Note that Nfail(t) is initialized as 0 at time step 1, and when
t = T, Nfail = Nfail(t). Additionally, it is observed that P0 is
in the form of INLP and intractable to deal with. Therefore,
in the following, a feasible solution is proposed via the MDP-
based reformulation.
F. Dec-POMDP based Problem Reformulation
To adapt to the dynamically changing network environment
and the local observations of each UAV, P0 is reformulated as
a Dec-POMDP form. In the Dec-POMDP, each UAV u is an
agent and makes the routing decision to send demands to next
alternative UAVs. Therefore, the agent set is the UAV set U. At
each time step t, agent u ∈U observes local state ou(t) from
the environment and performs action au(t) according to ou(t),
with an immediate reward Ru(t + 1), and the environment
transferring to next observation state ou(t + 1). Speciﬁcally,
⟨ou(t), au(t), Ru(t + 1), ou(t + 1), fu(t)⟩indicates the transi-
tion experience and is detailed as follows.
1) State Space: At time step t, state ou(t) is the available
information of agent u and neighboring UAV κ ∈Γu(t), i.e.,
ou(t) = {Θn(t), Cn(t), Tn(t)}, ∀n ∈{u} ∪Γu(t).
(31)
Θn(t), Cn(t), and Tn(t) indicate the locations, the sets of
queued demands, and the credits of UAV n, respectively. At
time step t, the joint state s(t) aggregates observations of all
agents and is denoted as s(t) = {ou(t), u ∈U}. Thus, the
state space is indicated as S = {s(t)|t ∈T}.
2) Action Space: Agent u makes decisions for each carried
demand r ∈Cu(t) independently, and au(t) = {ar
u(t), r ∈
Cu(t)} denotes actions for demands of Cu(t) at time step t.
The sub-action ar
u(t) represents the next-hop neighboring node
selected by UAV u for relaying demand r, i.e.,
{
ar
u(t) ∈{Γu(t)}, ∀u ∈Us ∪Ur,
ar
u(t) ∈{Γu(t), Zu(t)}, ∀u ∈Ud,
(32)
where Zu(t) is the set of BSs that are connected with UAVs
of Ud at time step t. If UAV u∈Ud connects to the destination
BS b of demand r∈Cu(t), it is directly transmitted to BS b by
UAV u. On the contrary, the demand is required to be relayed
by neighboring UAVs. In time step t, a(t) = {au(t), u ∈U}
represents the action set of all agents, and A = {a(t)|t ∈T}
denotes the action space.
3) Reward: Ru(t) = {Rr
u(t)|r ∈Cu(t)}, where Rr
u(t) is
the reward that agent u obtains after transmitting demand r
at time step t. It is noted that the routing paths of demands
are determined hop by hop. Hence, we calculate the reward
with one hop as the minimum period. Considering P0, for
transmitting demand r from UAV u to UAV κ, we propose
the reward value to be inversely correlated with T tr,r
uκ (t) and
positively correlated with Tu(t)·Tκ(t). Particularly, Tu(t)·Tκ(t)
represents the transmission success probability of link euκ. It
is rational since small Tu(t) and Tκ(t) lead to the incorrect
transmission and random loss of demands, directly decreasing
the TSR. Hence, the TSR R of one hop can be reasonably
represented by the value of Tu(t)·Tκ(t). Hence, the reward is
Rr
u(t) =
Tu·Tκ
T tr
uκ(t) · ι + ς · ηr
uκ(t), ∀r ∈Cu(t), κ ∈Γu(t), (33)
where ι is set to ensure that T tr
uκ(t) and Tu · Tκ are of the
same order of magnitude. ς is the hyperparameter balancing
the effect of the delay and credit values. Besides, at time step
t, the total reward of all demands is
R(t) =
∑
r∈Cu(t)
∑
u∈U
Rr
u(t), ∀t ∈T.
(34)
4) Transition Flag: Flag f r(t) indicates whether demand r
arrives at destination BS b∈B, deﬁned as
f r(t)=
{
1, if ar
u(t) is destination BS b,
0, otherwise,
(35)
and f(t)={f r(t)|r∈R} is the ﬂag set for all demands.
5) Discount Factor: γu is the cumulative reward of UAV
u, and the set of all UAVs is γ = {γu|u ∈U}. A larger γ
indicates decisions focusing on the long-term reward.
At time step t, policy πr
u(t) drives agent u to take action
ar
u(t) for demand r under observation ou(t). The joint policy of
demands on agent u is denoted as πu(t) = {πr
u(t), ∀r∈Cu(t)},
and the policy of all agents is Π(t) = {πu(t), ∀u ∈U}.
After determining the Dec-POMDP and speciﬁc policy Π(t),
the routing path for all demands can be obtained. Hence,
the objective is transformed to obtain the optimal policy
Π⋆(t) = {π⋆
u(t), ∀u ∈U}, and then the SP-MADDQN-based
routing method is designed to obtain Π⋆= {Π⋆(t)|t ∈T} for
optimizing the total E2E delay and TSR.
IV. ALGORITHM DESIGN
A. Trust-Aware CHU Selection and Update Algorithm
We propose a trust-aware CHU selection algorithm that dy-
namically elects leaders based on a composite metric balancing
the security (i.e., credit value) and processing capability, while
preventing the leadership thrashing.
1) Composite Score Design: The selection is driven by a
lightweight composite score Su(t) for each UAV u, which is
designed to prioritize the security while balancing computa-
tional resources, i.e.,
Su(t) = Tu(t) · (w1 · ˜∂u(t) + w2 · ˜Cu(t)),
(36)
where Tu(t) is the current credit value of UAV u. ˜∂u(t) =
∂u(t)/∂max(t) and ˜Cu(t) = Cu(t)/Cmax(t) are the normalized
computational and storage capabilities, relative to the highest
capability in the network, respectively. w1 and w2 are the
weights, and w1 + w2 = 1.


--- Page 10 ---
10
Algorithm 1 Trust-Aware CHU Selection and Update Algo-
rithm
Input: U, Tthr, and stability period M.
Output: Full UAV set Uf and primary UAV.
1: Initialization: Uf ←∅, counter countu ←0, ∀u ∈U.
2: for each UAV u ∈U do
3:
if Tu(t) > Tthr and ∂u(t) > ∂thr then
4:
Uf ←Uf ∪{u}.
5:
end if
6: end for
7: Calculate Su(t) for all UAVs, and select the highest-
scoring UAV as the primarily via (36).
8: for each time step t do
9:
Perform consensus and routing tasks.
10:
if t mod M == 0 then
11:
Update Uf based on current states (lines 2-6).
12:
for each u ∈Uf do
13:
if Tu(t) < Tthr or ∂u(t) < ∂thr then
14:
Remove u from Uf, and reset countu.
15:
else if countu < M then
16:
countu ←countu + 1.
17:
end if
18:
end for
19:
Update the primary UAV to highest Su(t) in Uf.
20:
if max(countu) ≥2M for u ∈Uf then
21:
Remove longest-serving UAV u∗from Uf, and
reset countu∗.
22:
end if
23:
end if
24: end for
The proposed trust-aware CHU (i.e., the full UAV) selection
and update algorithm is detailed in Algorithm 1. First, the
algorithm initializes the full UAV set Uf and the stability
counters (line 1). By evaluating whether the credit value and
computational capability of each UAV exceed their respective
thresholds, it constructs the initial Uf (lines 2-6). Subsequently,
based on (36), the composite score Su(t) is calculated for
all candidate UAVs, and the UAV with the highest score is
selected as the primary node (line 7). At each time step, the
algorithm performs consensus and routing tasks (line 9). Every
M time steps, an update to Uf is triggered (line 10). During
the update, any UAV whose trust or capability falls below
the required thresholds is removed from Uf, and its stability
counter is reset (lines 12-18). For UAVs that remain qualiﬁed,
the stability counter is incremented, providing a hysteresis
period of M slots to shield them from removal due to minor
score ﬂuctuations (lines 15-16). The primary UAV is then
updated to the node with the highest Su(t) within the revised
Uf (line 19). Finally, we perform a fairness-driven rotation
to balance the long-term load (lines 20-21). This mechanism
removes a UAV from Uf once it has completed 2M time steps
of service. The algorithm employs hysteresis via an M-slot
shield and rotation via retirement after 2M slots, to ensure the
cluster stability and long-term fairness.
Update
𝑳(𝜽𝟏)          𝑳(𝜽𝑵)
𝑜1𝑚+1, … , 𝑜𝑁𝑚+1
ℛ1𝑚+1, … , ℛ𝑁𝑚+1
(𝑜1𝑡, 𝑎1𝑡, ℛ1𝑡+1, 𝑜1𝑡+1)
(𝑜𝑁𝑡, 𝑎𝑁𝑡, ℛ𝑁𝑡+1, 𝑜𝑁𝑡+1)
…
𝑎1𝑚, … , 𝑎𝑁𝑚
𝑜1𝑚, … , 𝑜𝑁𝑚
𝑎1𝑡, … , 𝑎𝑁𝑡
𝑸(𝜽𝟏), … , 𝑸(𝜽𝑵)
(𝑜1𝑚, 𝑎1𝑚, ℛ1𝑚+1, 𝑜1𝑚+1)
(𝑜𝑁𝑚, 𝑎𝑁𝑚, ℛ𝑁𝑚+1, 𝑜𝑁𝑚+1)
…
…
…
𝑸(𝜽𝟏
−), … ,  𝑸(𝜽𝑵
−)
…
Target network
…
Online network
Experience replay pool of agent 1
(𝑜10, 𝑎10, ℛ11, 𝑜11)
(𝑜1𝑚, 𝑎1𝑚, ℛ1𝑚+1, 𝑜1𝑚+1)
…
Experience replay pool of agent N
(𝑜𝑁0, 𝑎𝑁0, ℛ𝑁1, 𝑜𝑁1)
(𝑜𝑁𝑚, 𝑎𝑁𝑚, ℛ𝑁𝑚+1, 𝑜𝑁𝑚+1)
…
𝛁𝜽𝟏𝑳(𝜽𝟏), … , 𝛁𝜽𝑵𝑳(𝜽𝑵)
Environment
𝑜1𝑡, … , 𝑜𝑁𝑡
Fig. 2.
SP-MADDQN algorithm framework for trust routing in LAINs.
B. SP-MADDQN-based Routing Algorithm
Based on the trust-aware full UAV selection and update
mechanism, we propose the MADDQN-based routing algo-
rithm in the multiple sources and destinations scenarios. The
routing algorithm improves the learning speed and efﬁciency
in dynamic scenarios, combining the SHERB and PER mecha-
nisms [54], [55]. Particularly, PER allows the agent to sample
experiences with higher importance more frequently based on
their priorities. This is particularly beneﬁcial when dealing
with large-scale states and action spaces, since it enables
the algorithm to focus on the most informative experiences
for faster and more effective learning. SHERB constructs the
experience buffer of each agent via embedding the distances
between nodes into rewards, i.e.,
Rr
u(t) =
Tu · Tκ
T tr
uκ(t) · ι + ς ·
duκ(t)
duκ(t) + dκb(t)ηr
uκ(t),
∀r ∈Cu(t), κ ∈Γu(t), t ∈T,
(37)
where duκ(t) and dκb(t) represent the distances from UAV u
to UAV κ and from UAV κ to destination BS b, respectively.
Since a larger duκ(t) requires a fewer hop counts and saves the
time cost, duκ(t) is designed to be positively correlated with
rewards. Meanwhile, duκ(t) + dκb(t) is the minimal transmis-
sion distance from the selected next-hop UAV κ to UAV u and
BS b. Agent u may obtain the greater value of rewards, when
duκ(t)+dκb(t) is closer to the shortest straight distance dub(t),
and vice versa.
Furthermore, the DDQN algorithm is presented via com-
bining double Q-learning with DQNs to approximate Q-
value functions via deep neural networks (DNNs) and de-
couple the action selection and calculation of Q-target val-
ues. Besides, for each agent u, the DDQN contains the


--- Page 11 ---
11
Algorithm 2 SP-MADDQN-based Routing Algorithm
Input: I, U, B, E, R, α, and γ .
Output: Optimal policy Π∗.
1: Initialization: Initialize the network environment, hyper-
parameters, ERB set D, and the online and target network
parameters θu and θ−
u for each agent u ∈U, respectively.
2: for each episode do
3:
for t = 1, . . . , T do
4:
for u = 1, . . . , U do
5:
The observation of agent u is set as ou(t).
6:
Allocate the bandwidth based on queued demands
in Cu(t) via (25).
7:
for r = 1, . . . , |Cu(t)| do
8:
Select action ar
u(t) for demand r under observa-
tion ou(t) using a ϵ-greedy policy.
9:
Execute ar
u(t), and obtain reward Rr
u(t+1).
10:
end for
11:
if |Du| > D then
12:
Select D samples from Du according to the
importance priority.
13:
Compute Q-target value yu(t) via (39).
14:
Update θu via the gradient descent in (40).
15:
Periodically update target network parameter θ−
u
via (41) every W steps.
16:
end if
17:
end for
18:
Update the environment, and set observation ou(t) ←
ou(t + 1) for all agents in U.
19:
Store transition (ou(t), ar
u(t), Rr
u(t+1), ou(t+1)) of
each demand r into corresponding Du.
20:
end for
21: end for
online network with parameter θu and the target network
with parameter θ−
u . The historical experience is denoted as
Du = {(ou(t), ar
u(t), Rr
u(t + 1), ou(t + 1))|r ∈Cu(t)}, which
is stored in the experience replay buffer (ERB) of agent u.
According to the importance priority, D historical experience
transition tuples are sampled from Du. Then, L(θu) is cal-
culated as the mean squared error between Q-value function
Q(ou(t), au(t); θu) and Q-target yu(t), i.e.,
L(θu) = Eν∼Du
[
(yu(t) −Q(ou(t), au(t); θu))2]
,
(38)
where tuple ν is a transition data of Du, and yu(t) is
yu(t) = Ru(t + 1)+
γuQ(ou(t + 1), arg max
a′u(t) Q(ou(t + 1), a′
u(t); θb
u)|θ−
u ).
(39)
Additionally, L(θu) is minimized via constantly training θu.
∇θuL(θu) denotes the gradient of L(θu) and is leveraged to
update θu via the gradient descent, i.e.,
θu ←θu −αu∇θuL(θu).
(40)
Here, αu is the learning rate. To stabilize training and improve
the convergence, parameter θ−
u is periodically updated in every
W steps to match the online network parameter θu, with a soft
update coefﬁcient µ, i.e.,
θ−
u ←µθu + (1 −µ)θ−
u .
(41)
The detail of the proposed SP-MADDQN-based routing
method is shown in Algorithm 2. Firstly, the network envi-
ronment, parameters, ERB set D are initialized (line 1). At
each episode, ou(t) is the observation of agent u (lines 2-5).
Further, the bandwidth of agent u is allocated according to the
queued demands in Cu(t) (line 6). In the light of observation
ou(t), sub-action ar
u(t) is selected for demand r via a ϵ-greedy
policy and is executed to obtain reward Rr
u(t + 1) (lines 7-
10). If the mini-batch D is satisﬁed, D samples are selected
from Du based on the importance priority, to calculate Q-target
value yu(t) via (39) (lines 11-13). Besides, the gradient descent
steps are performed to update θu (line 14). Every W steps, the
target network parameter θ−
u is periodically updated (line 15).
After ﬁnishing the actions of all demands, environments are
updated. Then, next observation ou(t+1) is obtained to update
ou(t) (line 18). Additionally, (ou(t), ar
u(t), Rr
u(t+1), ou(t+1))
is stored into corresponding Du for training (line 19).
C. Computational Complexity and Convergence Analysis
1) Computational Complexity Analysis: In Algorithm 1, the
per-update cost within period M is dominated by sorting U
candidates, i.e., O(U log U), which deﬁnes the overall worst-
case complexity. This ensures scalability in networks with
hundreds of UAVs.
In Algorithm 2, assume that Wi is the width of i-th layer
of neural networks, and M denotes the total number of layers.
For the entire forward propagation process, the computational
complexity of the agent is O(S·A·∑M−1
i=1 Wi·Wi+1), since the
input and output layers are the dimensions of state space S and
action space A, respectively. Suppose that h hops are needed
for a demand during routing, and the complexity becomes O(h·
S · A · ∑M−1
i=1 Wi · Wi+1). When there exist n demands, the
computational complexity is O(n·h·S ·A·∑M−1
i=1 Wi ·Wi+1).
2) Convergence Analysis: The core of SP-MADDQN is
based on DDQNs whose convergence is theoretically guaran-
teed under the experience replay, target network, and appropri-
ate learning rate [56], [57]. The SHERB and PER proposed
as sampling strategies for the replay area enhance learning
efﬁciency and stability by focusing on high-value samples. This
mechanism does not change the convergence basis of DDQN
but accelerates the training process and reduces variance [58].
The result indicates that the computational complexity O(S·
A · ∑M−1
i=1 Wi · Wi+1) of algorithms linearly scales with
the number of demands n and the average hop count h.
Furthermore, the online computational load of each UAV is
independent of the total network size, owing to the decentral-
ized multi-agent design in which each agent only relies on
its local observation ou(t) in (31) [59], [60]. The relative low
computational load and independence distribute the workload
across all UAVs and avoids the centralized bottleneck, which is


--- Page 12 ---
12
TABLE II
PARAMETER NOTATION
Notation
Value
Notation
Value
τ
0.5 s
dmin
10 m
β
0.5
ς
20
P tr
nm(t)
40 dBm
σ2
nm(t)
-110 dBm
fc
2.4 Ghz
c
3 ×108 m/s
ηLoS
ntmt
0.1 dB
ϵv
1 M CPU cycles
ϱ1
5.0188
∂
(2,4) G CPU cycles/s
ϱ2
0.3511
ϵs
1 M CPU cycles
ηNLoS
ntmt
21 dB
ϵm
1 M CPU cycles
B
2.4 MHz
Sb
15KB
νmin
3 m/s
νmax
5 m/s
ϕu
[0, 2π)
δu
[−π
2 , π
2 ]
w1
0.5
w2
0.5
a key feature for scalability and makes it feasible for practical
deployment in UAV networks.
Moreover, the algorithm framework follows the centralized
training and distributed execution paradigm, which is well
established for deploying DRL [61]–[63]. The computationally
intensive training is performed ofﬂine, while online execution
requires only a lightweight forward pass through a pre-trained
network. Thus, the operational overhead of the approach re-
mains manageable even in large-scale networks.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSES
In this section, we conduct a couple of simulations via
Python 3.12 and PyTorch 2.5.1. Table I lists the speciﬁc
parameters [64], [65]. In LAINs, nodes are distributed within
a range of 15 km×5 km, and the altitude range of UAVs
is within [0.2, 0.4] km. Besides, the size of demanded data
is randomly set within [400, 600] kbits. The hyperparameters
for the SP-MADDQN algorithm are detailed in the following.
Speciﬁcally, the training is conducted over 5,000 episodes, with
each episode comprising 1,000 steps. An ϵ-greedy policy is
employed for exploration, with ϵ decaying linearly from 1.0
to 0.01 over the ﬁrst 80% of training. The policy and target
networks are identical multi-layer perceptrons with two 256-
unit ReLU hidden layers. The optimization uses Adam with
α = 0.005. The target network is softly updated every 100
steps with a parameter of µ = 0.01. The experience replay
buffer holds 106 transitions. With PER, the priority exponent
α = 0.6, and the importance-sampling exponent ⋎is annealed
from 0.4 to 1.0.
To assess the performance of the proposed adaptive weight
mechanism, two benchmark methods are introduced, in which
the calculation of ψ0
u(t) follows the same formula in (11),
described as following.
1) Average weight methods: ψ1
u(t) and ψ2
u(t) are the aver-
age value of 1 −ψ0
u(t), expressed as



ψ0
u(t) = 1
2 × Tthr
Tu(t),
ψ1
u(t) = ψ2
u(t) = 0.5 × (1 −ψ0
u(t)).
(42)
(0.6, 0.6, 0.6)
(0.6, 0.6, 0.8)
(0.6, 0.8, 0.6)
(0.6, 0.8, 0.8)
(0.8, 0.6, 0.6)
(0.8, 0.6, 0.8)
(0.8, 0.8, 0.6)
(0.8, 0.8, 0.8)
(The demand forwarding probability, trusted interaction probability, probe packet reception probability)
0
200
400
600
800
Time steps
Adptive
Agerage 
Random
Fig. 3.
The minimum time step for identifying malicious UAVs with different
simulation parameters in space Λ.
2) Random weight methods: ψ1
u(t) is modeled as a ran-
dom variable uniformly distributed within the range [0.2(1 −
ψ0
u(t)), 0.8(1 −ψ0
u(t))], i.e.,









ψ0
u(t) = 1
2 × Tthr
Tu(t),
ψ1
u(t) ∼N(0.2(1 −ψ0
u(t)), 0.8(1 −ψ0
u(t))),
ψ2
u(t) = 1 −ψ0
u(t) −ψ1
u(t).
(43)
The experimental setup is conﬁgured as follows, to simulate
the effectiveness of the trust evaluation methods.
1) The number of UAVs is 12, and the number of malicious
UAVs is 2.
2) The credit value is initialized as 1, representing UAVs are
completely trust when departing from the GCS.
3) Considering the stringent security requirements, Tthr is
set as 0.8, and the probability range of malicious behaviors
is set to [0.1, 0.5] [44]. Particularly, in this paper, we select
0.4 and 0.2 as the probabilities of all malicious behaviors for
simulations. Thus, the demand forwarding probability, the trust
interaction probability with high-trust UAVs, and probe packet
reception probability of malicious UAVs are characterized
by p1 ∈{0.6, 0.8}, p2 ∈{0.6, 0.8}, and p3 ∈{0.6, 0.8},
respectively. Furthermore, the simulation parameter space Λ
of (p1, p2, p3) is
Λ=
[
(0.6, 0.6, 0.6)(0.6, 0.6, 0.8)(0.6, 0.8, 0.6)(0.6, 0.8, 0.8)
(0.8, 0.6, 0.6)(0.8, 0.6, 0.8)(0.8, 0.8, 0.6)(0.8, 0.8, 0.8)
]
.
(44)
4) The evaluation metric is deﬁned as the minimum time
steps that can identify all malicious UAVs, i.e.,
Υdetect
u
=min{t ∈N+|Tu(t)<Tthr}, ∀i∈U, t∈T.
(45)
To evaluate the efﬁciency of the proposed adaptive weight
approach for calculating the credit values, results are compared
with the average and random weight methods in Fig. 3. Specif-
ically, we evaluate Υdetect
u
across a diverse range of simulation
parameters in (44). For identifying the malicious UAVs, it re-
quires the fewest time steps when (p1, p2, p3)=(0.6, 0.6, 0.6).
On the contrary, when (p1, p2, p3) = (0.8, 0.8, 0.8), the most
time steps are needed. It lies that the values of p1, p2, and p3


--- Page 13 ---
13
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Trust Threshold
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Average Detection Time (steps)
348.6
800.0
740.1
328.9
800.0
724.1
233.5
688.1
644.3
26.9
704.1
620.3
1.4
652.2
349.2
1.1
388.6
6.9
1.2
5.6
2.4
Adaptive
Mean
Random
Fig. 4. The minimum time step for identifying malicious UAVs with different
trust thresholds.
decrease, indicating that the frequencies of incorrect behaviors
of malicious UAVs are higher, resulting in the increment of the
evaluated incorrect behavior ratio (i.e., 1−TD1
u (t), 1−TD2
u (t),
and 1−TD3
u (t)). Furthermore, compared with other methods,
the proposed method consistently obtains the minimum time
steps in diverse simulation parameters. The reason lies in
that the trust weights in the adaptive weight trust model are
proportional to incorrect behavior rates, and the credit values of
UAVs are dynamically adjusted at a quadratic rate. Therefore,
the penalties for incorrect behaviors become more severe, and
the detection of malicious UAVs is accelerated. In the same
case, the proposed method obtains better performances than
both the average and random weight trust methods.
In Fig. 4, the sensitivity of trust threshold Tthr is evaluated
and the proposed adaptive trust evaluation method in Section
III-B are compared with the two benchmark methods. Results
demonstrate that the adaptive method consistently requires the
minimum time steps to recognize the UAVs with malicious
behaviors at the probability tuple (p1, p2, p3) = (0.5, 0.5, 0.5),
compared with other two methods. In addition, a higher trust
threshold requires a smaller time step to isolate malicious
UAVs, resulting in a higher TSR and a lower average E2E
latency. It is the result that a stricter threshold (Tthr = 0.9)
enables the system to proactively and rapidly isolate potentially
malicious or unreliable nodes, thereby protecting the integrity
and efﬁciency of the routing paths. Conversely, a lower thresh-
old (Tthr = 0.6) retains more time slots for malicious nodes in
the network, which may increase the risk of allowing malicious
behavior while degrading the overall performance.
In Fig. 5, to evaluate the convergence performance of the
proposed SP-MADDQN algorithm, the relationship between
the accumulative rewards and episodes is presented with differ-
ent learning rates (LRs) and demand numbers. Fig. 5(a) clearly
shows that different LRs result in varied convergence behav-
iors. In the initial episodes (especially around the ﬁrst 500),
rewards change drastically for all LRs, and tend to stabilize
gradually with the increase of episodes. Notably, LR = 0.005
achieves the highest and most stable rewards in the long term,
compared with other LRs. When LR=0.01 and LR=0.001, the
convergence value of rewards descends. However, LR=0.0001
has the worst convergence, with rewards staying at a low level
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0*1e3
Episodes
40
50
60
70
Rewards
LR=0.01
LR=0.005
LR=0.001
LR=0.0001
LR=0.00005
(a)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0*1e3
Episodes
-100
0
100
200
300
Rewards
|R|=25
|R|=40
|R|=55
|R|=70
|R|=85
(b)
Fig. 5.
Comparison of convergence performances for transmitting demands
with 8 UAVs and 2 malicious UAVs during training SP-MADDQN. (a)
Different learning rates 25 demands. (b) Different demand numbers.
-0.2
0
0.2
0.5
1
2
10
20
30
40
50
Rewards
UAVs=8
UAVs=10
UAVs=12
(a)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.5
1
2
0.00000
0.00025
0.00050
0.00075
0.00100
0.00125
0.00150
Average E2E delay (s)
UAVs=8
UAVs=10
UAVs=12
(b)
Fig. 6. The evaluation of different ς in terms of the reward and the average
E2E delay with 25 demands and 8 UAVs including 2 malicious UAVs.
and ﬂuctuating more. This indicates that an too small or too
large learning rate may slow down the convergence process
and limit the ﬁnal reward values. Considering the execution
effect, LR = 0.005 is selected for subsequent simulations.
Fig. 5(b) shows the rewards of the proposed algorithm across
episodes under diverse numbers of demands. It is noticeable
that different numbers of demands have different impacts on the
convergence and value of rewards. As the number of demands
grows, the rewards converge rapidly in the early episodes. The
reason lies in that a higher demand value can meet the batch
size requirements for training more quickly. Besides, more
demands obtain high rewards, since the total reward of LAINs
is deﬁned as the sum of all transmitted demands in (34).
Fig. 6 evaluates the impact of hyperparameter ς deﬁned in
(33) under different network scales. In detail, Fig. 6(a) shows
that as ς increases, the average reward decreases in various
network scales, since the reward in (37) is inversely correlated
with ς. Fig. 6(b) indicates the average E2E delay of diverse ς. It
is noted that when ς is 0.2, the delay cost is the lowest among
all numbers of UAVs and is lower than that without using ς
(i.e., ς = 0). While the value of ς increases or decreases, the
beneﬁt decreases. Through the sensitivity analysis of ς, we
apply ς = 0.2 in the paper.
In Figs. 7-8, the SP-MADDQN is compared with SP-
MADQN, MADDQN, and MADQN algorithms with regard to
the convergence performance, loss value, average E2E delay,
and average TSR, with 2 malicious UAVs. Speciﬁcally, in Fig.
7(a), as the episode accumulates, all algorithms show a trend of
stable rewards. Around episode 1,000, most curves converge.
However, SP-based algorithms achieve higher stable rewards


--- Page 14 ---
14
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0*1e3
Episodes
-100
0
100
200
300
Rewards
SP-MADDQN,|R|=40
SP-MADDQN,|R|=80
SP-MADQN,|R|=40
SP-MADQN,|R|=80
MADDQN,|R|=40
MADDQN,|R|=80
MADQN,|R|=40
MADQN,|R|=80
(a)
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0*1e3
Episodes
0
1
2
3
4
5
Average loss values
4.3
4.35
4.4
4.45
4.5
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
SP-MADDQN
SP-MADQN
MADDQN
MADQN
(b)
Fig. 7.
Comparison of different algorithms in terms of the convergence
performance, and loss values with 25 demands and 8 UAVs including 2
malicious UAVs.
than non-SP algorithms. This proves that the introduction of
the SHERB and PER mechanisms is conducive to obtaining
better performances. Besides, for the same algorithm, higher
demands bring higher rewards, since the reward in (34) is
calculated via the sum of all demands, generating the larger
accumulative rewards. Fig. 7(b) displays that all algorithms
present a rapid loss drop in the early 0-1,000 episodes via
adjusting parameters to minimize errors. Then, the losses
decrease to very small values, indicating that the algorithms
already converge. Particularly, the SP-based algorithm achieves
a lower loss value earlier and keeps it more stable than the non-
SP algorithm. Besides, the enlarged subplot shows the subtle
difference that SP-MADDQN has the smoothest loss curve in
the later stage, while the non-SP algorithms ﬂuctuate more.
This conﬁrms that SP-based mechanisms improve the stability
and efﬁciency of learning, thereby achieving more consistent
performances and reducing errors.
Fig. 8 compares six algorithms focusing on average E2E
delay and TSR. Speciﬁcally, in Fig. 8(a), with the increasing
number of demands, the average E2E delay of all algorithms
shows an upward trend, aligned with (34). Among them, SP-
MADDQN obtains the lowest delay cost compared to other
ﬁve algorithms. This indicates that the variants of SP-based
methods are more effective in reducing the E2E delay. It is
observed that as the demands grow, the E2E delay increases
in all six algorithms. Nevertheless, the E2E delay of the
25
40
55
70
85
Number of demands
0.000
0.001
0.002
0.003
0.004
0.005
Average E2E delay (s)
SP-MADDQN
SP-MADQN
SHERB-MADDQN
PER-MADDQN
MADDQN
MADQN
(a)
25
40
55
70
85
Number of demands
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
Average success ratio
SP-MADDQN
SP-MADQN
SHERB-MADDQN
PER-MADDQN
MADDQN
MADQN
(b)
Fig. 8.
Comparison of the diverse algorithms in terms of the average E2E
delay and TSR with 25 demands and 8 UAVs including 2 malicious UAVs.
proposed SP-MADDQN algorithm decreases by 59% than SP-
MADQN, SHERB-MADDQN, PER-MADDQN, MADDQN,
and MADQN on average. Besides, the E2E delay results
indicate that SHERB and PER mechanisms independently
enhance routing efﬁciency compared to baselines, but fall
short of the fully integrated both SHERB and PER approach.
SHERB-MADDQN consistently shows a marginal advantage
over PER-MADDQN, highlighting its superior adaptability to
the multiple sources and destinations network conditions.
Regarding the TSR in Fig. 8(b), the SP-based methods
consistently outperform non-SP-based algorithms. Speciﬁcally,
as the number of demands varies, the TSR of SP-based methods
remains above 0.7, whereas non-SP-based algorithms achieve
a lower TSR around 0.5. This demonstrates the superior
capability of the proposed approach in ensuring successful
transmissions, even in environments with malicious UAVs. In
particular, SP-MADDQN achieves an average TSR that is 29%
higher than the other ﬁve benchmark algorithms. Meanwhile,
the ablation variants SHERB-MADDQN and PER-MADDQN
exhibit intermediate performance, with TSR values consistently
between 0.6 and 0.75 that are higher than non-SP methods
but below SP-MADDQN. This indicates that while SHERB
and PER mechanisms enhance experience replay and priority
scheduling to some extent, they still fall short of the deep
integration offered by the SP strategy in adversarial settings.
Additionally, SHERB-MADDQN shows a slight advantage
over PER-MADDQN, with an approximately 3.2% higher
average TSR, reﬂecting its better sample utilization and policy
stability. In summary, in the presence of 2 malicious UAVs, the
proposed SP-MADDQN achieves the best overall performance
in both E2E delay and TSR compared to all other considered
algorithms
In Fig. 9, the performance of the average E2E delay and TSR
is compared under the different network scales. Speciﬁcally,
Fig. 9(a) evaluates the average E2E delay of the proposed
SP-MADDQN algorithm with different scales of LAINs and
demand numbers. With the increment of demands, the average
E2E delay rises under the same UAV number in LAINs.
When the demand number is identical, the average E2E delay
decreases as the number of UAVs increases, since the increased
UAVs bring more abundant network resources. Fig. 9(b) shows
the performance of the average TSR when the numbers of


--- Page 15 ---
15
8
10
12
14
16
Number of UAVs
0.0010
0.0015
0.0020
0.0025
0.0030
0.0035
Average E2E delay (s)
Demands=25
Demands=55
Demands=85
(a)
4
3
2
1
0
Number of malicious UAVs
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Average success ratio
UAVs=12
UAVs=14
UAVs=16
(b)
Fig. 9. Comparison of the different network scales on performances. (a) The
average E2E delay with 2 malicious UAVs. (b) The TSR under various numbers
of malicious UAVs.
malicious UAVs are different in various scales of LAINs. It
can be observed that the average TSR is the highest when the
number of malicious UAVs is 0. While there are malicious
UAVs, the TSR decreases signiﬁcantly at different effects,
denoting that the malicious UAVs decrease the transmission
performance during routing. Additionally, the average TSR
declines sharply as the number of malicious UAVs increases.
It is because the malicious UAVs may reject to transmit the
demands, thereby losing demands. As the number of UAVs
grows, the total network resources are richer, such as the
channel bandwidth, storage, and computation power, resulting
in the higher TSR of routing.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have considered that UAVs are divided into
multiple clusters to collaboratively transmit the demands with
security threats and dynamic distributed topologies. We have
presented the ZTA with the SDP controller for the dynamic
management of UAV joining and exiting, via the identity
authentication and permission. Then, by combining the direct
and indirect trust, we have designed the adaptive weight trust
model to update the credit value of UAVs. Furthermore, we
have proposed the lightweight consortium blockchain to store
the transactions and the credit values, which is deployed on
the CHUs, mitigating the impact of security threats on routing
performances. The proposed framework has been particularly
well-suited for real-world scenarios that demand secure and
resilient communication in dynamic, open, and potentially
adversarial environments. In the constructed zero-trust LAIN,
we have formulated the routing problem to optimize both
the average E2E delay and TSR, which is an INLP prob-
lem and intractable to solve. To deal with the challenge of
obtaining the global information, we have reformulated the
routing problem into a Dec-POMDP form and designed the
SP-MADDQN algorithm. Furthermore, since the complexity
has been independent of the total scale of the network, the SP-
MADDQN algorithm can be deployed in practice. Simulation
results have demonstrated that the adaptive weight trust model
can identify malicious UAVs more quickly than the average
and random weight trust methods. Additionally, the designed
SP-MADDQN algorithm has been proven to outperform other
benchmarks, reducing the average E2E delay by 59% and
improving the TSR by 29% on average, also demonstrating
superior convergence and lower training loss.
To advance the proposed framework toward the practical
deployment, several research directions merit further explo-
rations. A crucial step is to reﬁne the cryptographic key
management scheme, establishing a more robust and efﬁcient
foundation for trust in dynamic networks. Furthermore, the
resilience of the IPBFT consensus mechanism under the high
mobility requires the in-depth stability analysis. Concurrently,
the integrated security model must be extended and stress-
tested against a broader and more realistic spectrum of adver-
sarial scenarios to ensure the holistic robustness. Addressing
these challenges are pivotal in transitioning the system from a
validated prototype to a ﬁeld deployment solution.
REFERENCES
[1] B. He, X. Ji, G. Li, and B. Cheng, “Key technologies and applications of
UAVs in underground space: A review,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun.
Networking, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 1026–1049, Jan. 2024.
[2] H. Luo, G. Sun, J. Wang, H. Yu, D. Niyato, S. Dustdar, and Z. Han,
“Wireless blockchain meets 6G: The future trustworthy and ubiquitous
connectivity,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, early access, Jul. 2025.
[3] K. Mao, Q. Zhu, C.-X. Wang, X. Ye, J. Gomez-Ponce, X. Cai, Y. Miao,
Z. Cui, Q. Wu, and W. Fan, “A survey on channel sounding technologies
and measurements for UAV-assisted communications,” IEEE Trans.
Instrum. Meas., vol. 73, pp. 1–24, Aug. 2024.
[4] Z. Jia, C. Cui, C. Dong, Q. Wu, Z. Ling, D. Niyato, and Z. Han, “Dis-
tributionally robust optimization for aerial multi-access edge computing
via cooperation of UAVs and HAPs,” IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 2025.
[5] S. Javed, A. Hassan, R. Ahmad, W. Ahmed, R. Ahmed, A. Saadat,
and M. Guizani, “State-of-the-art and future research challenges in UAV
swarms,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 19 023–19 045,
Jun. 2024.
[6] D. Shumeye Lakew, U. Saad, N.-N. Dao, W. Na, and S. Cho, “Routing in
ﬂying ad hoc networks: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv.
Tutorials, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 1071–1120, 2nd Quart. 2020.
[7] S. He, Z. Jia, C. Dong, W. Wang, Y. Cao, Y. Yang, and Q. Wu, “Routing
recovery for UAV networks with deliberate attacks: A reinforcement
learning based approach,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf. (GLOBE-
COM), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, Dec. 2023, pp. 952–957.
[8] A. Attkan and V. Ranga, “Cyber-physical security for IoT networks: A
comprehensive review on traditional, blockchain and artiﬁcial intelligence
based key-security,” Complex Intell. Syst., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 3559–3591,
Feb. 2022.
[9] M. Annabi, A. Zeroual, and N. Messai, “Towards zero trust security in
connected vehicles: A comprehensive survey,” Comput. Secur., vol. 145,
pp. 104 018–104 075, Oct. 2024.
[10] Y. Palmo, S. Tanimoto, H. Sato, and A. Kanai, “A consideration of
scalability for software deﬁned perimeter based on the zero-trust model,”
in Proc. Int. Congr. Adv. Appl. Inf. (IIAI-AAI), Niigata, Japan, Jul. 2021,
pp. 717–724.
[11] J. Yang, X. Liu, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, and H. He, “Toward trusted
unmanned aerial vehicle swarm networks: A blockchain-based approach,”
IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 98–108, Jun. 2023.
[12] V. Nivedita, C.-S. Shieh, and M.-F. Horng, “An integrated trust-
based secure routing with intrusion detection for mobile ad hoc
network using adaptive snow geese optimization algorithm,” Ain Shams
Eng. J., vol. 16, no. 7, p. 103385, Jul. 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090447925001261
[13] J. Yun, S. Seo, and J.-M. Chung, “Centralized trust-based secure routing
in wireless networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 6, pp.
1066–1069, Dec. 2018.
[14] Z. Wang, H. Yao, T. Mai, Z. Xiong, X. Wu, D. Wu, and S. Guo, “Learning
to routing in UAV swarm network: A multi-agent reinforcement learning
approach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 5, pp. 6611–6624,
May 2023.
[15] X. Wei, J. Ma, and C. Sun, “A survey on security of unmanned aerial
vehicle systems: Attacks and countermeasures,” IEEE Internet Things J.,
vol. 11, no. 21, pp. 34 826–34 847, Nov. 2024.


--- Page 16 ---
16
[16] J. Leng, M. Zhou, J. L. Zhao, Y. Huang, and Y. Bian, “Blockchain
security: A survey of techniques and research directions,” IEEE Trans.
Serv. Comput., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2490–2510, Jul./Aug. 2022.
[17] D. E. Kouicem, Y. Imine, A. Bouabdallah, and H. Lakhlef, “Decentralized
blockchain-based trust management protocol for the Internet of things,”
IEEE Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1292–1306,
Mar./Apr. 2022.
[18] H. Luo, Y. Wu, G. Sun, H. Yu, and M. Guizani, “ESCM: an efﬁcient
and secure communication mechanism for UAV networks,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Serv. Manage., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 3124–3139, Jun. 2024.
[19] F. Tang, C. Wen, L. Luo, M. Zhao, and N. Kato, “Blockchain-based
trusted trafﬁc ofﬂoading in space-air-ground integrated networks (SA-
GIN): A federated reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3501–3516, Dec. 2022.
[20] Y. Wang, Z. Su, Q. Xu, R. Li, T. H. Luan, and P. Wang, “A secure
and intelligent data sharing scheme for UAV-assisted disaster rescue,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Networking, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 2422–2438, Dec. 2023.
[21] P. Ganesan and S. K. Jagatheesaperumal, “Revolutionizing emergency re-
sponse: The transformative power of smart wearables through blockchain,
federated learning, and beyond 5G/6G services,” IT Prof., vol. 25, no. 6,
pp. 54–61, Nov.-Dec. 2023.
[22] L. Zhang, F. Hu, Z. Chu, E. Bentley, and S. Kumar, “3D transformative
routing for UAV swarming networks: A skeleton-guided, GPS-free ap-
proach,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3685–3701, Apr.
2021.
[23] T. Li, K. Zhu, N. C. Luong, D. Niyato, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, and B. Chen,
“Applications of multi-agent reinforcement learning in future Internet: A
comprehensive survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutorials, vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 1240–1279, 2nd Quart. 2022.
[24] J. Li, B. Feng, and H. Zheng, “A survey on VPN: Taxonomy, roles, trends
and future directions,” Comput. Networks, vol. 257, pp. 110 964–110 984,
Feb. 2025.
[25] B. Singh and S. S. Cheema, “Next generation ﬁrewall and self authen-
tication for network security,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image Inf. Process.
(ICIIP), Solan, India, May 2023, pp. 707–713.
[26] M. Juma, A. A. Monem, and K. Shaalan, “Hybrid end-to-end VPN
security approach for smart IoT objects,” J. Network Comput. Appl., vol.
158, pp. 102 598–102 611, May 2020.
[27] Z. Abdelhay, Y. Bello, and A. Refaey, “Toward zero-trust 6GC: A
software deﬁned perimeter approach with dynamic moving target defense
mechanism,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 74–80, Apr.
2024.
[28] X. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Zhu, W. Chen, Z. Chang, and Z. Han, “When
zero-trust meets federated learning,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM), Cape Town, South Africa, Dec. 2024, pp. 794–799.
[29] Z. Yan, G. Yu, M. Zhan, Y. Zhang, and J. Hu, “5GC-SDP: Security
enhancement of 5G core networks with zero trust,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Comput. Supported Cooperative Work Des. (CSCWD), Tianjin, China,
May 2024, pp. 1597–1602.
[30] D. J. S. Agron, M. R. Ramli, J.-M. Lee, and D.-S. Kim, “Secure ground
control station-based routing protocol for UAV networks,” in Proc. Int.
Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg. (ICTC), Jeju, Korea (South) ,Oct.
2019, pp. 794–798.
[31] Y. Chen, G. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. He, and S. He, “Improving physical layer
security for multi-UAV systems against hybrid wireless attacks,” IEEE
Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 73, no. 5, pp. 7034–7048, May 2024.
[32] D. Yin, X. Yang, H. Yu, S. Chen, and C. Wang, “An air-to-ground relay
communication planning method for UAVs swarm applications,” IEEE
Trans. Intell. Veh., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2983–2997, Apr. 2023.
[33] S. Kumar Jagatheesaperumal, M. Rahouti, A. Chehri, K. Xiong, and
J. Bieniek, “Blockchain-based security architecture for uncrewed aerial
systems in B5G/6G services and beyond: A comprehensive approach,”
IEEE Open J. Commun. Soc., vol. 6, pp. 1042–1069, Jan. 2025.
[34] H. Lu, Y. Tang, and Y. Sun, “DRRS-BC: Decentralized routing regis-
tration system based on blockchain,” IEEE/CAA J. Autom. Sin., vol. 8,
no. 12, pp. 1868–1876, Dec. 2021.
[35] T. Liao, L. Wei, X. Hu, J. Hu, M. Hu, K. Peng, C. Cai, and Z. Xiong,
“Blockchain-enhanced UAV networks: Optimizing data storage for real-
time efﬁciency,” IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 12, no. 19, pp. 39 910–
39 924, Oct. 2025.
[36] Q. Wang, C. Qian, S. Mia, H. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Lu, and H. Zhu,
“Blockchain-enabled credible multi-operator spectrum sharing in UAV
communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 74, no. 6, pp.
8989–9001, Jun. 2025.
[37] Z. Cui, F. XUE, S. Zhang, X. Cai, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, and J. Chen, “A
hybrid blockchain-based identity authentication scheme for multi-WSN,”
IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 241–251, Mar.-Apr., 2020.
[38] Y. Kuang, Q. Wu, R. Chen, and X. Liu, “Blockchain based lightweight
authentication scheme for Internet of things using lattice encryption
algorithm,” Comput. Stand. Interfaces, vol. 93, pp. 103 981–103 990, Apr.
2025.
[39] Y. Liu, J. Zhang, S. Muhammad, Y. Yuan, P. Zhang, M. Sarah, and
N. Avishek, “Research on identity authentication system of Internet of
things based on blockchain technology,” J. King Saud Univ. Comput. Inf.
Sci., vol. 34, no. 10, pp. 10 365–10 377, Nov. 2022.
[40] Z. Wang, S. Li, E. J. Knoblock, H. Li, and R. D. Apaza, “Delay sensitive
routing in an aerial and terrestrial hybrid wireless network via multi-
agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Commun. Conf.
(GLOBECOM), Cape Town, South Africa, Dec. 2024, pp. 1497–1502.
[41] Y. Lyu, H. Hu, R. Fan, Z. Liu, J. An, and S. Mao, “Dynamic routing
for integrated satellite-terrestrial networks: A constrained multi-agent
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 42,
no. 5, pp. 1204–1218, May 2024.
[42] H. Zhang, H. Tang, Y. Hu, X. Wei, C. Wu, W. Ding, and X.-P.
Zhang, “Heterogeneous mean-ﬁeld multi-agent reinforcement learning
for communication routing selection in SAGI-net,” in Proc. IEEE Veh.
Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), London, U.K., Sep. 2022.
[43] N. Lin, F. Gao, L. Zhao, A. Al-Dubai, and Z. Tan, “A 3D smooth random
walk mobility model for FANETs,” in 2019 IEEE 21st International
Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications;
IEEE 17th International Conference on Smart City; IEEE 5th Interna-
tional Conference on Data Science and Systems (HPCC/SmartCity/DSS),
Zhangjiajie, China, Aug. 2019, pp. 460–467.
[44] Z. Teng, B. Pang, M. Sun, L. Xie, and L. Guo, “A malicious node
identiﬁcation strategy with environmental parameters optimization in
wireless sensor network,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 117, pp. 1143–
1162, Mar. 2021.
[45] C. Li, J. Zhang, X. Yang, and L. Youlong, “Lightweight blockchain
consensus mechanism and storage optimization for resource-constrained
IoT devices,” Inf. Process. Manage., vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 102 602–102 625,
2021.
[46] I. Ud Din, A. Bano, K. A. Awan, A. Almogren, A. Altameem, and
M. Guizani, “Lighttrust: Lightweight trust management for edge devices
in industrial Internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things J., vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 2776–2783, Feb. 2023.
[47] H. Luo, G. Sun, Y. Liu, D. Zhao, D. Niyato, H. Yu, and S. Dustdar,
“A weighted Byzantine fault tolerance consensus driven trusted multiple
large language models network,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Network-
ing, early access, Oct. 2025.
[48] J. Du, J. Wang, A. Sun, J. Qu, J. Zhang, C. Wu, and D. Niyato, “Joint
optimization in blockchain and MEC-enabled space-air-ground integrated
networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 19, pp. 31 862–31 877,
Jul. 2024.
[49] J. Du, Z. Yu, A. Sun, J. Jiang, H. Zhao, N. Zhang, C. Wu, and
F. Richard Yu, “Secure task ofﬂoading in blockchain-enabled MEC net-
works with improved PBFT consensus,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun.
Networking, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1225–1243, Apr. 2025.
[50] G. Saldamli, C. Upadhyay, D. Jadhav, R. Shrishrimal, B. Patil, and
L. Tawalbeh, “Improved gossip protocol for blockchain applications,”
Cluster Comput., vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1915–1926, Jan. 2022.
[51] Y. Chen, N. Zhao, Z. Ding, and M.-S. Alouini, “Multiple UAVs as
relays: Multi-hop single link versus multiple dual-hop links,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 6348–6359, Sep. 2018.
[52] B. Zheng, Q. Wu, T. Ma, and R. Zhang, “Rotatable antenna enabled
wireless communication: Modeling and optimization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.02595, Jan. 2025.
[53] B. Zheng, T. Ma, C. You, J. Tang, R. Schober, and R. Zhang, “Rotatable
antenna enabled wireless communication and sensing: Opportunities and
challenges,” IEEE Wireless Commun., early access, Oct. 2025.
[54] S. He, Z. Jia, Q. Zhu, F. Zhou, and Q. Wu, “Trusted routing for
blockchain-enabled low-altitude intelligent networks,” in Proc. IEEE/CIC
Int. Conf. Commun. China (ICCC), Shanghai, China, Aug. 2025.
[55] Z. Jia, S. He, Q. Zhu, W. Wang, Q. Wu, and Z. Han, “Trusted
routing for blockchain-empowered UAV networks via multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Commun., early access, Aug. 2025.


--- Page 17 ---
17
[56] H. Van Hasselt, A. Guez, and D. Silver, “Deep reinforcement learning
with double Q-learning,” in Proc. 13th AAAI Conf. Artif. Intell., vol. 30,
no. 1, Phoenix, AZ, Feb. 2016, pp. 2094–2100.
[57] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G.
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski et al.,
“Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol.
518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, Feb. 2015.
[58] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience
replay,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1511.05952, Nov. 2015.
[59] L. Busoniu, R. Babuska, and B. De Schutter, “A comprehensive survey
of multiagent reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern.
C, Appl. Rev., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 156–172, Mar. 2008.
[60] S. Gu, E. Holly, T. Lillicrap, and S. Levine, “Deep reinforcement learning
for robotic manipulation with asynchronous off-policy updates,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA), Singapore, Jul. 2017, pp. 3389–
3396.
[61] J. Zhang, L. Che, and M. Shahidehpour, “Distributed training and dis-
tributed execution-based stackelberg multi-agent reinforcement learning
for EV charging scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 14, no. 6,
pp. 4976–4979, Nov. 2023.
[62] A. Kopic, E. Perenda, and H. Gacanin, “A collaborative multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning-based wireless power allocation with centralized
training and decentralized execution,” IEEE Transactions on Communi-
cations, vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 7006–7016, Nov. 2024.
[63] J. You, Z. Jia, C. Dong, Q. Wu, and Z. Han, “Joint computation ofﬂoading
and resource allocation for uncertain maritime mec via cooperation of
aavs and vessels,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 74,
no. 11, pp. 18 081–18 095, Nov. 2025.
[64] A. Miglani and N. Kumar, “BloomACS: Bloom ﬁlter-based access
control scheme in blockchain-enabled V2G networks,” IEEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 10 636–10 651, Sep. 2024.
[65] J. You, Z. Jia, C. Cui, C. Dong, Q. Wu, and Z. Han, “Hierarchical task
ofﬂoading and trajectory optimization in low-altitude intelligent networks
via auction and diffusion-based MARL,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun.
Netw., early access, Dec. 2025.
Ziye Jia (Member, IEEE) received the B.E., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees in communication and information
systems from Xidian University, Xian, China, in
2012, 2015, and 2021, respectively. From 2018 to
2020, she was a Visiting Ph.D. Student with the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Houston. She is currently an Associate
Professor with the Key Laboratory of Dynamic Cog-
nitive System of Electromagnetic Spectrum Space,
Ministry of Industry and Information Technology,
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics, Nanjing, China. Her current research interests include space-air-ground
networks, aerial access networks, UAV networking, resource optimization
and machine learning.She is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE
Internet of Things Journal. She served as the TPC for IEEE GLOBECOM
2025/2024/2023,IEEE WCNC 2025/2024, IEEE WCSP 2025, etc.
Sijie He is a postgraduate student with the College
of Electronic and Information Engineering, Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nan-
jing, China. Her current research interests include
the low-altitude intelligent networks, trusted routing,
blockchain, multi-agent deep reinforcement learning,
and zero-trust.
Ligang Yuan, Associate Professor College of Civil
Aviation, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and As-
tronautics. His research focuses on theoretical re-
search, key technology development, and applied
system design in air trafﬁc ﬂow management, low-
altitude airspace management, and system perfor-
mance evaluation. He has published more than
30 academic papers and ﬁled nearly 30 invention
patents. He participated in the formulation of two
standards and guidance manuals for the International
Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). He has led the
demonstration and construction of the Jiangsu Provincial Low-Altitude Flight
Service Center and platform, as well as the low-altitude ﬂight service centers
and platforms in Nanjing and Yangzhou.
Fuhui Zhou (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from Xidian University, Xian, China, in
2016. He is currently a Full Professor with Nanjing
University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing,
China, where he is also with the Key Laboratory
of Dynamic Cognitive System of Electromagnetic
Spectrum Space. He has published more than 200
papers in internationally renowned journals and con-
ferences in the ﬁeld of communications. He has been
selected for one ESI hot article and 13 ESI highly
cited articles. His research interests include cognitive
radio, cognitive intelligence, knowledge graph, edge computing, and resource
allocation. He received four Best Paper Awards at international conferences,
such as IEEE GLOBECOM and IEEE ICC. He was awarded as the 2021
Most Cited Chinese Researchers by Elsevier, the Stanford World’s Top 2%
Scientists, the IEEE ComSoc AsiaPaciﬁc Outstanding Young Researcher and
Young Elite Scientist Award of China, and the URSI GASS Young Scientist. He
serves as an Editor for IEEE Transactions on Communications, IEEE Systems
Journal, IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, IEEE Access, and Physical
Communication.
Qihui Wu (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in
communications engineering and the M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in communications and information systems
from the Institute of Communications Engineering,
Nanjing, China, in 1994, 1997, and 2000, respec-
tively. From 2003 to 2005, he was a Post-Doctoral
Research Associate with Southeast University, Nan-
jing. From 2005 to 2007, he was an Associate Pro-
fessor with the College of Communications Engi-
neering, PLA University of Science and Technology,
Nanjing, where he was a Full Professor, from 2008
to 2016. From March 2011 to September 2011, he was an Advanced Visiting
Scholar with the Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, NJ, USA. Since
May 2016, he has been a Full Professor with the College of Electronic and
Information Engineering, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing. His current research interests include wireless communications and
statistical signal processing, with an emphasis on system design of software
deﬁned radio, cognitive radio, and smart radio.


--- Page 18 ---
18
Zhu Han (Fellow, IEEE) (S’01-M’04-SM’09-F’14)
received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering
from Tsinghua University, in 1997, and the M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Maryland, College Park, in
1999 and 2003, respectively.
From 2000 to 2002, he was an R&D Engineer of
JDSU, Germantown, Maryland. From 2003 to 2006,
he was a Research Associate at the University of
Maryland. From 2006 to 2008, he was an assistant
professor at Boise State University, Idaho. Currently,
he is a John and Rebecca Moores Professor in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department as well as in the Computer Science Department at
the University of Houston, Texas. Dr. Hans main research targets on the novel
game-theory related concepts critical to enabling efﬁcient and distributive use
of wireless networks with limited resources. His other research interests include
wireless resource allocation and management, wireless communications and
networking, quantum computing, data science, smart grid, carbon neutraliza-
tion, security and privacy. Dr. Han received an NSF Career Award in 2010,
the Fred W. Ellersick Prize of the IEEE Communication Society in 2011,˘athe
EURASIP Best Paper Award for the Journal on Advances in Signal Processing
in 2015, IEEE Leonard G. Abraham Prize in the ﬁeld of Communications
Systems (best paper award in IEEE JSAC) in 2016, IEEE Vehicular Technology
Society 2022 Best Land Transportation Paper Award, and several best paper
awards in IEEE conferences. Dr. Han was an IEEE Communications Society
Distinguished Lecturer from 2015 to 2018 and ACM Distinguished Speaker
from 2022 to 2025, AAAS fellow since 2019, and ACM Fellow since 2024.
Dr. Han is also the winner of the 2021 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Award (an IEEE
Field Award), for outstanding early to mid-career contributions to technologies
holding the promise of innovative applications, with the following citation:
“for contributions to game theory and distributed management of autonomous
communication networks." Dr. Han is honored Lifetime Chair Professor of
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan, Eminent Scholar of
Kyung Hee University, South Korea and Global Professor of Keio University,
Japan.
Dusit Niyato (Fellow, IEEE) is a professor in the
College of Computing and Data Science, at Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore. He received
B.Eng. from King Mongkuts Institute of Technology
Ladkrabang (KMITL), Thailand and Ph.D. in Elec-
trical and Computer Engineering from the University
of Manitoba, Canada. His research interests are in
the areas of mobile generative AI, edge intelligence,
quantum computing and networking, and incentive
mechanism design.
