--- Page 1 ---
RF-Agent: Automated Reward Function Design via
Language Agent Tree Search
Ning Gao, Xiuhui Zhang, Xingyu Jiang,
Mukang You, Mohan Zhang, Yue Deng∗
Beihang University
37 Xueyuan Road, Haidian District, Beijing
{gaoning_ai, zhangxiuhui, jxy33zrhd}@buaa.edu.cn
youmukang@gmail.com, {zmh666, ydeng}@buaa.edu.cn
Abstract
Designing efficient reward functions for low-level control tasks is a challenging
problem. Recent research aims to reduce reliance on expert experience by using
Large Language Models (LLMs) with task information to generate dense reward
functions. These methods typically rely on training results as feedback, itera-
tively generating new reward functions with greedy or evolutionary algorithms.
However, they suffer from poor utilization of historical feedback and inefficient
search, resulting in limited improvements in complex control tasks. To address
this challenge, we propose RF-Agent, a framework that treats LLMs as language
agents and frames reward function design as a sequential decision-making process,
enhancing optimization through better contextual reasoning. RF-Agent integrates
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to manage the reward design and optimization
process, leveraging the multi-stage contextual reasoning ability of LLMs. This
approach better utilizes historical information and improves search efficiency to
identify promising reward functions. Outstanding experimental results in 17 diverse
low-level control tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The source
code is available at https://github.com/deng-ai-lab/RF-Agent.
1
Introduction
Reward design is a crucial component in Reinforcement Learning (RL), significantly affecting
the performance and training efficiency of the policy, especially in low-level control tasks like
locomotion[40] and complex manipulation[3, 15]. Although task evaluation metrics (e.g., success
rate, movement speed) can be directly used as rewards, their sparse or one-dimensional nature
presents challenges for policy optimization. Therefore, reward shaping[34] through dense reward
functions is crucial for guiding policy learning more efficiently[46]. The most common approach
involves human experts manually crafting a dense reward function, which is interpretable but requires
extensive expertise and may be suboptimal[4]. To address this, Inverse RL[65, 54, 13] and Preference-
based RL[10, 22, 35] attempt to generate dense rewards by learning reward models from expert
demonstrations or preferences. However, they still rely on large amounts of expert data and lack
interpretability.
Recently, large language models (LLMs) have excelled in not only traditional NLP tasks[33] but
also logical reasoning and agent-based tasks[50, 58]. Given their impressive world knowledge [52]
and coding capabilities [56, 60], a natural thought is to leverage LLMs to generate interpretable
dense reward functions, replacing expert effort. Approaches like L2R[59] and Text2Reward[55]
∗Corresponding author
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2602.23876v1  [cs.AI]  27 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Figure 1: Quick view. (a) Reshaping LLM-based Reward Function Design Problem from sequential
decision-making view. (b) Abstract pipeline comparison between different approaches. (c) Compari-
son between different methods on max success rates with the numbers of complete training times.
made strides in this direction, achieving remarkable results. In addition, more recent methods[28,
17, 61, 62, 18] have further advanced the field by combining more refined feedback design and
evolutionary concepts. We view these methods as part of a sequential decision process, as shown
in Fig1.a. The interaction between the policy and environment forms an internal system, where the
LLM, as a language agent, continuously interacts with this system. The action of the LLM represents
the process of generating a reward function, and the internal system provides results after training as
feedback based on the action. The action and feedback in the current decision-making process are
finally integrated into the history state and utilized by LLM for future actions.
From the sequential decision-making perspective, current research can be categorized into two reward
generation modes, as shown in Fig1.b. The first mode, exemplified by Eureka[28], follows a greedy
algorithm[48] approach, where the best reward function is retained after a batch generation of reward
functions and serves as the starting point for the next iteration. The second mode, represented
by Revolve[17], adopts an evolutionary algorithm[11] approach, maintaining a population and
evolving new reward functions by integrating individual information from the population. However,
when utilizing LLMs to design reward functions for complex control tasks[9], the performance
improvement of these methods remains limited, as illustrated in Fig1.c. This limitation hinders the
generation of high-quality and training-efficient reward functions through LLMs, constraining the
performance of this pipeline. We identify two key factors leading to limited performance improvement.
First, from the search perspective, greedy or evolutionary algorithms struggle in complex decision-
making problems, as they fail to effectively balance exploitation and exploration, often resulting
in premature convergence to local optima or excessive exploration of possibilities[37]. Second,
regarding information usage, existing methods only retain local historical information, overlooking
the potential decision paths that could transition from low-performing to high-performing reward
functions (Fig1.b ours).
Based on the analysis above, we introduce a novel reward function design framework, RF-Agent,
which treats the LLM as an agent to address the challenges outlined by enhancing their reasoning
and decision-making capabilities. Specifically, we employ a tree structure to represent the entire
reward design process (Fig1.b ours) and its history states. Each node in this tree corresponds to a
distinct decision strategy and its associated reward function, effectively leveraging the multi-stage
contextual reasoning capabilities of LLMs. To further improve the framework, we incorporate the
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm[5] to balance exploration and exploitation within the
decision space. Additionally, during the action expansion phase, we integrate a set of heuristic
action types to guide the LLM in generating reward functions with varying inclinations. This enables
RF-Agent to appropriately incorporate global decision information from other paths, ensuring the
full utilization and refinement of promising reward functions. Finally, environmental feedback and
self-verify metrics contribute to an overall evaluation, which forms a value prior for node selection,
thereby enhancing the search optimization capabilities of the entire RF-Agent framework.
2


--- Page 3 ---
We evaluate the proposed RF-Agent across 17 tasks in IsaacGym[31] and Bi-DexHands[9], covering
task types such as locomotion and robot arm/hand manipulation. The results indicate that our approach
outperforms the current state-of-the-art LLM-based reward function design methods, producing high-
performance and training-efficient reward functions. Such achievement demonstrates the potential of
leveraging language agents in combination with reasoning and search frameworks for reward function
design. Ablation studies further validate the effectiveness of our architecture.
2
Related Works
Reward Design with LLMs. Reward engineering has long been a challenge in reinforcement
learning[45, 26], with the common approach being manual creation of reward functions by experts[23,
4]. Inverse RL[1, 19, 65, 54, 13] and Preference-based RL[10, 22, 35] generate rewards through
learned models, but still require expert demonstrations and lack interpretability. Recent advancements
leverage LLMs, which exhibit strong world knowledge and logical reasoning[58, 14], in tasks like
code generation[8, 39] and robotic control planning[27, 44, 49]. Some works have extended this
to generating rewards for RL. For instance, [24] uses LLMs to generate binary rewards based on
user intent in negotiation games, and [12] calculates rewards based on the similarity between state
transitions and goals generated by LLMs. However, these methods suffer from excessive LLM calls
and inconsistencies. In contrast, L2R[59] and T2R[55] generate dense, interpretable reward functions,
while T2R directly offers plug-and-play reward function Python code, introducing a promising
paradigm for reward engineering. Recent works like Eureka[28] use greedy iterative approaches to
optimize reward functions, while Revolve[17] incorporates evolutionary algorithms to evolve new
rewards. However, both methods still face challenges with inefficient use of historical feedback and
low search efficiency. Our RF-Agent addresses these issues by introducing Monte Carlo Tree Search
to manage reward function design and optimization process from a decision-making perspective. It
fully utilizes LLMs’ contextual reasoning and historical feedback, thereby significantly enhancing
the performance of the designed reward function.
LLM-based Agent for Decision Making. The world knowledge and logical reasoning abilities
of LLMs enable them to serve as agents for solving decision-making problems[36, 49, 6]. For
example, LLMs have been used as high-level controllers in robotic planning [2], interacted with web
browsers to fulfill user needs [32], and tackled multi-step decisions in text-based adventure games
[43]. As tasks become more complex, methods such as Twosome[47] attempt to fine-tune LLM-based
agents to interact directly with the environment, but this often incurs high training costs. In contrast,
training-free approaches that utilize multi-step reasoning to leverage LLMs’ contextual learning have
gained popularity[53, 51, 58, 63, 38]. This “Test-time Compute” paradigm [25] enhances reasoning to
influence decision performance, with Chain-of-Thought (CoT)[53] being the most prominent method.
ReAct[58] incorporates CoT into decision-making, while self-refine[29] and Reflexion[42] add self-
feedback mechanisms. However, these linear methods neglect alternative decision paths. ToT[57]
breaks the decision process down using tree search, and methods like LATS[64] and RAP[16] further
introduce Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to enhance reasoning during decision-making. Inspired
by these approaches, we frame reward function design as a decision-making process, enhancing the
logical reasoning of LLM to better analyze historical feedback and generate high-quality reward
functions.
3
Problem Setting
In standard reinforcement learning (RL) [46] tasks, the problem is commonly modeled as a Markov
Decision Process (MDP), formalized by the tuple M = ⟨S, A, T, R, γ, ρ0⟩. In this formulation,
S denotes the state space and A represents the action space. γ is the discount factor, and ρ0 is
the initial state distribution. The environment’s dynamics are described by the transition function
T : S × A × S →[0, 1], which specifies the probability of transitioning to a new state given the
current state and action. The reward function R : S × A →R defines the immediate reward received
after taking an action in a given state.
We then introduce the Reward Design Problem (RDP)[45], given by the tuple P = {M, R, π, F},
where M = (S, A, T) is the environment world model including state space S, action space A,
and transition function T. R indicates the space of all reward functions where each R ∈R is a
reward function that maps a state-action pair to a scalar R : S × A →R. π : S →A indicates a
3


--- Page 4 ---
Figure 2: Illustration of our RF-Agent with (a) an exemplary reward function optimization path from
the tree, (b) total tree growth process, and (c) iteration based on MCTS. Please refer to the Appendix
B for prompts used in RF-Agent, mainly including initialization, expansion, and other process.
policy sampled form the policy space Π and F(·) : Π →R is the evaluation metric that measures
the real performance of π on a given task. Given a reward function R, the tuple (M, R) forms a
Markov Decision Process M. We additionally denote AM(·) : R →Π as a learning algorithm (e.g.,
PPO[41]) that outputs the policy π under the given MDP (M, R). The goal of the RDP is to output
a reward function R ∈R such that the policy π := AM(R) under the MDP (M, R) achieves the
highest evaluation score F(π).
In our Reward Function Design Problem (RFDP) setting, each R ∈R is specified as Python code
and given by a reward designer G : L →R according to the input string L as instruction. Here we
choose a pre-trained language model pθ(·) as the reward function designer G. After the policy π
completes the training of the fix number of steps under the given reward function R and learning
algorithm AM, we will receive feedback from the environment about this learning process. In
addition to the evaluation score F, a string lfeedback as language feedback will indicate the execution
situation. Finally, given a string ltask that specified the task, the objective of the RFDP is to output a
reward function code R ∼pθ(l) such that F(AM(R)) is maximized.
4
Method
In this section, we first explore the challenges associated with solving the LLM-based RFDP problem,
with a particular emphasis on the in-context learning capabilities of LLMs. We then introduce RF-
Agent, a framework that enhances the multi-stage contextual reasoning of LLMs by integrating Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS), thereby improving the efficiency of reward function search through better
utilization of historical feedback and evaluation metrics. Finally, we show an exemplary reward
function optimization process to illustrate the effectiveness of RF-Agent.
4


--- Page 5 ---
4.1
Rethinking LLM-Based Reward Function Design Problem
From a decision-making perspective, each reward function R generated by an LLM pθ(l) can be
viewed as an action a, with the corresponding input instruction l as the state s. This presents a key
challenge in RFDP: the state and action space defined on language is vast, while the evaluation
metrics F and feedback lfeedback provided by the environment after training are sparse and text-based.
As a result, using feedback to directly optimize pθ(·) via gradients is impractical and costly.
The in-context learning ability of LLMs offers a promising alternative to solve the above problem. In
many text-based tasks, LLMs act as language agents, leveraging varying state information as context
to iteratively make decisions[58, 64]. Based on the analysis, we identify that previous LLM-based
RFDP methods simply treat LLM contextual learning as a basic usage, failing to integrate it effectively
within the RFDP framework. These methods suffer from limited historical information utilization
and low search efficiency to generate high-performance reward functions. To address these issues, we
propose the RF-Agent framework, which fully exploits multi-stage contextual reasoning of LLM to
better utilize evaluation metrics and textual feedback in RFDP and improve the efficiency of reward
function search.
4.2
RF-Agent for Reward Function Design
Overview. Our RF-Agent is illustrated in Fig2. We structure the optimization to solve the LLM-based
RFDP as a Monte Carlo Tree Search process, with the root node nroot serving as a virtual node. The
remaining nodes each represent a reward function R with its training feedback. Based on classical
MCTS, we first generate an initial set of child nodes, after which the RFDP solution process consists
of four stages: selection, expansion, simulation, and backpropagation. These stages iterate until the
maximum iteration limit N is reached or early convergence. In the selection phase, we select the most
promising node based on an improved Upper Confidence Bound for Trees (UCT), which incorporates
evaluation metrics, self-verify metrics, and exploration count. During the expansion phase, RF-Agent
utilizes specific actions to guide the LLM in generating reward functions for child nodes, ensuring
effective exploration of the reward function space. Finally, in the simulation and backpropagation
phase, RF-Agent trains policies with generated reward functions and receives feedback to update the
node states for next selection. See Appendix G for the algorithm of RF-Agent.
Initialization. During the initialization phase, in addition to the brief task information ltask, RF-
Agent is only granted access to the observational part of the environment code, lobs, consistent
with previous approaches[28, 17]. We then provide both inputs to the LLM, leveraging its world
knowledge and zero-shot instruction-following capabilities to generate the reward function:
R ∼pθ(x, z) , z ∼pθ(x) , where x = [ltask, lobs, laction]
(1)
Here, laction refers to the instructions, and z represents the design thought in the reasoning process.
As shown in Fig.2.a, we prompt the LLM to first generate the design thought and then create the
specific reward function based on it, leveraging the advantages of logical reasoning[53].
The generated reward functions are then integrated with the environment to train the policy under
the learning algorithm AM. The process returns an evaluation metric F (e.g., task success rate) and
feedback lfeedback, which tracks the changes of key components in R during training as shown in
App. B.2. Then, the construction from the root node nroot to the first layer of child nodes is complete,
with each node state represented as s = [z, R, F, lfeedback]. The tree structure stores all of the node
states throughout the development, enabling their full utilization in the selection and expansion stages.
Selection to the Potential Node. In the selection stage, RF-Agent balances exploration and exploita-
tion to identify promising nodes as shown in Fig2.c.i and blue arrow in b, improving search efficiency
for promising reward functions. We complete this stage by sequentially selecting child nodes with
the highest UCT values until a leaf node. In the RFDP setting, each node maintains a value Q(s)
reflecting the score of its reward function and those of its descendants, along with a visit count N(s).
Additionally, RF-Agent introduces a self-verify score to improve selection. In complex control tasks,
early-generated reward functions often have low scores F, even nearly zero, resulting in the value
Q constructed based on F not being able to effectively reflect the potential of the node. Inspired by
the inherent evaluation capabilities of LLMs[42], we prompt the LLM to first analyze how an expert
completes the task, then output a score representing the likelihood of obtaining an expert-level policy
5


--- Page 6 ---
by training under the current R as shown in App. B.4. The final UCT calculation is as follows:
UCT(schild) = Q(schild) −Qmin
Qmax −Qmin
+ λ · (
s
2 · log(N(sparent) + 1)
N(schild)
+ σ(vself(schild)))
(2)
Here, we normalize the Q-value to enhance the robustness of the UCT calculation in different tasks.
The parameter λ controls the weight of the exploration term and linearly decays during the search to
promote early exploration while ensuring later convergence. vself represents the self-verify score
scaling with softmax σ and also decays with λ.
Expansion with LLM-based actions. In the expansion stage, RF-Agent incorporates historical
information to guide the LLM in generating new reward functions similar to Eq.1, but with different
laction. Previous methods[28] typically regenerate reward functions based on a single prompt and
limited historical data, thus cannot fully leverage the LLM in-context learning abilities and limit
effective exploration of the reward function space. When humans tackle problems, a complete
decision-making process usually involves various types of action, with different actions employed
under different states. Inspired by this, RF-Agent enhances exploration of the reward function space
by defining different action types to generate the reward functions with utilization of historical
information from the whole tree, as shown in Fig2.c.ii and orange arrow in b. See App. B.3 and I.1
for detailed prompts and effects. The action types including [am1, am2, ac3, ar4, ad5] are as follows:
⋄Mutation am1 & am2 : laction = lmutation(sparent). We introduce the mutation to represent local
modifications to the existing reward function. Given a parent node, the mutation action guides the
LLM to analyze the state of the parent node to optimize its reward function. Specifically, am1 guides
the LLM to modify the structure of the reward function, such as adding or removing a component,
while am2 focuses on adjusting the parameter weights within the reward function.
⋄Crossover ac3 : laction = lcrossover(sparent, snode∼{elites}). To enhance the utilization of global
historical information and accelerate the search process, we introduce a crossover operation to extract
information from high-performance nodes. RF-Agent maintains an elite set, dynamically storing
high-performance nodes from the tree based on evaluation scores F. We sample k nodes from the
elite set, weighted by their scores, and input them along with the parent node state to the LLM. Then
RF-Agent guides the LLM to analyze the feedback and extract useful reward components from these
nodes, combining them to form a new reward function.
⋄Path Reasoning ar4 : laction = lreason(sparent, sancestor). Each path from the root node to a leaf
node represents a unique reward function optimization trace. Similar to how humans recall past
experiences when solving new problems, RF-Agent leverages the knowledge in the reward function
optimization trace by reasoning. By truncating a k-length tree path from the current node to the root,
RF-Agent guides the LLM to reason the reward function optimization process, identifying the design
strengths and further generating a new reward function.
⋄Different Thought ad5 : laction = ldiffer(sparent, snode∼{tree}). To prevent premature conver-
gence during the search and enhance exploration of the reward function space, we introduce ad5 to
generate thoughts distinct from existing reward functions in the tree. RF-Agent randomly selects
nodes from different paths, combines them with the parent node, and guide the LLM to generate a
reward function structurally different from those in the selected nodes.
Simulation with Reward Function. In the simulation stage, we train the policy using the reward
function R of expanded nodes, as shown in Fig. 2.c.iii. Generally, R can be executed at once, then
a complete node s = [z, R, F, lfeedback] will be established. In complex environments, however,
early LLM-generated reward functions may encounter execution errors. In such cases, we extract the
traceback error and prompt the LLM to adjust R. This adjustment may cause the reward function ˆR
to diverge from the original design thought z, and even without adjustments, LLM hallucinations
can misalign R and z[20]. Since expansion actions are partly based on z, its accuracy is crucial. To
address this, RF-Agent introduces a simple yet effective thought alignment process: during expansion,
we generate z before R; in simulation, once the reward function compiles correctly, we regenerate a
more complete design idea znew based on R or ˆR. See Appendix B.4 and I.2 for details.
Backup with Evaluation. The purpose of the backpropagation stage is to update the value Q(s) and
visit count N(s), with generating a self-verify score vself , as shown in Fig2.c.iv and green arrow in
b. The process and motivation for generating the self-verify score are detailed in the expansion part,
6


--- Page 7 ---
while the update process for Q(s) and N(s) with update rate η is as follows:
Q(s) = (1 −η) · Q(s) + η ·
max
s′∈Child(s) Q(s′) ; N(s) =
X
s′∈Child(s)
N(s′)
(3)
4.3
Optimization of Reward Function in RF-Agent
As shown in Fig2.a, we illustrate an exemplary reward function optimization path for Swing Cup task.
During early exploration, RF-Agent tends to expand extensively to try different reward functions
such as using mutation actions to add the handle distance reward in R1
3. Later, RF-Agent focuses
on exploiting a few high-performance paths, such as continuing with R1
3 by crossover of elite nodes
to generate R0
4, which modifies parameters and incorporates angular velocity stabilization rewards.
Further optimization through path reasoning led to R1
5, which adds a linear velocity stabilization
reward and achieves high performance. See Appendix F.3 for more optimization examples.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experiment Environments
We test RF-Agent in two low-level control environments: IsaacGym[31] and Bi-DexHands[9],
encompassing 8 control agents and 17 diverse tasks. We first evaluates on 7 representative tasks
across locomotion and robot arm/hand manipulation from IsaacGym. To further test our method on
more complex tasks, we selected 10 tasks from the Bi-DexHands, involving dual-arm manipulation
with more intricate actions such as door closing, cup rotation, and bottle cap twisting. We divided
these 10 tasks into two groups, expert-easy and expert-hard, based on human reward function success
rates, enabling a comprehensive comparison of different LLM-based RFDP methods and human
performance. Task details are provided in the Appendix A.
5.2
Baselines
Human. These use dense reward functions from the benchmark, written by reinforcement learning
researchers who designed the tasks, representing expert-level reward engineering techniques.
Sparse. These are equivalent to using the evaluation score F, which directly reflects task completion
quality, as the reward. This reward is typically sparse or single-dimensional.
Eureka[28] automatically generates dense reward functions by combining task information and
environmental observations. More importantly, it generates rewards in batches and retains the best
one based on feedback, optimizing the reward function through a greedy iterative approach.
Revolve[17] maintains a population and applies evolutionary operations to modify the reward
functions with human-in-the-loop feedback. In our fully automated reward function design scenario,
we implemented the Revolve auto version, where feedback is also provided by the environment.
5.3
Training Setup
Policy Training. Following Eureka, all tasks are implemented with a well-tuned PPO[30] and default
hyperparameters provided by the benchmark. We tested the final reward functions through individual
training with 5 different seeds and measured the quality of the reward functions by reporting the
average maximum evaluation score achieved at each policy checkpoint.
Evaluation metrics. In the Bidex tasks, the success of a task is determined by a binary 0-1 signal,
thus the evaluation score directly based on the success rate. In the Isaac tasks, the metric depends on
its goal. For example, the goal of the Ant task is to move as quickly as possible, so the metric is set
as the forward speed. See appendix for detailed task descriptions and evaluation scores.
Method Implementation. Since Eureka, Revolve, and RF-Agent optimize reward functions through
sampling, we ensure a fair comparison by setting the same total sampling number of reward functions.
In IsaacGym, we set the total limit to 80 and use the GPT-4o-mini-0718 and GPT-4o-0806 models
for LLM implementation[21]. For the Bidex tasks, to evaluate the search performance of the method
itself under complex control tasks, we increase the upper limit to 512 and use only the GPT-4o-mini
7


--- Page 8 ---
Table 1: Quantitative evaluations on IsaacGym. Bold indicates the best results within the same
group. Avg norm score represents the average performance after calculating human normalized
scores (Method −Sparse)/(Human −Sparse) for each task.
task
locomotion
manipulation
Avg norm score
Ant
Anymal
Humanoid
Quadcopter
AllegroHand FrankaCabinet ShadowHand
Sparse
0.14±0.05
−2.05±0.24
3.01±1.99
−1.35±0.04
0.03±0.00
0.04±0.08
0.04±0.00
0
Human
6.75±0.30
−0.03±0.00
5.89±0.81
−0.08±0.03
11.41±1.62
0.11±0.07
8.56±1.23
1
LLM-based Reward Function Design with GPT-4o-mini
Eureka
4.87±1.34
−0.67±0.04
3.29±0.19
−0.07±0.02
13.87±3.04
0.01±0.00
10.81±1.06
0.63
Revolve
5.16±1.37
−0.80±0.09
3.12±0.33
−0.08±0.02
18.40±0.97
0.19±0.17
10.61±1.38
0.67
Ours
6.22±0.90 −0.01±0.00 5.91±1.21 −0.03±0.00
22.52±1.83
0.35±0.15
13.13±0.82
1.70
LLM-based Reward Function Design with GPT-4o
Eureka
5.77±0.85
−0.01±0.00
5.44±0.88
−0.03±0.02
22.55±0.99
0.52±0.21
12.27±0.91
2.00
Revolve
5.90±0.82
−0.01±0.00
4.87±0.23
−0.04±0.02
23.11±1.10
0.57±0.50
9.02±1.00
2.03
Ours
7.10±0.11 −0.01±0.00 6.37±0.32 −0.03±0.01
24.04±1.41
0.79±0.18
14.09±0.40
2.68
model. For Eureka and Revolve deployment details, please refer to the Appendix D. As for the
configuration of our RF-Agent, please refer to the Appendix C.
5.4
Experiment Results
Advantages of RF-Agent in multi-class control tasks. Tab.1 reports the absolute scores with
standard deviation and average normalized performance of different methods on each IsaacGym task.
We observe the following advantages:
(1) Our method outperforms other LLM-based reward function design methods across various tasks
and control types, demonstrating RF-Agent’s ability to leverage LLMs for reward function
generation, with this advantage unaffected by changes in the LLM backbone model.
(2) Even with a lightweight LLM backbone model 4o-mini, RF-Agent-generated reward functions
maintain superiority over human expert methods in nearly all tasks, while Eureka and Revolve
do not, particularly in locomotion tasks.
(3) With a more powerful LLM backbone 4o, almost all methods achieve better reward functions
within a limited number of training iterations. However, it is worth noting that Eureka experiences
oscillations on FrankaCabinet, indicating its inability to generate effective reward functions with
a lightweight model. Revolve fails to optimize performance on ShadowHand, while RF-Agent’s
performance improvement remains stable across all tasks.
These advantages highlight RF-Agent’s effective use of contextual reasoning and historical informa-
tion, enabling superior search efficiency for high-performance reward functions. Additionally, we
further modify two control tasks to validate the generalization capabilities of different methods in
out-of-distribution scenarios. Detailed results can be found in the AppendixF.4.
Figure 3: Success rates comparison with standard deviation upper bar on BiDex Expert-Easy/Hard.
8


--- Page 9 ---
High Performance of RF-Agent under complex manipulation. Fig.3 presents the results of
different methods on BidexHands, with tasks divided into Expert-Easy and Expert-Hard groups
based on human reward function outcomes for easier comparison. As shown, RF-Agent maintains a
clear performance advantage over both human experts and other LLM-based reward function design
methods, particularly on more complex tasks. Specifically, in the Expert-Easy tasks, where human
reward functions have high success rates and smaller objects (e.g., cubes, bottle caps) are manipulated,
Eureka and Revolve fail to reach half of human performance on tasks like GraspAndPlace, BottleCap,
and BlockStack. In contrast, RF-Agent matches or slightly exceeds human performance. In the
Expert-Hard tasks, where human success rates are lower and larger objects (e.g., kettles, doors) are
manipulated, LLM-based methods perform all well, with RF-Agent showing an obvious advantage in
most tasks. These results demonstrate that RF-Agent can design effective reward functions even in
more complex task environments.
Figure 4: Success rates with exploration steps under reward functions by different methods.
RF-Agent designs training-efficient reward functions. Fig.4 shows the training curves for different
reward functions on BiDexHands. Compared to Eureka and Revolve, Reward functions generated by
RF-Agent can efficiently train the policy to converge to a higher success rate range, illustrating the
high-quality reward function generation ability of RF-Agent. See Appendix F.1 for curves of others.
The powerful search improvement capabilities of RF-Agent. Fig.5 shows the average maximum
scores achieved across tasks as reward functions are iteratively generated, reflecting the actual
improvement of reward functions. In both Expert-Easy/Hard tasks, RF-Agent demonstrates high
optimization efficiency, significantly outperforming other methods. These results indicate that RF-
Agent effectively addresses the issue of limited reward function improvement in complex control.
We also provide the maximum reward achieved on each single task in Appendix F.2.
Figure 5: Reward function optimization performance with sampling counts.
5.5
Ablation Studies.
Figure 6: Ablations on the search method, action types, and reasoning component. We report the
percent difference in performance compared to the complete RF-Agent. The experiment is built on
Ant, FrankaCabinet, and AllegroHand to cover three task types with 4o-mini as the designer.
Search Method. To evaluate the impact of balancing exploration and exploitation on RF-Agent, we
replace the improved UCT-based selection process with common search methods such as DFS, BFS,
9


--- Page 10 ---
and Greedy. As shown in Fig 6.a, each method experienced significant performance loss on at least
one task, highlighting the importance of balance for search efficiency.
Action types. To evaluate the impact of the actions designed in the expansion stage, we relatively
replaced the different action types with a basic action, providing only the parent node state to generate
new reward functions. In Fig 6.b, each action type holds its value, and removing all actions leads to a
significant degradation. This demonstrates that the action design of RF-Agent effectively leverages
historical information and LLM in-context learning ability to generate high-quality reward functions.
Additionally, we further investigate the impact of different action combinations on the experimental
results. Detailed results and explanations can be found in the AppendixF.5.
Reasoning. To evaluate the impact of LLM reasoning paradigm on RF-Agent, we remove self-verify
and thought-align in Fig 6.c. The results show that the reasoning paradigm helps mitigate LLM
hallucinations and provides effective evaluations, benefiting RF-Agent in generation and search.
Furthermore, we also conduct an ablation study on the thought alignment component itself. Please
refer to the AppendixF.6.
6
Conclusion
This paper proposes RF-Agent, which automates the design of high-performance reward functions for
low-level control tasks by combining language agents and tree search. By treating the reward function
design process as a decision problem, RF-Agent integrates MCTS into the reward function design
process, utilizing the multi-stage contextual reasoning of LLMs to improve search efficiency and
leveraging diverse action design with historical information to make effective improvements to the
reward function. The results demonstrate that RF-Agent can effectively generate high-performance
reward functions for various and complex low-level control tasks, validating its effectiveness.
Limitation. Our RF-Agent, similar to Eureka and Revolve, belongs to the category of reward function
design methods that utilize feedback and LLM. These methods are rather computationally expensive
and time-consuming due to requiring multiple interactions with the LLM and repeated policy training.
While RF-Agent achieves better generation results with relatively smaller LLM models, it does not
reduce the need for multiple RL training iterations. Our future work will focus on reducing the
number of RL training cycles while maintaining the effective iterative improvement.
10


--- Page 11 ---
References
[1] Pieter Abbeel and Andrew Y Ng. Apprenticeship learning via inverse reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the twenty-first international conference on Machine learning, page 1, 2004.
[2] Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David,
Chelsea Finn, Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, et al. Do as i can, not
as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.01691, 2022.
[3] OpenAI: Marcin Andrychowicz, Bowen Baker, Maciek Chociej, Rafal Jozefowicz, Bob Mc-
Grew, Jakub Pachocki, Arthur Petron, Matthias Plappert, Glenn Powell, Alex Ray, et al. Learning
dexterous in-hand manipulation. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 39(1):3–20,
2020.
[4] Serena Booth, W Bradley Knox, Julie Shah, Scott Niekum, Peter Stone, and Alessandro Allievi.
The perils of trial-and-error reward design: misdesign through overfitting and invalid task
specifications. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 37,
pages 5920–5929, 2023.
[5] Cameron B Browne, Edward Powley, Daniel Whitehouse, Simon M Lucas, Peter I Cowling,
Philipp Rohlfshagen, Stephen Tavener, Diego Perez, Spyridon Samothrakis, and Simon Colton.
A survey of monte carlo tree search methods. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence
and AI in games, 4(1):1–43, 2012.
[6] Thomas Carta, Clément Romac, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Lamprier, Olivier Sigaud, and Pierre-
Yves Oudeyer. Grounding large language models in interactive environments with online
reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 3676–3713.
PMLR, 2023.
[7] Guillaume MJ B Chaslot, Mark HM Winands, and H Jaap van Den Herik. Parallel monte-carlo
tree search. In Computers and Games: 6th International Conference, CG 2008, Beijing, China,
September 29-October 1, 2008. Proceedings 6, pages 60–71. Springer, 2008.
[8] Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
[9] Yuanpei Chen, Tianhao Wu, Shengjie Wang, Xidong Feng, Jiechuan Jiang, Zongqing Lu,
Stephen McAleer, Hao Dong, Song-Chun Zhu, and Yaodong Yang. Towards human-level
bimanual dexterous manipulation with reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:5150–5163, 2022.
[10] Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Deep
reinforcement learning from human preferences. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 30, 2017.
[11] Kenneth De Jong. Evolutionary computation: a unified approach. In Proceedings of the Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion, pages 373–388, 2017.
[12] Yuqing Du, Olivia Watkins, Zihan Wang, Cédric Colas, Trevor Darrell, Pieter Abbeel, Abhishek
Gupta, and Jacob Andreas. Guiding pretraining in reinforcement learning with large language
models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8657–8677. PMLR, 2023.
[13] Chelsea Finn, Sergey Levine, and Pieter Abbeel. Guided cost learning: Deep inverse optimal
control via policy optimization. In International conference on machine learning, pages 49–58.
PMLR, 2016.
[14] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
11


--- Page 12 ---
[15] Ankur Handa, Arthur Allshire, Viktor Makoviychuk, Aleksei Petrenko, Ritvik Singh, Jingzhou
Liu, Denys Makoviichuk, Karl Van Wyk, Alexander Zhurkevich, Balakumar Sundaralingam,
et al. Dextreme: Transfer of agile in-hand manipulation from simulation to reality. In 2023
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 5977–5984. IEEE,
2023.
[16] Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Jiahua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Zhe Wang, and Zhit-
ing Hu.
Reasoning with language model is planning with world model.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14992, 2023.
[17] RISHI HAZRA, Alkis Sygkounas, Andreas Persson, Amy Loutfi, and Pedro Zuidberg Dos
Martires. REvolve: Reward evolution with large language models using human feedback. In
The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[18] Zen Kit Heng, Zimeng Zhao, Tianhao Wu, Yuanfei Wang, Mingdong Wu, Yangang Wang, and
Hao Dong. Boosting universal llm reward design through heuristic reward observation space
evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.07596, 2025.
[19] Jonathan Ho and Stefano Ermon. Generative adversarial imitation learning. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 29, 2016.
[20] Lei Huang, Weijiang Yu, Weitao Ma, Weihong Zhong, Zhangyin Feng, Haotian Wang, Qiang-
long Chen, Weihua Peng, Xiaocheng Feng, Bing Qin, et al. A survey on hallucination in large
language models: Principles, taxonomy, challenges, and open questions. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 43(2):1–55, 2025.
[21] Aaron Hurst, Adam Lerer, Adam P Goucher, Adam Perelman, Aditya Ramesh, Aidan Clark,
AJ Ostrow, Akila Welihinda, Alan Hayes, Alec Radford, et al. Gpt-4o system card. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[22] Borja Ibarz, Jan Leike, Tobias Pohlen, Geoffrey Irving, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei. Reward
learning from human preferences and demonstrations in atari. Advances in neural information
processing systems, 31, 2018.
[23] W Bradley Knox, Alessandro Allievi, Holger Banzhaf, Felix Schmitt, and Peter Stone. Reward
(mis) design for autonomous driving. Artificial Intelligence, 316:103829, 2023.
[24] Minae Kwon, Sang Michael Xie, Kalesha Bullard, and Dorsa Sadigh. Reward design with
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00001, 2023.
[25] Xinzhe Li. A survey on llm test-time compute via search: Tasks, llm profiling, search algorithms,
and relevant frameworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10069, 2025.
[26] Yuxi Li. Deep reinforcement learning: An overview. arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.07274, 2017.
[27] Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence,
and Andy Zeng. Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In 2023
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 9493–9500. IEEE,
2023.
[28] Yecheng Jason Ma, William Liang, Guanzhi Wang, De-An Huang, Osbert Bastani, Dinesh
Jayaraman, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Eureka: Human-level reward design
via coding large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12931, 2023.
[29] Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri
Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, et al. Self-refine: Iterative refinement
with self-feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:46534–46594,
2023.
[30] Denys Makoviichuk and Viktor Makoviychuk. rl-games: A high-performance framework for
reinforcement learning. https://github.com/Denys88/rl_games, May 2021.
12


--- Page 13 ---
[31] Viktor Makoviychuk, Lukasz Wawrzyniak, Yunrong Guo, Michelle Lu, Kier Storey, Miles
Macklin, David Hoeller, Nikita Rudin, Arthur Allshire, Ankur Handa, et al. Isaac gym: High
performance gpu-based physics simulation for robot learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.10470,
2021.
[32] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo-
pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332, 2021.
[33] Humza Naveed, Asad Ullah Khan, Shi Qiu, Muhammad Saqib, Saeed Anwar, Muhammad
Usman, Naveed Akhtar, Nick Barnes, and Ajmal Mian. A comprehensive overview of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06435, 2023.
[34] Andrew Y Ng, Daishi Harada, and Stuart Russell. Policy invariance under reward transforma-
tions: Theory and application to reward shaping. In Icml, volume 99, pages 278–287. Citeseer,
1999.
[35] Jongjin Park, Younggyo Seo, Jinwoo Shin, Honglak Lee, Pieter Abbeel, and Kimin Lee. Surf:
Semi-supervised reward learning with data augmentation for feedback-efficient preference-based
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.10050, 2022.
[36] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and
Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceed-
ings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology, pages 1–22,
2023.
[37] Diego Perez-Liebana, Spyridon Samothrakis, Julian Togelius, Tom Schaul, Simon M Lucas,
Adrien Couëtoux, Jerry Lee, Chong-U Lim, and Tommy Thompson. The 2014 general video
game playing competition. IEEE Transactions on Computational Intelligence and AI in Games,
8(3):229–243, 2015.
[38] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan Ma, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual
reasoning makes smaller llms stronger problem-solvers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06195,
2024.
[39] Baptiste Roziere, Jonas Gehring, Fabian Gloeckle, Sten Sootla, Itai Gat, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan,
Yossi Adi, Jingyu Liu, Romain Sauvestre, Tal Remez, et al. Code llama: Open foundation
models for code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.12950, 2023.
[40] Nikita Rudin, David Hoeller, Marko Bjelonic, and Marco Hutter. Advanced skills by learning
locomotion and local navigation end-to-end. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 2497–2503. IEEE, 2022.
[41] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[42] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
[43] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and
Matthew Hausknecht. Alfworld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.03768, 2020.
[44] Ishika Singh, Valts Blukis, Arsalan Mousavian, Ankit Goyal, Danfei Xu, Jonathan Tremblay,
Dieter Fox, Jesse Thomason, and Animesh Garg. Progprompt: Generating situated robot task
plans using large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 11523–11530. IEEE, 2023.
[45] Satinder Singh, Richard L Lewis, and Andrew G Barto. Where do rewards come from. In
Proceedings of the annual conference of the cognitive science society, pages 2601–2606.
Cognitive Science Society, 2009.
[46] Richard S Sutton, Andrew G Barto, et al. Reinforcement learning: An introduction, volume 1.
MIT press Cambridge, 1998.
13


--- Page 14 ---
[47] Weihao Tan, Wentao Zhang, Shanqi Liu, Longtao Zheng, Xinrun Wang, and Bo An. True
knowledge comes from practice: Aligning llms with embodied environments via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14151, 2024.
[48] Andrew Vince. A framework for the greedy algorithm. Discrete Applied Mathematics, 121(1-
3):247–260, 2002.
[49] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
[50] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen,
Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous
agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345, 2024.
[51] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2022.
[52] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682, 2022.
[53] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le,
Denny Zhou, et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[54] Markus Wulfmeier, Peter Ondruska, and Ingmar Posner. Maximum entropy deep inverse
reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1507.04888, 2015.
[55] Tianbao Xie, Siheng Zhao, Chen Henry Wu, Yitao Liu, Qian Luo, Victor Zhong, Yanchao Yang,
and Tao Yu. Text2reward: Automated dense reward function generation for reinforcement
learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024 (07/05/2024-
11/05/2024, Vienna, Austria), 2024.
[56] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15115, 2024.
[57] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik
Narasimhan. Tree of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 36:11809–11822, 2023.
[58] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan
Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[59] Wenhao Yu, Nimrod Gileadi, Chuyuan Fu, Sean Kirmani, Kuang-Huei Lee, Montse Gonzalez
Arenas, Hao-Tien Lewis Chiang, Tom Erez, Leonard Hasenclever, Jan Humplik, et al. Language
to rewards for robotic skill synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08647, 2023.
[60] Daoguang Zan, Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Dianjie Lu, Bingchao Wu, Bei Guan, Yongji Wang,
and Jian-Guang Lou.
Large language models meet nl2code: A survey.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.09420, 2022.
[61] Yuwei Zeng, Yao Mu, and Lin Shao. Learning reward for robot skills using large language
models via self-alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07162, 2024.
[62] Chen Bo Calvin Zhang, Zhang-Wei Hong, Aldo Pacchiano, and Pulkit Agrawal. Orso: Ac-
celerating reward design via online reward selection and policy optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.13837, 2024.
[63] Zirui Zhao, Wee Sun Lee, and David Hsu. Large language models as commonsense knowledge
for large-scale task planning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2023.
14


--- Page 15 ---
[64] Andy Zhou, Kai Yan, Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman, Haohan Wang, and Yu-Xiong Wang.
Language agent tree search unifies reasoning acting and planning in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.04406, 2023.
[65] Brian D Ziebart, Andrew L Maas, J Andrew Bagnell, Anind K Dey, et al. Maximum entropy
inverse reinforcement learning. In Aaai, volume 8, pages 1433–1438. Chicago, IL, USA, 2008.
15


--- Page 16 ---
A
Environments
In this section,we provide environment details. For each environment,we list its observation and
action dimensions,the verbatim task description,and the task evaluation score function F.
IsaacGym. The general objective of the IsaacGym[31] environments is to simulate various robotic
tasks in a controlled virtual setting. These tasks range from balancing and controlling movements to
interacting with objects. Each environment has specific goals such as making an ant run as fast as
possible, having a humanoid perform tasks with agility, or controlling a hand to spin an object to a
target orientation. The environments involve challenges in movement, manipulation, and stability,
with each task requiring precise control of the robot or agent, measured by a corresponding evaluation
score function that encourages the agent to optimize its performance.
Figure 7: Examples of the IsaacGym environment.
IsaacGym Environments
Environment (obs dim, action dim)
Task description
Task evaluation score function F
Ant (60,8)
To make the ant run forward as fast as possible
cur_dist - prev_dist
Anymal (48, 12)
To make the quadruped follow randomly chosen x, y, and yaw target velocities
-(linvel_error + angvel_error)
Humanoid (108, 21)
To make the humanoid run as fast as possible
cur_dist - prev_dist
Quadcopter (21, 12)
To make the quadcopter reach and hover near a fixed position
-cur_dist
AllegroHand (88, 16)
To make the hand spin the object to a target orientation
16


--- Page 17 ---
number of consecutive successes where current success is 1[rot_dist <
0.1]
FrankaCabinet (23, 9)
To open the cabinet door
1[cabinet_pos > 0.39]
ShadowHand (211, 20)
To make the shadow hand spin the object to a target orientation
number of consecutive successes where current success is 1[rot_dist <
0.1]
Bi-DexHands. The Bi-DexHands[9] environment is designed to simulate dexterous manipulation
tasks involving two hands. The overall goal of the Bi-DexHand environment is to enable the agent
to perform various tasks that require coordinated manipulation using both hands. These tasks
are modeled to simulate real-world dexterous activities, such as passing objects between hands,
interacting with everyday tools, and performing precise actions requiring dual-hand cooperation.
Tasks in Bi-DexHands environment are designed to push the boundaries of agent control, testing their
ability to handle complex multi-step processes, balance, and precision, all of which are crucial in
dexterous manipulation.
Figure 8: Examples of the Bi-DexHands environment.
Bi-DexHands Environments
Environment (obs dim, action dim)
Task description
Task evaluation score function F
Over (398, 40)
This class corresponds to the HandOver task. This environment consists of two shadow hands
with palms facing up, opposite each other, and an object that needs to be passed. In the
beginning, the object will fall randomly in the area of the shadow hand on the right side. Then
the hand holds the object and passes the object to the other hand. Note that the base of the
hand is fixed. More importantly, the hand which holds the object initially can not directly
touch the target, nor can it directly roll the object to the other hand, so the object must be
thrown up and stays in the air in the process
1[dist < 0.03]
GraspAndPlace (425, 52)
This class corresponds to the GraspAndPlace task. This environment consists of dual-hands,
an object and a bucket that requires us to pick up the object and put it into the bucket
1[|block- bucket| < 0.2]
17


--- Page 18 ---
BottleCap (420, 52)
This class corresponds to the Bottle Cap task. This environment involves two hands and a
bottle, we need to hold the bottle with one hand and open the bottle cap with the other hand.
This skill requires the cooperation of two hands to ensure that the cap does not fall
1[dist > 0.03]
CatchUnderarm (422, 52)
This class corresponds to the Catch Underarm task. In this task, two shadow hands with palms
facing upwards are controlled to pass an object from one palm to the other. What makes it
more difficult than the Hand over task is that the hands’ translation and rotation degrees of
freedom are no longer frozen but are added into the action space
1[dist < 0.03]
BlockStack (428, 52)
This class corresponds to the Block Stack task. This environment involves dual hands and two
blocks, and we need to stack the block as a tower
1[goal_dist_1 < 0.07 and goal_dist_2 < 0.07 and 50 * (0.05- z_dist_1)
> 1]
SwingCup (417, 52)
This class corresponds to the SwingCup task. This environment involves two hands and a dual
handle cup, we need to use two hands to hold and swing the cup together
1[rot_dist < 0.785]
LiftUnderarm (417, 52)
This class corresponds to the LiftUnderarm task. This environment requires grasping the pot
handle with two hands and lifting the pot to the designated position. This environment is
designed to simulate the scene of lift in daily life and is a practical skill
1[dist < 0.05]
Kettle (417, 52)
This class corresponds to the PourWater task. This environment involves two hands, a kettle,
and a bucket, we need to hold the kettle with one hand and the bucket with the other hand, and
pour the water from the kettle into the bucket. In the practice task in Isaac Gym, we use many
small balls to simulate the water
1[|bucket- kettle_spout| < 0.05]
CatchAbreast (422, 52)
This class corresponds to the Catch Abreast task. This environment consists of two shadow
hands placed side by side in the same direction and an object that needs to be passed. Compared
with the previous environment which is more like passing objects between the hands of two
people, this environment is designed to simulate the two hands of the same person passing
objects, so different catch techniques are also required and require more hand translation and
rotation techniques
1[dist] < 0.03
DoorCloseOutward (417, 52)
This class corresponds to the DoorCloseOutward task. This environment also require a closed
door to be opened and the door can only be pushed inward or initially open outward, but
because they can’t complete the task by simply pushing, which need to catch the handle by
hand and then open or close it, so it is relatively difficult
1[door_handle_dist < 0.5]
B
RF-Agent Details
B.1
Basic Prompts.
Here, we present the fundamental prompts used across all LLM-based reward function design
methods, including the system prompt, environment information prompt, code format tip prompt.
The system prompt is as follows:
18


--- Page 19 ---
System Prompt
You are a reward engineer trying to write reward functions to solve reinforcement learning
tasks as effective as possible.
Your goal is to write a reward function for the environment that will help the agent learn the
task described in text.
Your reward function should use useful variables from the environment as inputs.
As an example, the reward function signature can be:
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[
torch.Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
...
return
reward , {}
Since the reward function will be decorated with @torch.jit.script, please make sure that the
code is compatible with TorchScript (e.g., use torch tensor instead of numpy array).
Make sure any new tensor or variable you introduce is on the same device as the input tensors.
The environment information prompt with task IsaacGym-Ant is as follows:
Environment information Prompt with Task Ant
The task is: Ant. You need to make the ant run forward as fast as possible.
The Python environment is:
class
Ant(VecTask):
"""Rest of the
environment
definition
omitted."""
def
compute_observations (self):
self.gym. refresh_dof_state_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_actor_root_state_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_force_sensor_tensor (self.sim)
self.obs_buf [:], self. potentials [:], self. prev_potentials [:], self.up_vec
[:], self.heading_vec [:] = compute_ant_observations (
self.obs_buf , self.root_states , self.targets , self.potentials ,
self.inv_start_rot , self.dof_pos , self.dof_vel ,
self.dof_limits_lower , self.dof_limits_upper , self.dof_vel_scale ,
self.vec_sensor_tensor , self.actions , self.dt , self.
contact_force_scale ,
self.basis_vec0 , self.basis_vec1 , self. up_axis_idx )
def
compute_ant_observations (obs_buf , root_states , targets , potentials ,
inv_start_rot , dof_pos , dof_vel ,
dof_limits_lower , dof_limits_upper , dof_vel_scale ,
sensor_force_torques , actions , dt ,
contact_force_scale ,
basis_vec0 , basis_vec1 , up_axis_idx ):
# type: (Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor ,
Tensor , float , Tensor , Tensor , float , float , Tensor , Tensor , int) ->
Tuple[Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor , Tensor]
torso_position = root_states [:, 0:3]
torso_rotation = root_states [:, 3:7]
velocity = root_states [:, 7:10]
ang_velocity = root_states [:, 10:13]
to_target = targets
- torso_position
to_target [:, 2] = 0.0
prev_potentials_new = potentials.clone ()
potentials = -torch.norm(to_target , p=2, dim =-1) / dt
torso_quat , up_proj , heading_proj , up_vec , heading_vec =
compute_heading_and_up (
torso_rotation , inv_start_rot , to_target , basis_vec0 , basis_vec1 , 2)
19


--- Page 20 ---
vel_loc , angvel_loc , roll , pitch , yaw , angle_to_target = compute_rot (
torso_quat , velocity , ang_velocity , targets , torso_position )
dof_pos_scaled = unscale(dof_pos , dof_limits_lower , dof_limits_upper )
obs = torch.cat(( torso_position [:, up_axis_idx ]. view(-1, 1), vel_loc ,
angvel_loc ,
yaw.unsqueeze (-1), roll.unsqueeze (-1), angle_to_target .
unsqueeze (-1),
up_proj.unsqueeze (-1), heading_proj .unsqueeze (-1),
dof_pos_scaled ,
dof_vel * dof_vel_scale , sensor_force_torques .view(-1, 24) *
contact_force_scale ,
actions), dim =-1)
return obs , potentials , prev_potentials_new , up_vec , heading_vec
The environment information prompt with task BidexHands-Over is as follows:
Environment information Prompt with Task Bidex-Over
The task is: This class corresponds to the HandOver task. This environment consists
of two shadow hands with palms facing up, opposite each other, and an object that
needs to be passed. In the beginning, the object will fall randomly in the area of the
shadow hand on the right side. Then the hand holds the object and passes the object
to the other hand. Note that the base of the hand is fixed. More importantly, the hand
which holds the object initially can not directly touch the target, nor can it directly roll
the object to the other hand, so the object must be thrown up and stays in the air in the process.
The Python environment is:
class
ShadowHandOver (VecTask):
"""Rest of the
environment
definition
omitted."""
def
compute_observations (self):
self.gym. refresh_dof_state_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_actor_root_state_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_rigid_body_state_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_force_sensor_tensor (self.sim)
self.gym. refresh_dof_force_tensor (self.sim)
if self.obs_type
in [" point_cloud "]:
self.gym. render_all_camera_sensors (self.sim)
self.gym. start_access_image_tensors (self.sim)
self. object_pose = self. root_state_tensor [self.object_indices , 0:7]
self.object_pos = self. root_state_tensor [self.object_indices , 0:3]
self.object_rot = self. root_state_tensor [self.object_indices , 3:7]
self. object_linvel = self. root_state_tensor [self.object_indices , 7:10]
self. object_angvel = self. root_state_tensor [self.object_indices , 10:13]
self.goal_pose = self. goal_states [:, 0:7]
self.goal_pos = self. goal_states [:, 0:3]
self.goal_rot = self. goal_states [:, 3:7]
self. fingertip_state = self. rigid_body_states [:, self. fingertip_handles
][:, :, 0:13]
self. fingertip_pos = self. rigid_body_states [:, self. fingertip_handles ][:,
:, 0:3]
self. fingertip_another_state = self. rigid_body_states [:, self.
fingertip_another_handles ][:, :, 0:13]
self. fingertip_another_pos = self. rigid_body_states [:, self.
fingertip_another_handles ][:, :, 0:3]
if self.obs_type
== "full_state":
self. compute_full_state ()
elif
self.obs_type
== " point_cloud ":
self. compute_point_cloud_observation ()
if self. asymmetric_obs :
self. compute_full_state (True)
20


--- Page 21 ---
The code format tip prompt is as follows:
Code format tip Prompt
Some helpful tips for writing the reward function code:
(1) You may find it helpful to normalize to a fixed reward range like-1,1 or 0,1 by
applying transformations like torch.exp() to the overall reward or its reward components in
order to have reasonable values for the optimization procedure. This does not mean that
you should bound the rewards as wrong bounds might hinder the learning algorithm from
achieving the optimal policy.
(2) If you choose to transform a reward component, then you must also introduce a
temperature parameter inside the transformation function; this parameter must be a named
variable in the reward function and it must not be an input variable. Each transformed reward
component should have its own temperature variable.
(3) If the task has a goal state, it might be helpful to add a bonus to the reward function
if the agent achieves the goal (up to some tolerance).
(4) Make sure the type of each input variable is correctly specified; a float input variable
should not be specified as torch.Tensor.
(5) Make sure you don’t give contradictory reward components.
(6) Most importantly, the reward code’s input variables must contain only attributes of
the provided environment class definition (namely, variables that have prefix self.). Under no
circumstance can you introduce new input variables.
B.2
Feedback Example and Analysis Prompts.
Here we use the Ant task as an example to show the specific content of feedback. This feedback is
inherited from Eureka[28] and tracks the changes in a set of key variables during the training process,
including the key components of the designed reward function, task scores and episode length.
Feedback example on task Ant
reward_forward_velocity:
′ −0.02′,′ 1.07′,′ 1.47′,′ 1.90′,′ 2.29′,′ 2.62′,′ 3.00′,′ 3.48′,′ 3.54′,′ 3.67′
, Max: 3.73, Mean: 2.48, Min: -0.02
reward_to_target:
′0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′,′ 0.00′
, Max: 0.00, Mean: 0.00, Min: 0.00
task_score:
′ −0.02′,′ 1.08′,′ 1.48′,′ 1.90′,′ 2.29′,′ 2.60′,′ 2.97′,′ 3.45′,′ 3.49′,′ 3.62′
, Max: 3.67, Mean: 2.46, Min: -0.02
episode_lengths:
′59.19′,′ 180.39′,′ 285.69′,′ 425.37′,′ 519.28′,′ 578.28′,′ 634.42′,′ 644.16′,′ 633.70′,′ 649.94′
, Max: 717.00, Mean: 494.84, Min: 59.19
Based on a given feedback, we provide some general tips for analyzing feedback.
Trained results analysis tip
(1) ’task_score’ reflects the agent’s actual task score or success rate after training under the
current reward function.
21


--- Page 22 ---
(2) If the values for a certain reward component are near identical throughout, then this means
RL is not able to optimize this component as it is written.
(3) If some reward components’ magnitude is significantly larger or smaller, its value may
not conducive to policy learning.
The above feedback mechanism will be used in the implementation of Revolve to achieve automatic
feedback of revolve in the experimental environment.
B.3
Prompts for RF-Agent Actions.
In RF-Agent, five different action types are set in the expansion stage, as well as the initial initialization
action, as shown below:
The initialization prompt requires LLM to form a design idea based on the given environmental
information and task description, and generate a reward function based on this idea.
Initialization prompt
First, describe the design idea and main steps of your reward function in one sentence. The
description must be inside a brace outside the code implementation.
Next, write a reward function based on this idea. The output of the reward function should
consist of two items:
(1) the total reward,
(2) a dictionary of each individual reward component.
The code output should be formatted as a python code string: "“‘python ... “‘".
Do not give additional explanations.
The mutation am1 prompt requires the LLM to locally optimize its reward function based on the
feedback information of the parent node. In particular, am1 guides the LLM to modify the reward
function composition mechanism.
Mutation am1 prompt
I have one reward function with its design idea and code as follows.
Design Idea: {design_idea}
Code: {reward_function}
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of
the individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
minimum values encountered:
{trained_results}
Analysis tips for trained results:
{trained_result_analysis_tip}
Please create a new reward function that has a different form but can be a modified version
of the provided reward function. The new reward function should have a higher task score.
Try to introduce more novel idea and add or remove some basic reward components from the
environment.
The mutation am2 prompt requires the LLM to locally optimize its reward function based on the
feedback information of the parent node. In particular, am2 guides the LLM to adjust the parameter
weights within the reward function.
22


--- Page 23 ---
Mutation am2 prompt
I have one reward function with its design idea and code as follows.
Design Idea: {design_idea}
Code: {reward_function}
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of
the individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
minimum values encountered:
{trained_results}
Analysis tips for trained results:
{trained_result_analysis_tip}
Please identify the reward function parameters and create a new reward function that has
a different parameter settings compared to the provided version. The new reward function
should have a higher task score.
The crossover ac3 prompt uses parent node information and nodes information in the elite set
to generate a new reward function by combining the reward component. After sorting the scores
corresponding to nodes in the set, the sampling of elite sets is randomly selected using the reciprocal
of sorting as the weight.
Crossover ac3 prompt
I have {nums} existing reward functions with their design ideas and codes as follows.
{reward_func_group}
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of
the individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
minimum values encountered:
{trained_results}
Analysis tips for trained results:
{trained_result_analysis_tip}
Please create a new reward function inspired by those reward functions. Try to list the
common ideas in those high score reward functions and combine high-performing reward
components from different reward functions based on the data tracked. The new reward
function should have a higher task score.
The path reasoning ar4 prompt uses parent node information and its ancestor information to
generate a new reward function by reasoning this optimization path.
Path Reasoning ar4 prompt
I have {nums} existing reward functions related to optimization in sequence with their
design ideas and codes as follows.
{reward_func_group}
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of
the individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
23


--- Page 24 ---
success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
minimum values encountered:
{trained_results}
Analysis tips for trained results:
{trained_result_analysis_tip}
Please create a new reward function inspired by all the above reward functions. Try to reason
the optimization path and list some ideas in those reward functions that are clearly helpful to
a better improvement. The new reward function should have a higher task score than any of
them.
The different thought ad5 prompt uses parent node information and random nodes information
from the tree to generate a new reward function by requiring to design a new reward function with
different structures from these nodes.
Different Thought ad5 prompt
I have {nums} existing reward functions with their design ideas and codes as follows.
{reward_func_group}
We trained a RL policy using the provided reward function code and tracked the values of
the individual components in the reward function as well as global policy metrics such as
success rates and episode lengths after every {epoch_freq} epochs and the maximum, mean,
minimum values encountered:
{trained_results}
Analysis tips for trained results:
{trained_result_analysis_tip}
Please create a new reward function that has a totally different form from the given algorithms.
Try generating codes with different structures, flows or algorithms. Remember the new reward
function should have a higher task score.
B.4
Prompts for Thought-align and Self-verify.
Thought-align. After the reward function is successfully executed, the RF-Agent resummaries
the reward function to eliminate the inconsistency between the original design idea and the reward
function expression caused by hallucinations or modifications.
Thought-align prompt
Following is the Design Idea of a reward function for the problem and the code for
implementing the reward function.
Design Idea: {design_idea}
Code: {reward_function}
The content of the Design Idea cannot fully represent what the reward function has done
informative. So, now you should re-describe the reward function using less than 4 sentences.
Hint: You should reference the given Design Idea and highlight the most critical design ideas
of the code. You can analyze the code to describe which reward components it contains,
which observations they are calculated based on, what are the parameters and structure of the
reward coupling process, and what special ideas are used.
24


--- Page 25 ---
Self-verify. In order to identify potential functions faster in the early selection stage, RF-Agent
appropriately added a self-verify score from the LLM as part of the selection criteria, and the impact
of this score will gradually weaken in the later stage.
Self-verify prompt
Be sure to remember the definition of the task. Additionally, I have an existing reward
function with its design idea and code as follows.
Design Idea: {design_idea}
Code: {reward_function}
Now, based on the task definition, imagine how an expert-level strategy completes the task,
describe the execution planning and motion process of the expert strategy for the task, and
then evaluate the given reward functions according to your imagined description process,
and judge the similarity of the given reward function with the imagined process, with the
numerical value limited to [-1,1].
Finally, return the value enclosed in square brackets, such as [0.5].
C
Training Details
Hyper-parameters. As shown in the paper, we deploy our RF-Agent with leaf node parallel
scheme[7] in the expansion stage, we set this parallel number to 8. Thus, we configure the actions as
[2, 2, 2, 1, 1] per expansion to make the ratio of nodes that utilize local and global information at 1 : 1.
The initial value of λ is set to 0.4 across all tasks, vself is constrained within the range of [−1, 1] in
order to have a more obvious distinction after softmax, k is randomly sampled from [2, 4] to control
the number of nodes sampled in ac3, ar4 and ad5, and η is set to 0.7.
Deployment resources. We deployed RF-Agent on a 4 Nvidia Geforce RTX3090 cards with 128
core CPUs and 256GiB memory server. On issacgym, the average time consumed by each different
task was 9 hours; on Bi-DexHands, the average time consumed by each task was 40 hours.
Other evaluation details. During the evaluation, we tested on 5 seeds different from those during
the search. The number of training steps in the environment was consistent with the default training
steps in the IssacGym and Bi-DexHands environments. For example, the uniform number of steps on
Bi-DexHands is 1e8.
D
Baseline Details
Eureka. Eureka[28] has been tested on IsaacGym and Bi-Dexhands using the GPT-4 model as the
reward function generator. Given the high cost of GPT-4 and its reduced relevance as a mainstream
choice, we used 4o and 4o-mini models for our experiments. Therefore, we also re-conducted
experiments with Eureka using these two models. The parameter configuration for Eureka remains
consistent with its default settings, maintaining 16 samples per iteration.
Revolve. Since Revolve[17] has not been previously tested on IsaacGym and Bi-Dexhands, we
re-implemented the experiments. We retained its algorithm and evolutionary operation prompts, with
the main changes being in the system prompt for the environment and replacing feedback information
with automated environment feedback. These two types of prompts are consistent with those used in
Eureka and RF-Agent. The parameter configuration for Revolve remains consistent with its default
settings, maintaining 16 samples per iteration during population evolution.
E
Cost Comparison
Training resource consumption. Eureka, Revolve and Ours RF-Agent are using the same total
number of reward functions to training the policy, thus the training cost is almost the same.
25


--- Page 26 ---
Storage Usage. RF-Agent needs to store historical information of the entire tree, Revolve needs to
store historical information of the population, and Eureka hardly needs to store historical information,
but these additional historical information is composed of strings, whose order of magnitude is at the
MB level.
Token consumption. The main consumption of each method is concentrated on the process of
generating reward functions in combination with environmental information and instructions. RF-
Agent also has thought-align and self-verify processes compared to Eureka and Revolve, but the
token used in these two processes is much lower than the reward function generation process.
We tallied the input_token (prompt), output_token (completion), and the actual monetary cost for RF-
Agent, Eureka, and Revolve on the Ant and Humanoid tasks. It is important to note that input_tokens
can be processed in a single, efficient forward pass (a ’prefill’), whereas output_tokens are generated
autoregressively (a ’decode’ process), which is more computationally intensive. This efficiency
difference is reflected in API pricing (e.g., Input: $0.6 per 1M tokens vs. Output: $2.4 per 1M
tokens).
Table 4: Cost on Ant Environment
Ant
Prefill Tokens
Decode Tokens
Total Cost ($)
Eureka
82458
54505
0.1802868
Revolve
162348
43973
0.202944
Ours-total
257564
69704
0.321828
Ours-action
203282
53462
-
Ours-others
54282
16242
-
Table 5: Cost on Humanoid Environment
Humanoid
Prefill Tokens
Decode Tokens
Total Cost ($)
Eureka
78940
60021
0.191414
Revolve
169545
44118
0.20761
Ours-total
254555
66557
0.31247
Ours-action
204283
50270
-
Ours-others
50272
16287
-
The data in the tables leads to the following conclusions: RF-Agent utilizes 2-3 times more prefill
tokens than the baselines, while the number of decode tokens is only moderately higher. Furthermore,
we find that this asymmetric token consumption aligns perfectly with the design philosophy of
RF-Agent. The higher usage of prefill tokens is a direct result of leveraging historical information
(i.e., previously generated thoughts and reward functions). As the MCTS tree grows, these artifacts
are flexibly combined and included in the prompt, forming a multi-step reasoning process for the
LLM. This process enables the LLM to generate more sophisticated and effective reward functions,
which in turn leads to the significant performance growth observed in our experiments.
F
Additional Results
F.1
Training Curves in Bi-DexHands.
In Fig.9, we show all the training curve results of the Expert-Easy and Expert-Hard groups on the
selected Bi-DexHands. RF-Agent can maintain its dominant performance in most tasks.
F.2
Reward Function Optimization Performance.
In Fig.10, we show the maximum score obtained on each task as the number of reward function
samples increases. The results show that our RF-Agent has better iterative optimization capabilities
on most tasks.
26


--- Page 27 ---
Figure 9:
Success rates with exploration steps under reward functions by different methods on
Bidex-hands.
Figure 10: Reward function optimization performance with sampling counts in Bi-DexHands.
Figure 11: Examples of the best node growth path.
F.3
More Optimization Path Examples of RF-Agent
We show the optimization paths of the nodes that end up with the best performance on two Bi-
DexHands tasks, as shown in Fig.11. We found that the optimization paths on both tasks contain
certain global actions, which shows that it is important to optimize reward functions using global
historical information. In addition, the optimization paths on CatchAbreast further illustrate that
those weak reward functions should not be easily abandoned, and mixing them with reward functions
on other paths can also obtain performance advantage nodes.
F.4
Out-of-distribution tasks performance
Considering that the training data for advanced large language model baselines might include certain
common reward functions, we design and conduct two entirely new experiments using the Isaac Gym
Ant environment:
Ant Lie Down Task description: “To make the ant lie down on its back (belly-up) as quickly and
stably as possible. Its four feet should point towards the sky.” The evaluation score for this task
is based on a success condition, defined by an indicator function 1[orientation_reward > 0.9],
corresponding to a stable belly-up pose.
27


--- Page 28 ---
Ant Patrol and Return Task description: “To make the ant first run forward to the checkpoint
position, then turn around and return to its starting origin position.” For this task, success is
1[task_phase == 1 and dist_to_start < 0.5], signifying the completion of the entire two-stage
trip.
Using the same experimental configuration as in our main Isaac Gym experiments and employing the
GPT-4o-mini model, we obtained the following results:
Table 6: Comparison of methods on OOD-Ant tasks.
Task
Sparse
Eureka
Revolve
Ours
Lie Down
0.12±0.03
0.64±0.08
0.59±0.11
0.73±0.08
Patrol and Return
0.05±0.02
0.52±0.07
0.63±0.05
0.82±0.06
In these experiments, the ’Sparse’ condition refers to using only the evaluation score (i.e., the 1[...]
indicator function) as the reward signal. While it is not feasible to provide a handcrafted expert
baseline for such novel tasks, the experimental results sufficiently demonstrate two key points: (1) The
paradigm of LLM-based reward generation is capable of generalizing to these specialized, novel tasks.
(2) Our RF-Agent continues to outperform the existing baseline methods on these new challenges.
F.5
Detailed ablation studies on action combination
We further conducted a combinatorial study of action on Ant and Allegro Hand tasks:
Table 7: Detailed ablation study on action combinations.
Action Combination
Ant
Allegro Hand
a w/ mutation
5.13(-18%)
18.76(-16%)
b w/ mutation + crossover
5.77(-7%)
21.90(-3%)
c w/ mutation + reasoning
5.94(-4%)
21.26(-5%)
d w/ crossover + reasoning
4.85(-22%)
19.21(-15%)
e w/ mutation + crossover + reasoning
6.08(-2%)
22.19(-2%)
Full Version (w/ all actions)
6.22
22.52
By analyzing the ablation results, we can categorize our actions from the perspective of information
utilization. The mutation action can be seen as a local operator, as it modifies a single parent node.
In contrast, crossover and reasoning act as global operators, as they synthesize information from
multiple nodes or entire ancestral paths.
The results clearly indicate that relying exclusively on one type of operator leads to a significant
performance drop. For instance, using only a local action (w/ mutation) or only global actions (w/
crossover + reasoning) both result in considerable performance degradation. Therefore, a balanced
combination of both local and global operators is crucial for achieving the best performance.
F.6
Detailed ablation studies on thought align
We present an ablation study on the thought align mechanism. In our current design, this process
consists of two steps:
(1) First Design Thought: Following a Chain-of-Thought like process, the LLM first generates a
high-level ’design thought’ before composing the actual reward function code.
(2) Second Thought Align: To mitigate potential hallucinations from a single generation step, after
the reward function is generated, we prompt the LLM to re-examine the code’s content and then
revise the original ’design thought’ to ensure it accurately reflects the code’s logic.
To quantitatively validate the effectiveness of this mechanism, we conducted further ablations on
these intermediate components:
The results indicate that the design thought mechanism is crucial across all tasks. Notably, the
second thought align step has a particularly significant impact on the more complex manipulation
task (Allegro Hand).
28


--- Page 29 ---
Table 8: Ablation study on thought alignment components.
Task
w/ full thought align
w/o first design thought
w/o second thought align
w/o all
ant
6.22
5.08(-18%)
5.94(-4%)
4.96(-20%)
allegro hand
22.52
18.07(-19%)
18.55(-17%)
14.64(-35%)
G
Algorithm of RF-Agent
Algorithm 1 provides a pseudo-code for the proposed RF-Agent method, which can be combined
with Fig.2 to further familiarize yourself with the entire RF-Agent process.
Algorithm 1: Reward Function Design via Language Agent Tree Search (RF-Agent)
Input: score Function F, reward designer G, the number of initial nodes NI, max evaluation
times N, action set [am1, am2, ac3, ar4, ad5], counts of action [nm1, nm2, nc3, nd4, nd5],
UCT initial balance parameter λ0
1 // Initialization Stage
2 Initialize a virtual root node nroot
3 Set t ←0
4 Initialization NI nodes with designer G and link all the NI nodes to the nroot ;
// Eq.1
5 Evaluating F after training policy π with R from NI nodes
6 // MCTS Search
7 for t ≤N do
8
λ ←λ0 · N−t
N
9
// MCTS Selection Stage
10
s ←nroot
11
while s is not a leaf node do
12
s ←argmaxs′∈Child(s)UCT(s′) ;
// Eq.2 with λ
13
end while
14
// MCTS Expansion Stage
15
for a in action set do
16
expand node s with action a and designer G in na times ;
// Eq.1 with laction
17
end
18
// MCTS Simulation Stage
19
Evaluating F after training policy π with R from newly generated nodes
20
// MCTS Backpropagation Stage
21
Evaluate the self-verify score vself of newly generated nodes.
22
while s is not the root node nroot do
23
Update Q(s) and N(s) ;
// Eq.3
24
end while
25
t ←t + P
a∈action set na
26 end
27 Return: The node s∗with the best reward function R∗
H
Licenses
The licenses and URL of baselines , benchmarks and deployment algorithm are listed in 9.
Table 9: The licenses and URL of baselines , benchmarks and deployment algorithm.
Resources
Type
License
URL
Eureka[28]
Codes for Baseline
MIT
https://github.com/eureka-research/Eureka
Revolve[17]
Codes for Baseline
Available Online
https://github.com/RishiHazra/Revolve/tree/main
IsaacGym[31]
Codes for Benchmark
BSD 3-Clause License
https://github.com/isaac-sim/IsaacGymEnvs
Bi-DexHands[9]
Codes for Benchmark
Apache 2.0
https://github.com/PKU-MARL/DexterousHands
RL-games[30]
Codes for Algorithm
MIT
https://github.com/Denys88/rl_games
29


--- Page 30 ---
I
RF-Agent Reward Examples
I.1
Reward after Diverse Actions Examples
We randomly selected a task and a corresponding node to show what the tendency of the new reward
function generated by RF-Agent under different actions. Here we select the node with RF-Agent
developed on CatchAbreast to the path "root-0i-e3-m1-e3" as the current node. First, the reward
function of the node is displayed, and then the reward function generated by different actions under
the node is displayed in turn.
Current reward function on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
# Reward
for
being
close to the
goal
distance_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.5) , min=0, max =1)
# Reward
for
successfully
passing
the object , bonus
for
being
within a
proximity
threshold
success_bonus = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< 0.1, torch.tensor (1.0 ,
device=
object_pos.device), torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device= object_pos .device))
# Hand
balance
reward
penalizing
uneven
movement
hand_balance_reward = -torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand )
# Proximity
reward to
encourage
hands to
efficiently
reach
the
object
combined_hand_distance = distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand
proximity_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( combined_hand_distance / 0.8) , min=0,
max =1)
# Smoothness
penalty
to
encourage
fluid
hand
movements
hand_distance_between_hands = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim
=-1)
smooth_movement_penalty = 0.01 * hand_distance_between_hands
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = distance_reward + success_bonus + hand_balance_reward +
proximity_reward
- smooth_movement_penalty
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" distance_reward ": distance_reward ,
" success_bonus ": success_bonus ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward ,
" smooth_movement_penalty ": smooth_movement_penalty
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Mutation am1.
Reward function after am1 on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
# Reward
for
being
very
close to the
goal
with
increased
distance
tolerance
distance_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.6) , min=0, max =1)
30


--- Page 31 ---
# Success
bonus
increased
for
being
within a tighter
proximity
threshold
success_bonus = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< 0.05 ,
torch.tensor (1.0 ,
device
=object_pos.device), torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device= object_pos.device))
# Balance
reward
penalizing
uneven
movement
but
normalizing
based on hand
distance
hand_balance_penalty = -torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand )
normalized_hand_distance = torch.clamp (( distance_to_left_hand +
distance_to_right_hand ) / (0.6 + 0.6) , min=0, max =1)
hand_balance_reward = hand_balance_penalty * normalized_hand_distance
# Proximity
reward
encouraging
efficient
hand
placement
combined_hand_distance = distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand
proximity_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( combined_hand_distance / 0.75) , min=0,
max =1)
# Smoothness
bonus
for
transitions
encouraging
fluid
hand
movements
hand_distance_between_hands = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim
=-1)
smooth_movement_bonus = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( hand_distance_between_hands / 0.1)
, min=0, max =1)
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = ( distance_reward + success_bonus + hand_balance_reward +
proximity_reward + smooth_movement_bonus ) / 1.5
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" distance_reward ": distance_reward ,
" success_bonus ": success_bonus ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward ,
" smooth_movement_bonus ": smooth_movement_bonus
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
where the key change is adding the normalizing mechanism to "hand_balance_penalty"
Mutation am2.
Reward function after am2 on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =-1)
# Reward
for
being
close to the
goal
with a larger
range
distance_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.3) , min=0, max =1)
# Larger
success
bonus
for
passing
the
object
success_bonus = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< 0.05 ,
torch.tensor (2.0 ,
device
=object_pos.device), torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device= object_pos.device))
# Hand
balance
reward
maintaining a moderate
penalty
hand_balance_reward =
-0.5 * torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand )
# Enhanced
proximity
reward
encouraging
efficient
hand
placement
combined_hand_distance = distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand
proximity_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( combined_hand_distance / 0.6) , min=0,
max =1)
# Smoothness
penalty
slightly
adjusted
to
minimize
harsh
penalties
hand_distance_between_hands = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim
=-1)
smooth_movement_penalty = 0.005 * hand_distance_between_hands
31


--- Page 32 ---
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = distance_reward + success_bonus + hand_balance_reward +
proximity_reward
- smooth_movement_penalty
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" distance_reward ": distance_reward ,
" success_bonus ": success_bonus ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward ,
" smooth_movement_penalty ": smooth_movement_penalty
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
where the key change is change the parameters in some reward components.
Crossover ac3.
Reward function after ac3 on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
goal_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.5) , min=0, max =1)
#
Proximity
to goal
success_bonus = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< 0.1, torch.tensor (2.0 ,
device=
object_pos.device), torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device= object_pos .device))
#
Success
bonus
hand_balance_reward = -torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand )
# Penalizes
uneven
movement
between
hands
hand_coordination_reward = torch.exp(-torch.norm( left_hand_pos
-
right_hand_pos , dim =1))
# Encourages
closer
hand
positions
proximity_reward =
-0.5 * ( distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand )
#
Maintain
proximity
to the
object
total_reward = goal_reward + success_bonus + hand_balance_reward +
hand_coordination_reward + proximity_reward
reward_components = {
"goal_reward ": goal_reward ,
" success_bonus ": success_bonus ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" hand_coordination_reward ": hand_coordination_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
where the key change is to delete "combined_hand_distance" and "smooth_movement_penalty" from
the initial reward function while keeping other high-performing components.
Path Reasoning ar4.
Reward function after ar4 on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
# Constants
distance_threshold = 0.1
success_bonus = 1.0
smooth_movement_penalty = 0.01
32


--- Page 33 ---
# Distance
metrics
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
# Reward
components
distance_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.5) , min=0, max =1)
# Reward
for
being
close to the
goal
# Reward
for
successfully
passing
the
object
successful_pass = ( distance_to_goal
< distance_threshold ).type(object_pos.
dtype)
reward_successful_pass = successful_pass * success_bonus
# Hand
balance
reward
to
encourage
synchronized
movements
hand_balance_reward = -torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand )
# Proximity
reward
for
effectively
reaching
the
object
combined_hand_distance = distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand
proximity_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( combined_hand_distance / 0.8) , min=0,
max =1)
# Smoothness
penalty
for
fluid
hand
movements
hand_distance_between_hands = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim
=1)
smooth_movement_penalty_reward = -smooth_movement_penalty *
hand_distance_between_hands
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = distance_reward + reward_successful_pass + hand_balance_reward
+ proximity_reward + smooth_movement_penalty_reward
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" distance_reward ": distance_reward ,
" reward_successful_pass ": reward_successful_pass ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward ,
" smooth_movement_penalty_reward ": smooth_movement_penalty_reward
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
where the key change is that the coefficients in the original reward function have been redefined and
some nested methods have been changed.
Different Thought ad5.
Reward function after ar4 on CatchAbreast.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , object_linvel :
torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
# Design
Idea: Utilize a nested
reward
structure
focusing
on
progressive
subtasks
of
grasping
and
passing
the object , rewarding
successful
transitions
and
smooth
trajectories .
# Define
parameters
goal_tolerance = 0.1
grasp_radius = 0.05
smoothness_weight = 0.2
# Calculate
distances
for
nested
rewards
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm(object_pos
- left_hand_pos , dim =-1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( object_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim =-1)
# Nested
reward
for
successful
grasping (within
grasp
radius)
grasp_reward = torch.where( distance_to_left_hand
< grasp_radius , torch.tensor
(0.5 ,
device=object_pos .device), torch. zeros_like ( distance_to_left_hand ))
33


--- Page 34 ---
grasp_reward
+= torch.where( distance_to_right_hand
< grasp_radius , torch.
tensor (0.5 ,
device=object_pos.device), torch. zeros_like (
distance_to_right_hand ))
# Goal
reward
goal_reward = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< goal_tolerance , torch.tensor
(1.0 ,
device=object_pos .device), torch. zeros_like ( distance_to_goal ))
# Smoothness
reward
calculated
as the
negative
exponential
of
object
linear
velocity
smoothness_reward = -torch.exp(- smoothness_weight * torch.norm(object_linvel ,
dim =-1))
# Total
reward
combining
all
components
total_reward = smoothness_reward + grasp_reward + goal_reward
# Reward
components
reward_components = {
" grasp_reward ": grasp_reward ,
"goal_reward ": goal_reward ,
" smoothness_reward ": smoothness_reward
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
where the change is to think about new reward forms, introducing a grasping angle and nesting it into
the distance-related rewards.
I.2
Design Thought after Alignment
Similarly, the current node ”root-0i-e3-m1-e3“ in the previous section is an example. The design
thought during the generation process is:
Before thought-align
The reward function is designed to optimize agent performance in the Catch Abreast task
by rewarding careful proximity of the hands to the object, effective synchronization of hand
movements, and incentivizing reaching the goal with a success bonus, while penalizing
excessive movement to ensure fluid hand coordination.
After thought alignment:
After thought-align
The reward function is designed to enhance agent performance in the Catch Abreast task by
incorporating multiple components that prioritize hand coordination and goal achievement.
It evaluates proximity to the goal and the object, providing rewards for closeness and a
success bonus for passing the object within a defined threshold. Additionally, it incorporates
a hand balance reward to penalize uneven movements between the hands, a proximity reward
to encourage efficient hand placement, and a smoothness penalty to promote fluid motion.
The total reward is calculated by summing these components while ensuring that fluid hand
coordination is incentivized.
Obviously, the design ideas after thinking alignment can more comprehensively summarize the
corresponding reward function.
I.3
RF-Agent and Baselines Reward Comparison
Here we list some best reward function from different methods.
IsaacGym-Ant.
34


--- Page 35 ---
Our RF-Agent.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward ( root_states : torch.Tensor , heading_vec : torch.Tensor , up_vec:
torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
# Extract
the
forward
velocity
in the x-direction
velocity = root_states [:, 7:10]
forward_velocity = velocity [:, 0]
# Weight
for
different
reward
components
heading_weight = 1.5
upright_weight = 0.5
y_z_penalty_weight = 0.3
# Cosine
similarity
reward
for
maintaining
the
desired
heading
direction (x-
axis)
desired_heading = torch.tensor ([1.0 , 0.0, 0.0] ,
device= heading_vec .device).
expand_as(heading_vec )
heading_cos_sim = torch.nn. functional . cosine_similarity (desired_heading ,
heading_vec , dim=-1)
heading_reward = heading_weight * ( heading_cos_sim * forward_velocity )
# Stability
penalty
for
velocity
in y and z directions
y_z_velocity_penalty = y_z_penalty_weight * torch.norm(velocity [:, 1:], p=2,
dim =-1)
# Reward
for
being
upright , using
the z-component
of the
up_vec to
measure
uprightness
upright_bonus_temp = 2.0
upright_bonus = upright_weight * torch.exp( upright_bonus_temp * (up_vec [:, 2]
- 1.0))
# Total
reward is a combination
of
forward
movement , heading
alignment , and
uprightness
total_reward = forward_velocity + heading_reward + upright_bonus
-
y_z_velocity_penalty
# Construct
reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" forward_velocity ": forward_velocity ,
" heading_reward ": heading_reward ,
" upright_bonus ": upright_bonus ,
" y_z_velocity_penalty ": -y_z_velocity_penalty
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Eureka.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward ( root_states : torch.Tensor , potentials : torch.Tensor ,
prev_potentials : torch.Tensor , actions: torch.Tensor ,
dof_vel: torch.Tensor , dof_limits_lower : torch.Tensor ,
dof_limits_upper : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor ,
Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
# Extract
relevant
state
information
velocity = root_states [:, 7:10]
# Linear
velocity
torso_position = root_states [:, 0:3]
# Position
of the
torso
# Reward
component
to
encourage
forward
velocity
forward_velocity_reward = velocity [:, 0]
# Assuming
forward
is along
the x-
axis
# Modify
target
closeness
reward
to
reflect
more
sensitivity
target_closeness_reward_temperate = 0.2
target_closeness_reward = prev_potentials
- potentials
exp_target_closeness_reward = torch.exp( target_closeness_reward_temperate *
target_closeness_reward )
# Re -examine
dof
velocity
penalty
for
more
sensitivity
dof_vel_penalty_temperate = 0.02
dof_vel_penalty = torch.sum(torch.abs(dof_vel), dim =-1)
exp_dof_vel_penalty = torch.exp(- dof_vel_penalty_temperate * dof_vel_penalty )
35


--- Page 36 ---
# Actions
penalty
adjust
temperature
for
greater
distinction
actions_penalty_temperate = 0.005
actions_penalty = torch.sum(torch.abs(actions), dim =-1)
exp_actions_penalty = torch.exp(- actions_penalty_temperate * actions_penalty )
# Total
normalized
reward
total_reward = forward_velocity_reward + 0.5 * exp_target_closeness_reward +
0.1 * exp_dof_vel_penalty + 0.1 * exp_actions_penalty
# Compile
individual
components
into a dictionary
reward_components = {
" forward_velocity_reward ": forward_velocity_reward ,
" exp_target_closeness_reward ": exp_target_closeness_reward ,
" exp_dof_vel_penalty ": exp_dof_vel_penalty ,
" exp_actions_penalty ": exp_actions_penalty ,
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Revolve.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward ( root_states : torch.Tensor , targets: torch.Tensor , potentials :
torch.Tensor ,
prev_potentials : torch.Tensor , up_vec: torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[
torch.Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
# Extract
necessary
components
velocity = root_states [:, 7:10]
# Forward
speed
reward
component
forward_speed_reward = velocity [:, 0]
# Forward
speed
along x-axis
# Forward
potential
difference
reward
component
forward_potential_diff = potentials
- prev_potentials
# Upright
reward
component
up_vec_goal = torch.tensor ([0.0 , 0.0, 1.0] ,
device=up_vec.device).unsqueeze
(0).expand_as(up_vec)
upright_reward = torch.sum(up_vec * up_vec_goal , dim =-1)
# Set
temperatures
for
exponential
scaling
forward_speed_temp = 0.35
forward_potential_temp = 0.4
upright_temp = 1.0
# Keeping
original
scale
# Exponentially
scale
the
rewards
scaled_forward_speed_reward = forward_speed_temp * torch.exp(
forward_speed_reward * forward_speed_temp )
scaled_forward_potential_diff = forward_potential_temp * torch.exp(
forward_potential_diff * forward_potential_temp )
scaled_upright_reward = torch.exp( upright_temp * upright_reward )
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = scaled_forward_speed_reward + scaled_forward_potential_diff +
scaled_upright_reward
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" forward_speed_reward ": scaled_forward_speed_reward ,
" forward_potential_diff_reward ": scaled_forward_potential_diff ,
" upright_reward ": scaled_upright_reward
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Bidex-CatchAbreast.
36


--- Page 37 ---
Our RF-Agent.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.
Tensor , Dict[str , torch.Tensor ]]:
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( right_hand_pos
- object_pos , dim =1)
# Reward
for
proximity
to the
goal
with
increased
tolerance
distance_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_goal / 0.5) , min=0, max =1)
# Success
bonus
for
accurate
object
passing
with
tighter
threshold
success_bonus = torch.where( distance_to_goal
< 0.03 ,
torch.tensor (1.0 ,
device
=object_pos.device), torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device= object_pos.device))
# Hand
balance
reward
incentivizing
even
distribution
of effort
between
hands
hand_balance_reward =
-0.5 * torch.abs( distance_to_left_hand
-
distance_to_right_hand ) * torch.clamp (1.0 - ( distance_to_left_hand +
distance_to_right_hand ) / 1.5, min=0, max =1)
# Proximity
reward to
encourage
both
hands to be near
the
object
combined_hand_distance = distance_to_left_hand + distance_to_right_hand
proximity_reward = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( combined_hand_distance / 0.75) , min=0,
max =1)
# Smoothness
bonus to
promote
fluid
hand
movements
hand_distance_between_hands = torch.norm( left_hand_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim
=1)
smooth_movement_bonus = torch.clamp (1.0 - ( hand_distance_between_hands / 0.1)
, min=0, max =1)
# Total
reward
calculation
total_reward = ( distance_reward + success_bonus + hand_balance_reward +
proximity_reward + smooth_movement_bonus ) / 2.0
# Reward
components
dictionary
reward_components = {
" distance_reward ": distance_reward ,
" success_bonus ": success_bonus ,
" hand_balance_reward ": hand_balance_reward ,
" proximity_reward ": proximity_reward ,
" smooth_movement_bonus ": smooth_movement_bonus
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Eureka.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
object_linvel : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor , Dict[str ,
torch.Tensor ]]:
# Constants
for
temperature
adjustments
distance_temp = 5.0
# Increased
temperature
sensitivity
for
distance
velocity_temp = 1.0
# Reduced
scaling
for
velocity
# Compute
distance
to goal
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =1)
# Negative
distance
to
promote
minimization
distance_reward = torch.exp(- distance_temp * distance_to_goal )
# Exponential
decay
for
distance
# Improved
velocity
reward
with
penalty
for
slow
speeds
speed_threshold = 0.1
# threshold
for
penalty
velocity_magnitude = torch.norm(object_linvel , dim =1)
# Penalty
for low
speeds
to
encourage
proper
movement
velocity_penalty = torch.where( velocity_magnitude
< speed_threshold ,
-1.0 * (
speed_threshold
- velocity_magnitude ), torch. zeros_like (
velocity_magnitude ))
# Positive
reward
for
aligned
velocity
towards
the
goal
direction
37


--- Page 38 ---
direction_vector = goal_pos
- object_pos
# Direction
vector
from
object to
goal
direction_norm = torch.norm(direction_vector , dim=1, keepdim=True) + 1e-6
desired_velocity = direction_vector / direction_norm
# Normalized
direction
aligned_velocity = torch.sum( object_linvel * desired_velocity , dim =1)
# Dot
product
for
alignment
aligned_velocity_reward = torch.clamp(aligned_velocity , min =0.0)
# Only
reward
positive
velocities
velocity_reward = aligned_velocity_reward + velocity_penalty
# Combine
rewards
and
penalties
# Normalize
velocity
reward
velocity_reward = torch.clamp(velocity_reward , min =0.0)
# Combine
all
rewards
to form
total
reward
total_reward = distance_reward + velocity_reward
# Components
for
debugging
reward_components = {
’distance_reward ’: distance_reward ,
’velocity_reward ’: velocity_reward ,
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
Revolve.
@torch.jit.script
def
compute_reward (object_pos: torch.Tensor , goal_pos: torch.Tensor ,
left_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , right_hand_pos : torch.Tensor , left_hand_rot :
torch.Tensor , right_hand_rot : torch.Tensor) -> Tuple[torch.Tensor , Dict[str ,
torch.Tensor ]]:
# Define
temperature
variables
for
normalization
temp_pos = 0.1
temp_rot = 0.05
temp_catch = 0.2
# Adjusted
temperature
for
catch
reward
# Compute
the
distance
from
the
object to the
goal
distance_to_goal = torch.norm(object_pos
- goal_pos , dim =-1)
reward_position = -distance_to_goal
# Closer is better , so we take
negative
# Compute
the
distance
from
the
object to the
left
and
right
hands
distance_to_left_hand = torch.norm(object_pos
- left_hand_pos , dim =-1) + 1e-6
# Adding a small
epsilon
to
prevent
log (0)
distance_to_right_hand = torch.norm( object_pos
- right_hand_pos , dim =-1) + 1e
-6
# Encourage
the
object to be close to the
hands
with
stronger
feedback
reward_catch_left_base = -torch.exp( distance_to_left_hand / temp_catch )
#
Base
feedback
reward_catch_left_prox = torch.where( distance_to_left_hand
< 0.1, 1.0 -
distance_to_left_hand / 0.1, torch.tensor (0.0 ,
device=object_pos.device))
# Linear
boost
for
proximity
reward_catch_left = reward_catch_left_base + reward_catch_left_prox
#
Combined
rewards
reward_catch_right =
-1.5 * torch.exp( distance_to_right_hand / temp_catch)
#
More
weight
for
right
hand
penalty
reward_catch = reward_catch_left + reward_catch_right
# Combined
rewards
for
better
guidance
# Compute
alignment/rotation
rewards
based on the
orientation
of the
hands
desired_left_rot = torch.atan2( left_hand_pos [:, 1],
left_hand_pos [:, 0])
desired_right_rot = torch.atan2( right_hand_pos [:, 1],
right_hand_pos [:, 0])
reward_left_rot = -torch.abs( left_hand_rot [:, 0] - desired_left_rot )
#
Compare
some
angle
derived
from
quaternion
reward_right_rot = -torch.abs( right_hand_rot [:, 0] - desired_right_rot )
# Combine
all
rewards
total_reward = torch.exp( reward_position / temp_pos) + torch.exp( reward_catch
/ temp_catch) + torch.exp( reward_left_rot / temp_rot) + torch.exp(
reward_right_rot / temp_rot)
# Prepare
individual
rewards
to
return
38


--- Page 39 ---
reward_components = {
’reward_position ’: reward_position ,
’reward_catch ’: reward_catch ,
’reward_catch_left ’: reward_catch_left ,
’reward_catch_right ’: reward_catch_right ,
’reward_left_rot ’: reward_left_rot ,
’reward_right_rot ’: reward_right_rot ,
}
return
total_reward , reward_components
39
