--- Page 1 ---
Accelerating Diffusion via Hybrid Data-Pipeline Parallelism
Based on Conditional Guidance Scheduling
Euisoo Jung
Byunghyun Kim
Hyunjin Kim
Seonghye Cho
Jae-Gil Lee*
School of Computing, KAIST
{jyssys, rooknpown, hjkim1228, orangingq, jaegil}@kaist.ac.kr
2.3x Speed-Up at 2 GPUs
7.12
16.49
Time
Ours
Naïve diffusion
0
Speed-up
Image Quality
Model Generality
High-resolution
Communication
Efficiency
Ours
AsyncDiff
DistriFusion
Figure 1. Summary of the proposed hybrid data-pipeline parallelism. Our method consistently outperforms prior distributed approaches
across five key aspects: Speed-up, Image Quality, Generality, High-resolution Synthesis, and Communication Cost, demonstrating robust
and balanced acceleration-quality trade-offs.
Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress in
high-fidelity image, video, and audio generation, yet in-
ference remains computationally expensive. Nevertheless,
current diffusion acceleration methods based on distributed
parallelism suffer from noticeable generation artifacts and
fail to achieve substantial acceleration proportional to the
number of GPUs. Therefore, we propose a hybrid paral-
lelism framework that combines a novel data parallel strat-
egy, condition-based partitioning, with an optimal pipeline
scheduling method, adaptive parallelism switching, to re-
duce generation latency and achieve high generation qual-
ity in conditional diffusion models. The key ideas are to (i)
leverage the conditional and unconditional denoising paths
as a new data-partitioning perspective and (ii) adaptively
enable optimal pipeline parallelism according to the de-
noising discrepancy between these two paths. Our frame-
work achieves 2.31× and 2.07× latency reductions on
SDXL and SD3, respectively, using two NVIDIA RTX 3090
GPUs, while preserving image quality. This result confirms
the generality of our approach across U-Net-based diffusion
models and DiT-based flow-matching architectures.
Our
approach also outperforms existing methods in acceleration
under high-resolution synthesis settings. Code is available
at https://github.com/kaist-dmlab/Hybridiff.
∗indicates corresponding author.
1. Introduction
Diffusion models have emerged as a powerful family of
generative models because of their superior sample qual-
ity and broad applicability.
However, the inherently it-
erative nature of diffusion processes, which consists of
many denoising steps, leads to significant inference la-
tency and computational bottlenecks. As model sizes con-
tinue to scale, these inefficiencies become increasingly
limiting, making diffusion inference acceleration a press-
ing research challenge. Existing approaches have focused
mainly on reducing the number of sampling steps [9, 19–
21, 26, 27, 34, 36, 37], designing optimal architectures [11,
13, 14, 35, 38, 39], or leveraging mathematical approxima-
tions [1, 17, 18, 22, 28, 40, 40]. Yet, these methods often
require additional training or fail to deliver strong accelera-
tion in practice, exhibiting a clear trade-off between gener-
ation quality and speed.
Distributed parallelism across multiple GPUs offers a
promising alternative.
Using modern parallel comput-
ing resources, one can achieve substantial throughput im-
provements in diffusion inference without additional train-
ing. This direction is especially appealing given the suc-
cess of distributed strategies in natural language process-
ing, where large-scale language models have already ben-
efited from extensive parallelism research [24, 29]. As in
other domains, distributed parallelism for generative model
inference can be broadly classified into data parallelism
arXiv:2602.21760v1  [cs.CV]  25 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
a. Diffusion Inference Data Parallel Processing
b. Diffusion Inference Pipeline Parallel Processing
𝐱! & 𝑥!, 𝑐
𝐱!
Multi-GPU
𝐱! & 𝐱!, 𝑐
Artifact
in connection
𝐱!
Speed-Up: 1.2x
Quality ↓
Speed-Up: 1.3x
Quality -
⋯
Multi-GPU
c. Ours (Condition-Based Data & Pipeline Parallel Processing)
𝐱! & 𝐱!, 𝑐
𝐱!
𝐱!
Speed-Up: 2.3x
Quality ↑
Multi-GPU
𝐱!, 𝑐
𝐱! & 𝐱!, 𝑐
𝐱! & 𝐱!, 𝑐
Parallelism Step
Parallelism Step
⋯
⋯
: Communication
: Pre-trained Diffusion Model
: Conditional Communication
: Unconditional Communication
𝐱!
: Latent Noise at time step t
: All-gather Operation
𝐱!,# & 𝐱!,#, 𝑐
𝐱!,$ & 𝐱!,$, 𝑐
𝑐
: Conditional Information
(Adaptive Parallelism Switching)
Figure 2. Comparison of parallel strategies for diffusion inference. (a) Patch-based data parallel frameworks suffer from bottlenecks
caused by all-gather operations and artifacts at patch boundaries, leading to limited acceleration and quality degradation. (b) Pipeline
parallel frameworks incur excessive asynchronous communication overhead and accumulate estimate errors. (c) Our hybrid parallelism,
which incorporates condition-based data parallelism, adaptively combines both paradigms to achieve high fidelity and fast generation.
and pipeline parallelism [2, 12]. Both approaches enhance
throughput by distributing either the input data or the model
itself across multiple GPUs.
Representative existing studies include DistriFusion [12]
for data parallelism and AsyncDiff [2] for pipeline paral-
lelism. In DistriFusion (Figure 2a), an input image is di-
vided into N disjoint patches, and these patches are pro-
cessed in parallel across N GPUs, where each device in-
dependently handles one patch. In AsyncDiff (Figure 2b),
the entire model is divided into N sequential components,
where each component is assigned to a GPU, and the out-
put from the i-th GPU is asynchronously fed as the input
to the (i + 1)-th GPU; thus, AsyncDiff enables pipelined
execution across devices.
In theory, each form of parallelism can improve through-
put linearly with respect to the number of GPUs, up to
an ideal N×speed-up, but in practice, the gains are often
sublinear due to communication overhead and synchroniza-
tion costs. In this paper, we propose a hybrid strategy that
combines data and model parallelism to further increase
the throughput of generative model inference, achieving
beyond-linear scaling relative to the number of GPUs, while
maintaining generation quality. That is, if there are two
GPUs, we aim to obtain more than a twofold speed-up with-
out noticeable degradation in output fidelity. In practice,
when using two GPUs, data and model parallelism achieved
1.2× and 1.3×speed-up, respectively, whereas our hybrid
approach remarkably achieved a 2.3×speed-up under the
same configuration, as shown in Figures 1 and 2.
To achieve hybrid parallelism, one could combine the
aforementioned representative methods.
Specifically, an
image is divided into disjoint patches, and each patch is
fed into a corresponding model component (not necessar-
ily the first one). As a result, each GPU trains a 1/N por-
tion of the model using a 1/N portion of an input image.
This hybrid approach can potentially achieve beyond-linear
scaling; however, it may degrade generation quality for two
main reasons. First, since each GPU processes only a por-
tion of the image, artifacts are likely to appear particularly
along patch boundaries. Second, this issue is exacerbated
by asynchronous communication between model compo-
nents; that is, errors introduced by asynchronous rather than
sequential denoising can worsen the artifacts.
In this paper, we aim to propose and further opti-
mize the hybrid parallelism for diffusion inference from
two complementary perspectives: (1) from the data paral-
lelism perspective, transitioning from patch-based partition-
ing to condition-based partitioning; and (2) from the model
parallelism perspective, advancing from static parallelism
switching to adaptive parallelism switching.


--- Page 3 ---
(1) Condition-Based Partitioning. The main limitation of
patch-based partitioning is that each patch represents only a
local subregion of an image, often leading to boundary ar-
tifacts and degraded visual coherence. To address this lim-
itation, we leverage the classifier-free guidance (CFG) [7],
a technique widely adopted in diffusion models, where the
model simultaneously predicts conditional (prompted) and
unconditional (unprompted) noise estimates.
This dual-
path prediction naturally provides a meaningful criterion for
data partitioning: as shown in Figure 2c, the conditioned
(xt, c) and unconditioned (xt) inputs form two distinct data-
parallel paths. Importantly, unlike patch-based partitioning,
each image partition covers the entire image, thereby pre-
serving global consistency. Consequently, condition-based
partitioning yields improved visual coherence and reduced
communication overhead during feature aggregation.
(2) Adaptive Parallelism Switching. Because we revise
the data partitioning strategy, the pipeline parallelism must
also be adapted to align with it.
In the early denoising
steps, the conditional and unconditional noise estimates dif-
fer substantially due to the presence or absence of the con-
dition. Consequently, asynchronous denoising at this stage
can lead to divergence between the two paths. To mitigate
this issue, we defer the onset of parallel execution until the
noise estimates of the two paths become sufficiently similar,
beyond the conventional warm-up phase used in prior works
(e.g., [2]). Similarly, toward the final denoising steps, the
noise estimates from the two paths begin to diverge again;
at this point, parallel execution is terminated. The specific
switching points between serial and parallel execution are
determined automatically based on a novel metric, called
the denoising discrepancy, which quantifies the difference
between the two noise estimates. This adaptive switching
mechanism effectively improves generation quality by re-
ducing error propagation, while only marginally shortening
the duration of parallel processing.
This novel framework demonstrates consistent accelera-
tion not only on conventional denoising diffusion models
but also on recent state-of-the-art generative frameworks
such as flow matching [16]. As long as the model follows
a sequential denoising process that allows quantifying the
relative influence between conditional and unconditional
branches, our framework remains robust and effective. Fur-
thermore, due to the nature of pipeline parallelism, it is not
restricted to specific architectures such as U-Net or DiT,
showing strong generality across diverse networks.
As summarized in Figure 1, our proposed hybrid par-
allelism achieves superior performance across the five key
aspects. In fact, compared to single-GPU inference, our
method achieves a 2.3×speed-up with two GPUs (i.e.,
> 2), while preserving generation fidelity. See Appendix A
and Section 5 for details of Figure 1. Finally, the key con-
tributions are summarized as follows.
• Hybrid Parallelism Framework for Diffusion Infer-
ence.
We introduce a novel diffusion inference paral-
lelism framework that integrates condition-based parti-
tioning and adaptive parallelism switching into a unified
hybrid parallelism design.
• Novel Condition-Based Partitioning. At the data par-
allelism level, we exploit the intrinsic mechanism of
diffusion by decoupling conditional and unconditional
branches and performing multi-GPU denoising.
• Adaptive Parallelism Switching. To align pipeline par-
allelism with the behavior of conditional guidance, our
method adaptively switches to hybrid parallelism frame-
work during inference. Switching points are automati-
cally determined based on the denoising discrepancy be-
tween conditional and unconditional estimates, ensuring
generation efficiency throughout the denoising process.
• Robustness across Models and Architectures.
Our
framework consistently demonstrates strong acceleration
and generation quality across various architectures (e.g.,
U-Net, DiT) and recent state-of-the-art generative frame-
works, such as flow matching, even under high-resolution
synthesis settings.
2. Related Work
Single-GPU Diffusion Acceleration. Research on the ac-
celeration of single-device diffusion inference can be classi-
fied into three categories. The first group focuses on reduc-
ing the number of sampling steps required for high-quality
generation [9, 19–21, 26, 27, 30, 34, 36, 37, 40]. These ap-
proaches enable fast sampling by either reformulating the
reverse process as an ordinary differential equation (ODE),
distilling multi-step models into fewer steps, or directly pre-
dicting the reverse process in latent space.
The second
group targets model architecture optimization, aiming to re-
duce computational cost through network compression and
efficient design [11, 13, 14, 35, 38, 39]. The third group
leverages mathematical and algorithmic strategies, either
exploiting the mathematical structure of diffusion processes
or reusing intermediate computations to further accelerate
inference [1, 17, 18, 22, 28, 33, 40]. While these methods
reduce single-device inference time, they are inherently lim-
ited by the computational capacity of individual GPUs.
Multi-GPU Diffusion Acceleration. Recent studies have
explored various distributed parallelism strategies to accel-
erate diffusion inference using multiple GPUs [2, 4, 5, 12,
32]. DistriFusion [12] introduces a data-parallel approach
that divides the input image into independent patches, per-
forming denoising in parallel across GPUs.
This work
has established a foundational paradigm for parallel dif-
fusion inference.
Building on this parallelization idea,
AsyncDiff,[2] introduces model parallelism by dividing the
U-Net into layer-wise segments and employing a stride-


--- Page 4 ---
𝑥!
𝑥!
𝑥!, 𝑐
Unconditional 
Conditional
(2) Parallelism Stage  (𝜏!, 𝜏")
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage  [𝜏", 0]
𝑥!"#!, 𝑐
𝑥!"#!
𝑥!"#!"$, 𝑐
𝑥$!"#!"%, 𝑐
⋯
𝑥$!"#", 𝑐
𝑥$!"#"
𝑥&
(1) Warm-Up Stage  [𝑇, 𝜏!]
Conditional
Unconditional 
Ordinal Communication
Conditional Communication
Unconditional Communication
𝑐
Conditional Information
⋯
⋯
Condition-Based Partitioning
Condition-Based Partitioning + Adaptive Parallelism Switching
Condition-Based Partitioning
Figure 3. Overview of the proposed diffusion inference hybrid parallel framework. Our method adaptively switches parallelism modes
at τ1 and τ2, optimizing the trade-off between computational efficiency and consistency of conditional guidance, and demonstrates superior
inference acceleration performance while preserving high generation quality.
based scheduling strategy to balance parallel execution,
achieving a notable reduction in latency.
Subsequently, PipeFusion [5] and XDiT [4] combine
patch-level parallelism with transformer-oriented paral-
lelism through ring attention.
While additional adapta-
tions such as CFG-based data parallelism have been intro-
duced, these methods remain limited to inter-image pro-
cessing and lack deeper architectural integration. Moreover,
transformer-specific schemes such as ring attention exhibit
limited scalability and inconsistent performance when ap-
plied to general diffusion architectures.
More recently,
ParaStep [32] proposes a reuse-then-predict mechanism that
leverages the similarity of noise predictions between adja-
cent denoising steps. By reusing the noise from previous
steps before re-prediction, ParaStep enables inter-step par-
allelization and significantly reduces communication over-
head. However, because early and late diffusion steps ex-
hibit larger discrepancies between adjacent noise states, the
reuse mechanism can accumulate errors, leading to poten-
tial degradation in image quality or restricted speedup.
3. Preliminaries
Denoising Diffusion Model. Let q(x0) denote the data dis-
tribution and define a forward noising process by
q(xt | xt−1) = N
 xt;
p
1 −βt xt−1, βtI

,
for t = 1, . . . , T, with variance schedule {βt}. The model
learns a parameterized reverse denoising process,
pθ(xt−1 | xt) = N
 xt−1; µθ(xt, t), Σθ(t)

,
by optimizing the variational lower bound,
LVLB = Eq
h T
X
t=1
DKL
 q(xt−1 | xt, x0) ∥pθ(xt−1 | xt)
i
.
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG). For conditional genera-
tion with a condition c, the model is trained to predict the
noise ϵθ(xt, t, c) and its unconditional variant ϵθ(xt, t, ∅).
At inference, the samples follow
ϵcfg = ϵθ(xt, c, t) + w
 ϵθ(xt, c, t) −ϵθ(xt, t)

,
where w > 0 is the guidance scale. The adjusted reverse
mean becomes
µcfg(xt, t, y) =
1
√αt

xt −
βt
√1 −¯αt
ϵcfg

.
Flow Matching. Given a target distribution q(x) and base
distribution p0(x), flow matching defines an ordinary dif-
ferential equation,
dx(t)
dt
= v(x(t), t),
where the vector field vθ is learned by minimizing
LFM = Et,x0∼q
vθ
 xt, t

−xt −x0
t

2
,
with xt = x0 + te for e ∼N(0, I). Sampling proceeds by
integrating ˙x = vθ(x, t) from t = 1 to t = 0.
4. Method
4.1. Overview
Figure 3 illustrates the overall process of our proposed hy-
brid parallelism framework. The input isotropic noise la-
tent xT is fed simultaneously into two denoising branches:
the unconditional path fθ(xt, t) and the conditional path
fθ(xt, c, t) guided by a textual prompt c. where fθ denotes
the denoising diffusion network parameterized by θ (e.g.
U-Net, DiT). To exploit both global consistency and con-
ditional fidelity, our framework incorporates two comple-
mentary dimensions of parallelism, condition-based parti-
tioning, and adaptive parallelism switching.
Formally, given the denoising model fθ, the diffusion in-
ference across N devices can be expressed as
x(n)
t−1 = fθ(n)(x(n)
t
, c(bn), t),
n ∈{1, . . . , N},
bn ∈{cond, uncond},


--- Page 5 ---
Time step
T
0
rel −MAE! ϵ", ϵ#
Warm-Up
Stage
Parallelism Stage
𝜏!
𝜏"
Fully-Connecting Stage
Figure 4.
Illustration of the rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) curve.
The
rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) value is relatively large before τ1 and after τ2,
while it converges near zero between them, indicating stable align-
ment between conditional and unconditional branches during the
parallelism phase.
where each θ(n) corresponds to the subset of model pa-
rameters assigned to the n-th device in the pipeline, re-
flecting adaptive parallelism switching across different net-
work stages. Meanwhile, bn ∈{cond, uncond} indicates
whether the device n handles the conditional or uncondi-
tional branch in condition-based partitioning. Accordingly,
each device processes either a conditional input with c or an
unconditional input without c. This formulation jointly rep-
resents both condition-based partitioning and adaptive par-
allelism switching within a unified diffusion framework.
To further enhance performance, the denoising process
is divided into three stages according to the temporal dy-
namics of conditional influence: (1) Warm-Up Stage, where
only ordinal communication occurs between conditional
and unconditional branches; (2) Parallelism Stage, where
both branches are executed in parallel with conditional ex-
change; and (3) Fully-Connecting Stage, which merges the
two branches for the final refinement. The rationale for this
three-phase division and the quantitative criteria for deter-
mining the boundary points τ1 and τ2 are discussed in Sec-
tion 4.2 and Section 4.3, respectively.
4.2. Hybrid Parallel Inference Framework
Figure 4 illustrates the relative-Mean Absolute Error of the
predicted noise (relative-MAE; rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu)) across
the three stages of the proposed hybrid parallelism in the
denoising diffusion model. To determine when the condi-
tional and unconditional branches should interact or remain
independent, we first quantify their denoising discrepancy
during the denoising process.
Since conditional and unconditional denoisers contribute
differently to generation, with one emphasizing semantic
alignment to the text condition and the other stabilizing
global structure, it is essential to measure how their noises
ϵc and ϵu diverge over time. This discrepancy serves as a
key indicator for determining the switching points between
serial and parallel execution within our hybrid framework.
The denoising discrepancy, namely rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu),
quantifies the difference in noise prediction ϵt between the
conditional and unconditional branches at each timestep t,
(where ϵc = ϵθ(xt, c, t) and ϵu = ϵθ(xt, t)), and is formu-
lated as
rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) = Ex,ϵ[∥ϵθ(xt, c, t) −ϵθ(xt, t)∥1]
Ex,ϵ[∥ϵθ(xt, t)∥1]
. (1)
Here, ϵθ(xt, c, t) and ϵθ(xt, t) denote the noise components
predicted from the conditional and unconditional denoisers,
respectively. A larger value indicates a stronger discrepancy
between the two branches, reflecting a higher conditional
influence on the denoising trajectory at that timestep.
According to the trend of denoising discrepancy shown
in Figure 4, which exhibits a U-shaped curve over the entire
denoising process, we divide the process into three stages:
the Warm-Up Stage [T, τ1], the Parallelism Stage (τ1, τ2),
and the Fully Connecting Stage [τ2, 0]. The two parameters,
τ1 and τ2, define the boundaries between these stages and
are automatically determined during the middle of the de-
noising process. The details of how they are determined are
provided in the next section. Intuitively, τ1 marks the point
where the denoising discrepancy ceases to decrease rapidly,
while τ2 indicates the point where it begins to increase.
By measuring denoising discrepancy across 5,000
prompts from the MS-COCO 2014 validation set [15], we
observed that the variation of the error between the condi-
tional and unconditional branches exhibits a clear U-shaped
trend, as further demonstrated in Appendix B.
We now describe each denoising stage in detail.
(1) Warm-Up Stage [T, τ1]. This stage captures the global
outline of the generated image.
The conditional branch
establishes the overall composition from the text prompt,
while the unconditional branch stabilizes the coarse struc-
tural forms. Since both branches have distinct influences,
the denoising discrepancy remains low.
Therefore, each
branch is processed independently using condition-based
partitioning, without adaptive parallelism switching.
(2) Parallelism Stage (τ1, τ2). At this phase, the model
refines local details within the preformed outline. The con-
ditional and unconditional branches begin to converge, and
the denoising discrepancy remains small and stable. To take
advantage of this convergence, adaptive parallelism switch-
ing is activated, enabling a more powerful acceleration of
the denoising process.
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage [τ2, 0].
In the final phase,
fine-grained conditional cues dominate generation.
The
framework reverts to condition-based partitioning, integrat-
ing conditional guidance to reconstruct the final image x0.
A similar three stages structure has also been observed
in previous studies on diffusion conditional guidance [10],
which further supports the validity of our framework.
Building upon this, through this three stages hybrid paral-
lelism framework, our method achieves efficient distributed
denoising while preserving generation quality.


--- Page 6 ---
The denoising discrepancy, rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) can be
extended to flow matching models by replacing ϵθ with
the predicted velocity vθ. In this case, rel-MAEt(vc, vu)
maintains the same role in quantifying the conditional-
unconditional discrepancy over the velocity field.
4.3. Adaptive Switching via Denoising Discrepancy
The core of the proposed hybrid parallelism is to dynam-
ically determine the timesteps τ1 and τ2 during the real-
time denoising process, sequentially switching between the
Warm-Up, Parallelism, and Fully-Connecting modes, while
constructing a scheduling method based on the previously
defined denoising discrepancy.
(1) Determining τ1. For each timestep t, we compute de-
noising discrepancy and calculate the average slope of the
most recent L steps by
Gt = Mt −Mt−L
L
.
(2)
We then select τ ′
1 = min{t | 0 ≤Gt < gslope} and con-
strain it by safety-cap τcap. As shown in Appendix B, τcap is
defined as the global minimum point of the denoising dis-
crepancy curve, and it serves as an upper bound for τ1 dur-
ing automatic selection. The introduction of τcap ensures
stability by covering cases where τ1 is assigned too late or
remains undefined due to outlier behaviors, thus maintain-
ing generation quality while maximizing acceleration.
Consequently, τ1 is given by τ1 = min(τ ′
1, τcap), which
marks the end of the warm-up stage where conditional in-
fluence stabilizes.
(2) Determining τ2. During the parallelism phase, ϵc and
ϵu converge to an identical value, making the denoising dis-
crepancy measurement no longer meaningful. Therefore, τ2
is empirically fixed to a certain number of steps k after τ1,
τ2 = τ1 + k,
k ∈N, 1 ≤k < T −τ1.
(3)
A larger k extends the parallelism phase, resulting in faster
inference but lower generation quality, while a smaller k
improves fidelity at the cost of latency. A detailed analysis
of quality and speed trade-offs with respect to k is presented
in Section 5.4, where we empirically verify the optimal bal-
ance across various k. We also provide the algorithm of
Section 4.3 in Appendix C describes the overall process.
4.4. Theoretical Analysis of Adaptive Switching
Analysis of Denoising Discrepancy by Score Decompo-
sition. The denoising discrepancy can be theoretically in-
terpreted as a ratio between the conditional information
strength and the unconditional data prior. From the score-
decomposition perspective [8, 31], can be approximated as
rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) = ∥ϵc−ϵu∥1
∥ϵu∥1
≈∥∇xt log p(c|xt)∥1
∥su(xt,t)∥1
.
(4)
∇xt log p(c|xt) represents the conditional information
strength and su(xt, t) denotes the unconditional score of
the data distribution. Consequently, denoising discrepancy
measures the relative magnitude between conditional and
unconditional components.
In the score formulation of Eq. (4), the unconditional
score su(xt, t) = ∇xt log p(xt) captures the intrinsic struc-
ture of the data distribution, while the conditional gradient
∇xt log p(c|xt) encodes the semantic influence of the condi-
tioning signal c. Their relative magnitudes evolve naturally
along the diffusion process:
• Warm-Up Stage:
When xt is close to pure noise,
su(xt, t) carries little structural information, whereas
∇xt log p(c|xt) dominates by guiding the global seman-
tic layout from the prompt, leading to a large denoising
discrepancy.
• Parallelism Stage: As denoising progresses, su(xt, t)
reconstructs meaningful local structures and becomes
comparable in magnitude to ∇xt log p(c|xt). This bal-
ance satisfies ∥su(xt, t)∥≈∥∇xt log p(c|xt)∥, yielding
d
dtrel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) ≈0 and motivates the activation of
the parallel inference phase.
• Fully-Connecting Stage: At high SNR, most patterns
have been recovered by su(xt, t), while ∇xt log p(c|xt)
contributes to fine-grained alignment and texture refine-
ment, causing a mild increase in denoising discrepancy.
This interpretation provides an intuitive explanation of
how the relative magnitudes of the conditional and uncondi-
tional scores evolve across timesteps, theoretically support-
ing the three stages proposed (Warm-Up →Parallelism →
Fully Connecting). Detailed derivations of Eq. (4) and the
robustness analysis of τ1 under stochastic denoising noise
are shown in Appendix D and Appendix E, respectively.
4.5. Extensibility to Many GPU Configurations
While the hybrid parallelism framework is optimized for
two GPUs, it also scales well to larger even-numbered con-
figurations. We present two extension strategies.
(1) Batch-Level Extension. In this approach, the model
generates N
2 samples across N GPUs, where each pair of
GPUs produces one image. This structure linearly increases
acceleration with the number of GPUs while maintaining
near-identical generation quality. However, it is most effec-
tive when a large number of samples are generated.
(2) Layer-Wise Pipeline Extension. This method extends
the adaptive parallelism switching mechanism by divid-
ing the optimal pipeline interval into N layer-wise seg-
ments, thereby enabling finer-grained parallel execution
across multiple devices.
Unlike the batch-level scheme,
it can be applied to single-sample generation, though it
may incur slightly reduced acceleration efficiency and mi-
nor quality degradation due to finer partitioning.
The structures and details of both strategies are provided
in Appendix F. Supporting a degree of parallelism greater
than two for a single image is deferred to future work.


--- Page 7 ---
Base Model
Devices
Methods
Latency (s) ↓
Speed-Up ↑
Comm. (GB) ↓
FID ↓
LPIPS ↓
PSNR ↑
w/ G. T.
w/ Orig.
w/ G. T.
w/ Orig.
w/ G. T.
w/ Orig.
Stable Diffusion XL
1
Original Model
16.49
-
-
23.977
-
0.797
-
9.618
-
2
DistriFusion [12]
13.53
1.22×
0.525
24.164
4.864
0.7978
0.146
9.597
24.634
AsyncDiff [2] (stride=1)
12.54
1.31×
9.830
23.941
4.103
0.797
0.108
9.586
26.387
Ours (k=5)
7.12
2.31×
0.516
23.831
4.100
0.796
0.107
9.665
26.640
Stable Diffusion 3
1
Original Model
19.36
-
-
33.433
-
0.810
-
8.086
-
2
AsyncDiff [2] (stride=1)
9.82
1.97×
1.290
33.379
2.032
0.813
0.052
8.155
27.812
xDiT-Ring [4]
14.31
1.35×
121.646
33.356
1.909
0.809
0.047
8.085
27.857
Parastep [32]
9.98
1.94×
0.032
33.340
3.350
0.810
0.112
8.091
22.917
Ours (k=5)
9.33
2.07×
0.189
33.322
1.878
0.780
0.046
8.229
27.875
Table 1. Quantitative comparison of parallelism methods on the Stable Diffusion XL and Stable Diffusion 3 models. We compare
our method with existing distributed inference techniques under 1- and 2-GPU. We report both the baseline latency and the corresponding
acceleration ratio (Speed-Up), Communication efficiency (Comm.), and quantitative metrics assessing generation fidelity. Here, w/ G.T.
denotes comparison with the ground-truth image, and w/ Orig. indicates comparison with the original (single-GPU) model output.
5. Experiments
5.1. Experimental Setup
Models.
We evaluate our proposed hybrid parallelism
framework on two representative diffusion backbones:
Stable Diffusion XL (SDXL) [23] and Stable Diffusion
3.0 (SD3), a DiT-based flow matching model [3]. SDXL
represents U-Net–based latent diffusion models [25], while
SD3 reflects the transformer-based paradigm, demonstrat-
ing the generality of our approach.
Datasets.
All experiments are conducted on the MS-
COCO Captions 2014 benchmark [15], using 5,000 valida-
tion prompts for text-to-image generation. Generated im-
ages are compared against both the ground-truth samples
and the single-GPU original model outputs.
Metrics. We evaluate inference efficiency and generative
quality. Latency and speed-up ratio measure acceleration.
For quality, we report FID (Fr´echet Inception Distance) [6],
LPIPS (Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity) [41],
and PSNR (Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio). Lower FID/LPIPS
and higher PSNR indicate better generation quality.
For implementation details, please refer to Appendix G.
5.2. Main Results
Quantitative Results. Table 1 reports a quantitative com-
parison across SDXL and SD3 pre-train diffusion models.
On SDXL, our method achieves a 2.31× acceleration over
the single-GPU baseline while slightly improving image fi-
delity.
Compared to prior distributed inference methods
such as DistriFusion,[12] and AsyncDiff,[2], our proposed
method attains the best speed–quality trade-off with mini-
mal communication overhead. Notably, our communication
cost is reduced by 19.6× compared to AsyncDiff, due to
adaptive parallelism switching that dynamically determines
optimal parallel intervals to minimize communication cost.
Methods
Latency (s) ↓Speed-Up ↑
FID ↓
(w/ Orig.)
Original Model
16.49
-
-
Full Condition-Based Partitioning
9.24
1.78×
3.623
Ours (Hybrid Parallelism)
7.12
2.31×
4.100
Table 2. Ablation on hybrid parallel components. All exper-
iments are conducted on the SDXL model at 1024×1024 reso-
lution, comparing the single-GPU baseline, full condition-based
partitioning, and our hybrid parallelism framework.
For SD3, a DiT-based flow-matching model, our ap-
proach not only surpasses earlier distributed frameworks
such as DistriFusion and AsyncDiff, but also consis-
tently outperforms more recent baselines, xDiT-Ring and
Parastep. It achieves a 2.07× speed-up with negligible com-
munication cost while maintaining comparable or superior
generation quality. These results emphasize our method’s
strong generality across both U-Net and DiT architectures,
achieving generation efficiency.
Qualitative Results. Figure 5 presents qualitative compar-
isons among distributed inference methods. While Distri-
Fusion and AsyncDiff exhibit boundary artifacts or spatial
inconsistency, our method preserves global coherence and
fine-grained details similar to the original model. These
results confirm that the proposed hybrid parallelism frame-
work maintains high visual fidelity while achieving substan-
tial acceleration. Further results are shown in Appendix I.
5.3. Ablation Study
Ablation on Hybrid Parallel Components. Table 2 an-
alyzes the contribution of each hybrid parallel compo-
nent. We compare three settings: (1) the original single-
GPU model, (2) full condition-based partitioning applied
to all denoising steps, and (3) our proposed hybrid par-
allelism combining both condition-based partitioning and
adaptive parallelism switching. Condition-based partition-


--- Page 8 ---
Original
DistriFusion
AsyncDiff
Ours
Prompt: “A white tray with a vase holding flowers over a cat.”
Speed-Up: 1.23x    FID: 4.86
Speed-Up: 1.32x    FID: 4.13
Speed-Up: 2.32x  FID: 4.10
Figure 5. Qualitative results of the main experiments. We compare 1024×1024 image generations from the SDXL model. Our method
achieves the best acceleration and FID performance, while producing visuals most similar to the original.
Speed-Up ↑
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
FID ↓
3.0x
1.0x
2.0x
0.0
1.5x
2.5x
DistriFusion
AsyncDiff
Ours (k = 5)
Ours (k = 10)
Ours (k = 20)
Ours (k = 30)
Naïve diffusion
Figure 6. Visualization of speed–quality trade-off across differ-
ent parallelism intervals k. Smaller k values preserve higher fi-
delity, whereas larger k achieve greater acceleration. Our method
consistently dominates prior works across the trade-off frontier.
All experiments were conducted on 2 GPUs.
ing achieves a 1.78× speed-up while maintaining image
quality, whereas our hybrid parallelism further improves ef-
ficiency to 2.31× with comparable quality. This demon-
strates that the addition of the pipeline component max-
imizes generation acceleration while minimizing quality
degradation.
Consequently, the proposed framework ef-
fectively integrates the advantages of condition-based parti-
tioning and adaptive parallelism switching.
5.4. Sensitivity Analysis
Impact of Different k Values. As shown in Figure 6, the
parallelism interval k clearly reveals a speed–quality trade-
off: smaller k values preserve higher fidelity, while larger
k values yield faster generation. An appropriate balance
is observed at k=5, achieving both strong quality and ac-
celeration. Moreover, the interval k can be flexibly chosen
by practitioners to adjust the trade-off between efficiency
Latency (s)
2.36x
1.80x
2.72x
1.25x 1.35x
1.54x
10
5
2.5
7.5
20
10
5
15
40
20
10
30
1024 x 1024
2048 x 2048
2560 x 2560
Original
DistriFusion
AsyncDiff
Ours (k=5)
8.12
3.44
4.50
2.99
14.2
13.2
11.6
26.5
25.1
21.5
1.31x 1.38x
1.62x
34.7
17.8
Figure 7.
Comparison of high-resolutions tasks.
We com-
pare different parallel inference methods on the SDXL model us-
ing NVIDIA H200 GPUs across 1024×1024, 2048×2048, and
2560×2560 high-resolutions.
and fidelity.
Quantitative results are summarized in Ap-
pendix H, and qualitative comparisons across different k
values are provided in Appendix J.
High-Resolution Generation. As shown in Figure 7, our
method consistently achieves superior acceleration over ex-
isting distributed inference frameworks across increasing
resolutions.
On the SDXL model using NVIDIA H200
GPUs, our hybrid parallelism attains up to 2.72× speed-up
at 1024×1024, 1.54× speed-up at 2048×2048, and 1.62×
speed-up at 2560×2560, demonstrating strong scalability
for high-resolution image generation.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced a hybrid parallelism framework
for diffusion inference that integrates condition-based par-
titioning with adaptive parallelism switching. Guided by
the denoising discrepancy criterion, the method adaptively
switches between parallelism modes to minimize redundant
communication. It achieves 2.31× and 2.07× latency re-
ductions on SDXL and SD3, respectively, while preserving
fidelity. We also generalize across U-Net and DiT architec-
tures, providing a unified parallelism paradigm for scalable
multi-GPU diffusion inference.


--- Page 9 ---
References
[1] Fan Bao, Chongxuan Li, Jun Zhu, and Bo Zhang. Analytic-
dpm: an analytic estimate of the optimal reverse variance
in diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2022. 1, 3
[2] Zigeng Chen, Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, Zhenxiong Tan,
and Xinchao Wang. Asyncdiff: Parallelizing diffusion mod-
els by asynchronous denoising. Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
37:95170–95197, 2024. 2, 3, 7
[3] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim
Entezari, Jonas M¨uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik
Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling recti-
fied flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2024. 7
[4] Jiarui Fang, Jinzhe Pan, Xibo Sun, Aoyu Li, and Jian-
nan Wang.
xdit: an inference engine for diffusion trans-
formers (dits) with massive parallelism.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.01738, 2024. 3, 4, 7
[5] Jiarui Fang, Jinzhe Pan, Jiannan Wang, Aoyu Li, and
Xibo Sun.
Pipefusion:
Patch-level pipeline parallelism
for diffusion transformers inference.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.14430, 2024. 3, 4
[6] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-
rium. Proceedings of the Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 30, 2017. 7
[7] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
Classifier-free diffusion
guidance. In NeurIPS Workshop on Deep Generative Models
and Downstream Applications, 2021. 3, 2
[8] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.
Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
models. Proceedings of the Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 35:26565–26577, 2022.
6, 2
[9] Zhifeng Kong and Wei Ping. On fast sampling of diffusion
probabilistic models. ICML Workshop on Invertible Neural
Networks, Normalizing Flows, and Explicit Likelihood Mod-
els, 2021. 1, 3
[10] Tuomas Kynk¨a¨anniemi, Miika Aittala, Tero Karras, Samuli
Laine, Timo Aila, and Jaakko Lehtinen. Applying guidance
in a limited interval improves sample and distribution quality
in diffusion models. Proceedings of the Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 37:122458–
122483, 2024. 5
[11] Muyang Li, Ji Lin, Chenlin Meng, Stefano Ermon, Song
Han, and Jun-Yan Zhu. Efficient spatially sparse inference
for conditional gans and diffusion models. Proceedings of
the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 35:28858–28873, 2022. 1, 3
[12] Muyang Li, Tianle Cai, Jiaxin Cao, Qinsheng Zhang, Han
Cai, Junjie Bai, Yangqing Jia, Kai Li, and Song Han. Dis-
trifusion: Distributed parallel inference for high-resolution
diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 7183–7193, 2024. 2, 3, 7
[13] Xiuyu Li, Yijiang Liu, Long Lian, Huanrui Yang, Zhen
Dong, Daniel Kang, Shanghang Zhang, and Kurt Keutzer.
Q-diffusion: Quantizing diffusion models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 17535–17545, 2023. 1, 3
[14] Yanyu Li, Huan Wang, Qing Jin, Ju Hu, Pavlo Chemerys,
Yun Fu, Yanzhi Wang, Sergey Tulyakov, and Jian Ren. Snap-
fusion: Text-to-image diffusion model on mobile devices
within two seconds. Proceedings of the Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36:20662–
20678, 2023. 1, 3
[15] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays,
Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ar, and C Lawrence
Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vi-
sion (ECCV), pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. 5, 7, 1
[16] Yaron Lipman, Ricky TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maxim-
ilian Nickel, and Matt Le.
Flow matching for generative
modeling. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023. 3
[17] Haozhe Liu, Wentian Zhang, Jinheng Xie, Francesco Fac-
cio, Mengmeng Xu, Tao Xiang, Mike Zheng Shou, Juan-
Manuel Perez-Rua, and J¨urgen Schmidhuber. Faster diffu-
sion via temporal attention decomposition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.02747, 2024. 1, 3
[18] Luping Liu, Yi Ren, Zhijie Lin, and Zhou Zhao. Pseudo nu-
merical methods for diffusion models on manifolds. In Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations (ICLR), 2022. 1, 3
[19] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan
Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver: A fast ode solver for diffu-
sion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps. Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS), 35:5775–5787, 2022. 1, 3
[20] Cheng Lu, Yuhao Zhou, Fan Bao, Jianfei Chen, Chongxuan
Li, and Jun Zhu. Dpm-solver++: Fast solver for guided sam-
pling of diffusion probabilistic models. Machine Intelligence
Research, pages 1–22, 2025.
[21] Simian Luo, Yiqin Tan, Longbo Huang, Jian Li, and Hang
Zhao.
Latent consistency models:
Synthesizing high-
resolution images with few-step inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.04378, 2023. 1, 3
[22] Xinyin Ma, Gongfan Fang, and Xinchao Wang. Deepcache:
Accelerating diffusion models for free. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 15762–15772, 2024. 1, 3
[23] Dustin
Podell,
Zion
English,
Kyle
Lacey,
Andreas
Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Jonas M¨uller, Joe Penna, and
Robin Rombach.
Sdxl: Improving latent diffusion mod-
els for high-resolution image synthesis. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024. 7
[24] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and
Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System optimizations enable train-
ing deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters.


--- Page 10 ---
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD), pages 3505–3506,
2020. 1
[25] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 10684–10695, 2022. 7
[26] Tim Salimans and Jonathan Ho. Progressive distillation for
fast sampling of diffusion models. Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2022. 1, 3
[27] Axel Sauer, Dominik Lorenz, Andreas Blattmann, and Robin
Rombach. Adversarial diffusion distillation. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
pages 87–103. Springer, 2024. 1, 3
[28] Andy Shih, Suneel Belkhale, Stefano Ermon, Dorsa Sadigh,
and Nima Anari. Parallel sampling of diffusion models. Pro-
ceedings of the Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS), 36:4263–4276, 2023. 1, 3
[29] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick
LeGresley, Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-
lm: Training multi-billion parameter language models using
model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053, 2019.
1
[30] Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. Denois-
ing diffusion implicit models. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2021. 3, 4
[31] Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Ab-
hishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon, and Ben Poole. Score-based
generative modeling through stochastic differential equa-
tions. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (ICLR), 2021. 6, 2
[32] Kunyun Wang, Bohan Li, Kai Yu, Minyi Guo, and Jieru
Zhao.
Communication-efficient diffusion denoising paral-
lelization via reuse-then-predict mechanism. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.14741, 2025. 3, 4, 7
[33] Felix Wimbauer, Bichen Wu, Edgar Schoenfeld, Xiaoliang
Dai, Ji Hou, Zijian He, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Peizhao Zhang,
Sam Tsai, Jonas Kohler, et al. Cache me if you can: Accel-
erating diffusion models through block caching. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 6211–6220, 2024. 3
[34] Zhisheng Xiao, Karsten Kreis, and Arash Vahdat.
Tack-
ling the generative learning trilemma with denoising diffu-
sion gans. Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022. 1, 3
[35] Xingyi Yang, Daquan Zhou, Jiashi Feng, and Xinchao Wang.
Diffusion probabilistic model made slim. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 22552–22562, 2023. 1, 3
[36] Tianwei Yin, Micha¨el Gharbi, Richard Zhang, Eli Shecht-
man, Fredo Durand, William T Freeman, and Taesung Park.
One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 6613–6623,
2024. 1, 3
[37] Zongsheng Yue, Jianyi Wang, and Chen Change Loy.
Resshift:
Efficient diffusion model for image super-
resolution by residual shifting. Proceedings of the Confer-
ence on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS),
36:13294–13307, 2023. 1, 3
[38] Dingkun Zhang, Sijia Li, Chen Chen, Qingsong Xie, and
Haonan Lu. Laptop-diff: Layer pruning and normalized dis-
tillation for compressing diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.11098, 2024. 1, 3
[39] Jiale Zhang, Yulun Zhang, Jinjin Gu, Jiahua Dong, Linghe
Kong, and Xiaokang Yang. Xformer: Hybrid x-shaped trans-
former for image denoising. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. 1, 3
[40] Qinsheng Zhang and Yongxin Chen. Fast sampling of diffu-
sion models with exponential integrator. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2023. 1, 3
[41] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-
man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of
deep features as a perceptual metric.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 586–595, 2018. 7


--- Page 11 ---
Accelerating Diffusion via Hybrid Data-Pipeline Parallelism
Based on Conditional Guidance Scheduling
Supplementary Material
Methods
Speed-Up ↑
Image
Quality ↑
Model
General. ↑High-res
Synth. ↑
Comm.
Efficiency ↑
Distrifusion
2.5
3.5
2.5
3.3
5.0
AsyncDiff
3.0
4.5
5.0
3.5
1.0
Ours
4.7
4.5
5.0
4.4
5.0
Table 3. Quantitative metrics comparison across five evalua-
tion aspects. Scores are normalized to a 5-point scale. Higher
values ( ↑) indicate better performance.
A. Evaluation of Hybrid Parallelism
Evaluation Protocol. All scores are computed based on a
5-point scale unified min–max scaling scheme, where the
normalized values are re-centered around an average score
of 3. Specifically, each metric is assessed as follows:
• Speed-Up.
We measure the relative acceleration ratio
with respect to the SDXL baseline latency in Table 1.
The measured latencies are 13.53secs for DistriFusion,
12.54secs for AsyncDiff, and 7.12secs for our method.
• Image Quality. We evaluate image quality using FID
scores reported in Table 1 from the main results of SDXL.
The reported FID values are 4.864 for DistriFusion, 4.103
for AsyncDiff, and 4.100 for our method.
• Model Generality. We assign scores based on architec-
ture compatibility. Each model receives 2.5 points for
supporting U-Net and an additional 2.5 points for DiT
support, resulting in scores of 2.5 for DistriFusion, 5 for
AsyncDiff, and 5 for Ours.
• High-resolution Synthesis. The score reflects both high-
resolution generation capability and inference latency.
According to the results in Section 5.4 High-Resolution
Generation, all three methods successfully generate three
target resolutions. The corresponding average latencies
are 14.73secs for DistriFusion, 14.27secs for AsyncDiff,
and 11.99secs for Ours.
• Communication Efficiency. We evaluate the communi-
cation efficiency based on the measured inter-GPU data
transfer communication volume in the SDXL multi-GPU
setting reported in Table 1 from the main results. The
measured communication volumes are 0.525 GB for Dis-
triFusion, 9.830 GB for AsyncDiff, and 0.516 GB for our
method.
MAE mean
±2σ
Timestep 𝑡
rel −MAE!(𝜖", 𝜖#) value
Figure 8. Empirical visualization of denoising discrepancy curve.
B. Empirical Visualization of Denoising
Discrepancy
Figure 8 illustrates the average denoising discrepancy
(rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu)) value measured during the denoising
process based on 5,000 prompts from the MS-COCO
2014 [15] validation set.
The shaded region repre-
sents the ±2σ range, and the denoising model used
is Stable Diffusion XL. The red dot denotes τcap
=
argmin
t
rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu), which is employed as a safety-
cap in the main method.
C. Adaptive Parallelism Switching Algorithm
Algorithm 1 Adaptive Parallelism Switching
via Denoising Discrepancy
Require: latent noise xt, prompt c, steps T, window L,
slope threshold g, safety-cap τcap, interval k
1: τ1, τ2 ←∅
2: for t = T, T −1, . . . , 1 do
3:
ϵc, ϵu ←ϵθ(xt, c, t), ϵθ(xt, t)
4:
Mt ←Ex,ϵ∥ϵc −ϵu∥1
Ex,ϵ∥ϵu∥1
▷rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu)
5:
Gt = Mt−Mt−L
L
6:
if τ1 = ∅and t > L and 0 ≤Gt < g then
7:
τ1 ←min(t, τcap);
τ2 ←τ1 + k
8:
Denoise:
9:
if t ≥τ1 then
10:
WARM-UP
11:
else if t > τ2 then
12:
PARALLELISM
13:
else
14:
FULLY-CONNECTING
15:
end if
16:
xt−1 ←STEP DENOISE(xt, ϵc, ϵu, t)
17: end for
18: return x0, (τ1, τ2)


--- Page 12 ---
D. Derivation of Score-Based Interpretation of
Denoising Discrepancy
The denoising discrepancy(rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu)) criterion in
Eq. (4) can be theoretically derived from the score de-
composition of diffusion models.
Following the ϵ-
parameterization of score-based generative modeling [8,
31], the preconditioned score can be expressed as
sθ(xt, t) ≈−ϵθ(xt, t)
σt
,
(5)
where σt denotes the noise standard deviation at timestep
t. According to Bayes’ rule, the conditional score function
can be decomposed as
sc(xt, t) = su(xt, t) + ∇xt log p(c|xt),
(6)
where su(xt, t) is the unconditional data score,
and
∇xt log p(c|xt) denotes the conditional information flow
[7]. Substituting Eq. ((5)) into Eq. ((6)) yields
ϵc(xt, t) −ϵu(xt, t) ∝σt ∇xt log p(c|xt),
(7)
which implies that the difference between conditional and
unconditional denoiser outputs corresponds to the condi-
tional gradient scaled by σt. Therefore, the rel-MAE at each
timestep t can be approximated as
rel-MAEt = ∥ϵc −ϵu∥1
∥ϵu∥1
≈∥∇xt log p(c|xt)∥1
∥su(xt, t)∥1
.
(8)
This formulation reveals that rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) quantifies
the relative magnitude between the conditional information
and the unconditional data prior—forming the theoretical
basis for the main method equation (Eq. (4)).
E. Robustness of Determine τ1 under
Stochastic Denoising Noise
Diffusion inference is a stochastic denoising process; pre-
dicted noises ϵθ(xt) are subject to random sampling. Con-
sequently, the observed {Mt} fluctuates slightly, and Gt ≈0
may appear prematurely. To ensure robust detection, we de-
fine a finite-difference slope by
Gt = Mt −Mt−L
L
,
(9)
which smooths out stochastic perturbations across L
timesteps. The stability of Gt can be theoretically justified
by Hoeffding’s inequality:
Pr(|Gt −E[Gt]| > δ) ≤2 exp

−
2Lδ2
(b −a)2

.
(10)
Here, L denotes the window length used to compute the
moving-average slope, δ represents the allowable deviation
from the expected slope E[Gt], and a, b correspond to the
minimum and maximum possible range of the observed
rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) values, typically normalized within [0, 1].
As L increases, the variance of the estimated slope de-
creases, and the probability of false detection decreases ex-
ponentially. showing that larger L exponentially reduces
false-alarm probability.
Empirically, L and gslope, which are also established in
our experiments, lie within a stable regime due to strong
autocorrelation of rel-MAEt(ϵc, ϵu) sequences. Thus, τ1
can be reliably detected as the earliest timestep satisfying
0≤Gt <gslope and t≤τcap.
F. Extensibility to Many GPU Configurations
Structures
Figure 9 presents two extensibility structures that scale the
proposed hybrid parallelism framework from the baseline
2 GPUs setup to many GPU configurations.
The first structure, shown in Figure 9a, demonstrates the
batch-level extension under an N GPUs configuration. In
this scheme, each pair of GPUs collaboratively denoises a
single sample while following the three stages hybrid paral-
lelism framework. As a result, the system can generate N/2
samples concurrently with N GPUs, enabling near-linear
throughput scaling when multiple samples are produced.
The second structure, shown in Figure 9b, demonstrates
the layer-wise pipeline extension on a 4 GPUs configura-
tion. Here, the denoising network is partitioned into mul-
tiple layer-wise segments distributed across devices, allow-
ing the hybrid parallelism strategy to be applied to single-
sample generation. While this configuration may exhibit
slightly reduced acceleration efficiency and minor quality
degradation compared to the batch-level extension, it pro-
vides a fine-grained pipeline scheduling mechanism. Im-
portantly, the same structural principles naturally generalize
beyond the 4 GPUs example to arbitrary N GPUs configu-
rations, demonstrating the flexibility and scalability of the
proposed framework.


--- Page 13 ---
𝑥!
𝑥!, 𝑐
Unconditional 
Conditional
(2) Parallelism Stage  (𝜏!, 𝜏")
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage  [𝜏", 0]
𝑥!"#!, 𝑐
𝑥!"#!
𝑥!"#!"$, 𝑐
𝑥$!"#!"%, 𝑐
⋯
𝑥$!"#", 𝑐
𝑥$!"#"
𝑥&
(1) Warm-Up Stage  [𝑇, 𝜏!]
Conditional
Unconditional 
Ordinal Communication
Conditional Communication
Unconditional Communication
𝑐
Conditional Information
⋯
⋯
𝑥!
𝑥!, 𝑐
Unconditional 
Conditional
(2) Parallelism Stage  (𝜏!, 𝜏")
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage  [𝜏", 0]
𝑥!"#!, 𝑐
𝑥!"#!
𝑥!"#!"$, 𝑐
𝑥$!"#!"%, 𝑐
⋯
𝑥$!"#", 𝑐
𝑥$!"#"
𝑥&
(1) Warm-Up Stage  [𝑇, 𝜏!]
Conditional
Unconditional 
⋯
⋯
𝑥!
𝑥!, 𝑐
Unconditional 
Conditional
(2) Parallelism Stage  (𝜏!, 𝜏")
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage  [𝜏", 0]
𝑥!"#!, 𝑐
𝑥!"#!
𝑥!"#!"$, 𝑐
𝑥$!"#!"%, 𝑐
⋯
𝑥$!"#", 𝑐
𝑥$!"#"
𝑥&
(1) Warm-Up Stage  [𝑇, 𝜏!]
Conditional
Unconditional 
⋯
⋯
⋮
𝑥!
Sample 1
GPU 1
GPU 2
𝑥!
Sample 2
GPU 3
GPU 4
𝑥!
Sample 𝐍
𝟐
GPU 
N-1
GPU N
(a) Batch-level extension under N GPUs configuration.
𝑥!
𝑥!, 𝑐
Unconditional 
Conditional
(2) Parallelism Stage  (𝜏!, 𝜏")
(3) Fully-Connecting Stage  [𝜏", 0]
𝑥!"#!, 𝑐
𝑥!"#!
𝑥$!"#", 𝑐
𝑥$!"#"
𝑥$
(1) Warm-Up Stage  [𝑇, 𝜏!]
Conditional
Unconditional 
⋯
⋯
𝑥!"#!"%, 𝑐
𝑥$!"#!"&, 𝑐
⋯
Ordinal Communication
Conditional Communication
Unconditional Communication
𝑐
Conditional Information
𝑥!
(b) Layer-wise pipeline extension on a 4 GPUs configuration.
Figure 9. Extensibility to many GPU configurations structures. This figure illustrates two strategies for scaling the proposed hybrid
parallelism framework to larger GPU configurations. These structures demonstrate how the proposed framework naturally generalizes from
the 2 GPUs setting to both batch-level and layer-wise many GPU configurations.


--- Page 14 ---
Parallelism Interval k
Latency (s) ↓Speed-Up ↑
FID ↓
(w/ Orig.)
k=5
7.12
2.31×
4.100
k=10
6.89
2.39×
5.942
k=20
6.44
2.56×
7.966
k=30
5.94
2.78×
9.191
Table 4. Effect of speed-quality trade-off across different par-
allelism intervals k. All experiments are conducted on the SDXL
model at 1024×1024 resolution with various parallelism intervals.
G. Implementation Details
All experiments adopt the DDIM scheduler [30] with T =
50 timesteps and generate images at a resolution of 1024 ×
1024.
Experiments are performed on NVIDIA GeForce
3090 GPUs (24GB each), connected via PCIe Gen3. The
adaptive switching parameters are set as follows: for SDXL,
we use L = 12, gslope = 0.4 × 10−3, k = 5, and τcap = 15;
for SD3, we set L = 15, gslope = 0.1 × 10−3, k = 5, and
τcap = 40.
H. Quantitative Results on the Parallelism
Interval k
Table 4 summarizes the numerical values corresponding to
the speed–quality trade-off illustrated in Figure 6. As de-
scribed in the Section 5.4, smaller parallelism interval k
preserve higher fidelity, whereas larger k values yield pow-
erful acceleration. The table provides concrete measure-
ments that reflect this trade-off, confirming the same trend
observed in the pareto frontier visualization.


--- Page 15 ---
I. Additional Qualitative Results
Prompt: “Two cats sitting on top of a pair of shoes.”
Original
DistriFusion
AsyncDiff
Ours
Prompt: “A white tray with a vase holding flowers over a cat.”
Speed-Up: 1.23x    FID: 4.82
Speed-Up: 1.32x    FID: 4.21
Speed-Up: 2.32x  FID: 4.14
Prompt: “A bedroom with a bed next to a closet.”
Prompt: “A silver fork and some sliced carrots and fish.”
Figure 10. Additional qualitative results of the main experiments. We compare 1024×1024 image generations from the SDXL model.
Our method achieves the best acceleration and FID performance, while producing visuals most similar to the original.


--- Page 16 ---
J. Qualitative Comparion Results via Different k
Prompt: “Astronaut in a jungle, cold color palette, muted colors, detailed, 8k”
𝑘= 5
𝑘= 10
𝑘= 20
𝑘=30
Prompt: “A photo of running horse.”
Prompt: “A kid wearing headphones and using a laptop.”
Prompt: “A young girl is holding a small cat.”
Figure 11. Additional qualitative comparisons across different k values. We compare 1024×1024 image generations from the SDXL
model across various parallelism intervals. Smaller k values preserve higher visual fidelity, whereas larger k gradually reduce local detail
due to the extended parallelism window. Although the overall appearance remains similar, fine-grained conditional attributes become
subtly blurred as k increases.
