--- Page 1 ---
Data-Driven Optimization of GPU efficiency for Distributed LLM–Adapter Serving
Ferran Agullóa,b,1,∗, Joan Oliverasa,b, Chen Wangc, Alberto Gutierrez-Torrea, Olivier Tardieuc, Alaa Youssefc, Jordi
Torresa,b, Josep Ll. Berrala,b
aBarcelona Supercomputing Center (BSC), Barcelona, Spain
bUniversitat Politècnica de Catalunya - BarcelonaTech (UPC), Barcelona, Spain
cIBM Research, New York, USA
Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) adapters enable low-cost model specialization, but introduce complex caching and schedul-
ing challenges in distributed serving systems where hundreds of adapters must be hosted concurrently. While prior work
has largely focused on latency minimization, resource efficiency through throughput maximization remains underex-
plored. This paper presents a data-driven pipeline that, for a given workload, computes an adapter placement that
serves the workload with the minimum number of GPUs while avoiding request starvation and GPU memory errors.
To that end, the approach identifies the maximum feasible throughput attainable on each GPU by leveraging accurate
performance predictions learned from real serving behavior. The proposed pipeline integrates three components: (i)
a Digital Twin (DT) tailored to LLM-adapter serving, (ii) a distilled machine learning (ML) model trained on DT-
generated data, and (iii) a greedy placement algorithm that exploits ML-based performance estimates to maximize GPU
efficiency. The DT emulates real system dynamics with high fidelity, achieving below 5% throughput estimation error
while executing up to 90× faster than full LLM benchmarking across both predictable and unpredictable workloads.
The learned ML models further accelerate performance estimation with marginal accuracy degradation, enabling scalable
optimization. Experimental results demonstrate that the pipeline substantially improves GPU efficiency by reducing the
number of GPUs required to sustain target workloads. Beyond GPU efficiency, the pipeline can be adapted to alternative
objectives, such as latency minimization, highlighting its versatility for future large-scale LLM serving infrastructures.
Keywords:
Large language models (LLMs), Distributed system, LLM adapters, LoRA adapters, Digital twin, GPU
optimization, Machine learning (ML), Performance modeling
1. Introduction
With the rapid advancement and widespread adoption
of Large Language Models (LLMs), the demand for LLM-
adapters has grown significantly. While LLMs are large-
scale models trained to achieve strong performance across
diverse language tasks, adapters specialize this general
knowledge to concrete applications through lightweight pa-
rameter additions [12, 11, 19, 10]. The use of adapters is
far quicker than training-from-scratch or fine-tuning a new
model, which is a tedious and long process that requires
meticulous data curation and high computation capabili-
ties. Moreover, adapters achieve comparable performance
to other equivalent methods such as in-context learning [4]
or prompt tuning [18, 24].
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: ferran.agullo@bsc.es (Ferran Agulló),
joan.oliveras@bsc.es (Joan Oliveras), chen.wang1@ibm.com (Chen
Wang), alberto.gutierrez@bsc.es (Alberto Gutierrez-Torre),
tardieu@ibm.com (Olivier Tardieu), asyousse@ibm.com (Alaa
Youssef), jordi.torres@bsc.es (Jordi Torres),
josep.ll.berral@upc.edu (Josep Ll. Berral)
1Code
will
be
available
at:
https://github.com/
FerranAgulloLopez/DistributedEfficientAdapterLLMServing
As adapters are increasingly used to specialize and
deploy LLMs across diverse tasks [32], efficiently man-
aging their inference execution has become a key sys-
tems concern [34, 17, 13]. Although adapters were orig-
inally designed to be merged into the backbone model to
avoid additional computation and preserve latency [12],
contemporary serving systems typically keep them un-
merged. This design enables the serving of multiple task-
specific adapters on top of a shared backbone without
replicating its large parameter footprint in GPU mem-
ory.
Such an approach is particularly well suited for
multi-tenant environments, where a system must serve
multiple users, each requiring a distinct model special-
ization [28]. Since adapters are compact, a single GPU
can serve hundreds or even thousands of different special-
izations of the same LLM [29, 5]. This consolidation in-
creases per-GPU throughput by aggregating requests from
the hosted adapters whose individual arrival rates are of-
ten too low to saturate a GPU.
However, excessive adapter packing can cross a criti-
cal threshold where request starvation emerges.
In this
regime, the GPU lacks sufficient memory for intermedi-
ate request states (i.e. KV cache), so requests accumu-
arXiv:2602.24044v1  [cs.DC]  27 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
late faster than they are processed and latency increases
steadily. Determining an allocation that maximizes per-
GPU throughput, and thus GPU utilization, without trig-
gering starvation is non-trivial. This optimal point, de-
noted as Maxpack, depends on the interplay between the
sizes and request arrival rates of the adapters, which vary
across deployments and over time. Adapter size constrains
the GPU memory available for intermediate states and in-
crease computation time, while arrival rate governs the
load induced by each adapter.
To mitigate the GPU footprint of adapter weights, serv-
ing systems often employ dynamic mechanisms that swap
adapters between CPU and GPU memory based on uti-
lization. Adapters resident in GPU memory can execute
requests in parallel with other resident adapters [6], while
swapping enables interleaved execution among adapters
that do not simultaneously coexist on the GPU. Some
frameworks, such as vLLM [15], additionally enforce a
static upper bound on the number of loaded adapters,
Amax, and preallocate the corresponding GPU memory
at initialization. This choice directly shapes Maxpack: in-
creasing Amax reduces memory available for request pro-
cessing, while decreasing it limits achievable parallelism.
Improper tuning of Amax can therefore induce starvation
and, in extreme cases, GPU memory errors.
Building on these observations, this work addresses
the following problem:
given an expected future
workload composed of adapters with heteroge-
neous sizes and request arrival rates, determine
a GPU allocation strategy that maximizes per-
GPU throughput by achieving Maxpack, so that
the workload is served using the minimum number
of GPUs without incurring starvation or memory
errors.
The solution must also derive the correspond-
ing Amax configuration for each GPU. By expected future
workload, we focus on predictable workloads that can be
estimated in advance, such as long-term patterns present
in production traces that exhibit periodicity [34].
This
formulation enables distributed systems to provision the
minimal GPU capacity required for a workload in advance,
improving hardware efficiency. We refer to this optimiza-
tion challenge as the adapter caching problem, whose
output specifies adapter placement across GPUs together
with per-GPU Amax values.
While prior work has explored the optimization of
LLM-adapter serving via kernel-level enhancements [6],
memory management techniques [29], and scheduling
strategies [13], the adapter caching problem remains
largely underexplored.
The closest related work is
dLoRA [34], which, among its contributions, proposes a
greedy, heuristic-based algorithm that proactively deter-
mines a GPU allocation strategy based on long-term work-
load patterns. Whereas dLoRA targets latency reduction
by exploiting all available resources, our objective is to
maximize GPU efficiency by optimizing per-GPU through-
put. To this end, we propose a data-driven pipeline com-
prising three phases: (i) a Digital Twin (DT) that emu-
lates an online LLM-adapter serving system; (ii) a machine
learning (ML) phase that employs data generated by the
DT; and (iii) a greedy algorithm that computes the final
adapter placement to solve the caching problem.
Unlike purely heuristic approaches, our method bases
allocation decisions on learned system behavior obtained
under diverse workload and system conditions. The greedy
algorithm exploits this performance knowledge captured
by the ML models to approach the optimal packing point,
Maxpack, for each GPU, while determining an appropriate
Amax configuration. To train the ML models without in-
curring the prohibitive cost of profiling a real LLM-adapter
serving system, we introduce a Digital Twin that re-
produces the system’s behavior with orders-of-magnitude
faster execution and substantially lower resource consump-
tion. Building this Digital Twin required an in-depth pro-
filing and analysis of the dominant overheads in LLM-
adapter serving, which we also report.
We evaluate our approach using the widely adopted
vLLM framework [15] with LoRA adapters [12].
To il-
lustrate the generality of the adapter caching problem be-
yond a single framework, we additionally provide a brief
analysis using S-LoRA [29] in Appendix A.
In summary, this work makes the following contribu-
tions:
• A data-driven pipeline to solve the adapter
caching problem, minimizing the number of
GPUs required to serve an anticipated work-
load by maximizing per-GPU utilization while avoid-
ing request starvation and memory errors.
The
pipeline integrates a Digital Twin, an ML learning
phase, and a greedy allocation algorithm.
• To our knowledge, the first Digital Twin that em-
ulates LLM-adapter serving.
It runs orders of
magnitude faster than the real system while accu-
rately reproducing key performance metrics and effi-
ciently generating synthetic training data for the ML
learning phase.
• A detailed analysis of the dominant overheads
in LLM-adapter serving, quantifying their inter-
actions under diverse workloads and providing action-
able configuration guidelines.
Paper structure: The remainder of this work is orga-
nized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 present the necessary
background and review prior work, with the former also
showing the adapter caching problem in practice.
Sec-
tions 4, 5, 6, and 7 detail the components of the proposed
pipeline. Section 8 reports the main experimental results,
while Sections 9 and 10 provide discussion and concluding
remarks.
2


--- Page 3 ---
2. Background
2.1. LLM serving
An LLM serving system processes each request through
two sequential phases: prefill and decode. During prefill,
all input tokens are processed in parallel, producing inter-
mediate attention states, commonly referred to as the KV
cache, which are stored in GPU memory to avoid redun-
dant computation during generation. In the decode phase,
output tokens are generated autoregressively, one token at
a time, while newly computed KV values are appended to
memory. Generation terminates upon emission of an end-
of-sequence token or when the maximum output length is
reached.
Because decoding is inherently sequential and there-
fore not compute-intensive, serving systems improve hard-
ware utilization by processing multiple requests in parallel
through batching [25]. As static batching is inefficient un-
der variable output lengths, modern systems instead adopt
continuous batching [37, 15, 22, 21]. It allows requests to
dynamically enter and exit the batch between decoding it-
erations, significantly improving throughput and latency.
At runtime, the number of active requests in the batch
is primarily constrained by GPU memory, as each re-
quest maintains a growing KV cache throughout decod-
ing. Early frameworks conservatively preallocated mem-
ory for the maximum possible output length, resulting in
substantial overprovisioning. In contrast, systems such as
vLLM [15] and S-LoRA [29] employ greedy KV-cache al-
location strategies that reserve memory only for a limited
window of upcoming tokens. While this design improves
memory efficiency, it may lead to request preemption un-
der high volumes of request arrivals.
2.2. (vLLM) Adapter serving
Multiple types of LLM-adapters have been proposed [11,
19, 10, 30]. In this work, we focus on LoRA adapters [12],
which remain the most widely adopted approach. LoRA
introduces trainable weights into specific layers of the
backbone LLM through two low-rank matrices. Their re-
sulting activations are added to the corresponding back-
bone layer outputs, allowing the adapter to learn only
the residual difference between the pretrained and target
tasks. The size of a LoRA adapter is defined by the di-
mensionality of its low-rank latent space, known as rank.
Modern serving systems support parallel execution of
multiple adapters within the same batch through kernel-
level optimizations [6].
Nevertheless, a request can be
processed only if both the backbone model and adapter
weights reside in GPU memory. Adapter weights there-
fore reduce the memory available for requests KV cache.
To alleviate this limitation, adapters are dynamically swap
between CPU and GPU depending on their current usage.
In vLLM, GPU memory is statically partitioned at ini-
tialization by reserving a fixed region for adapter weights.
This design limits the maximum number of simultaneously
loaded adapters, denoted as Amax.
Although tunable,
0
100
200
300
adapters (#)
1000
2000
3000
4000
throughput (toks/s)
Varying size (rank)
8
16
32
64
0
100
200
300
adapters (#)
Varying rate (reqs/s)
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0.1
0.2
0
100
200
300
adapters (#)
Varying Amax
12
96
120
256
320
Not starvation
Starvation
Maxpack
Memory error
Figure 1: Throughput as a function of the number of served adapters
under varying adapter sizes (left), arrival rates (center) and config-
ured Amax (right). Each line corresponds to experiments in which
all parameters are held constant except for the number of adapters.
Results were obtained using vLLM with Llama-2-7B [31] and a public
LoRA adapter [36].Unless otherwise specified, the default configura-
tion is: adapter size 8 (rank), per-adapter arrival rate 0.05 req/s,
250 input tokens per request, and 231 output tokens per request. In
the two leftmost plots, Amax is set equal to the number of served
adapters. Smax is configured to match the adapter size used in each
experiment.
there is no principled methodology to choose its optimal
value. Furthermore, vLLM assigns a uniform maximum
memory footprint per adapter, Smax, causing all adapters
to occupy identical GPU memory space regardless of their
actual size.
S-LoRA [29] mitigates these limitations by
jointly managing KV-cache and adapter-weight memory
within a unified cache. However, given the archival sta-
tus of its codebase and its limited adoption in practice, it
is not used as the primary framework in this study. An
exploratory analysis is provided in Appendix A.
2.3. Illustrating the adapter caching problem
Fig. 1 illustrates the adapter caching problem under ho-
mogeneous workloads on a single GPU. Each curve shows
the throughput as a function of the number of concurrently
served adapters. Two distinct regimes are consistently ob-
served in each line. Initially, throughput increases approx-
imately linearly as additional adapters introduce more re-
quest load that can be efficiently batched together. Be-
yond a certain point, throughput saturates or degrades due
to insufficient GPU memory for KV-cache allocation, re-
sulting in request starvation. The transition between these
two regimes marks the optimal packing point Maxpack
targeted in this work, which maximizes throughput while
avoiding starvation. In practice, we identify this point as
the highest measured throughput that remains above 90%
of the total incoming token rate.
The location of Maxpack is highly sensitive to adapter
size, arrival rate, and the configured value of Amax, as a
consequence of the adapter-serving overheads analyzed in
Section 5.1. Larger adapters reduce the available mem-
ory for request processing and increase computation cost,
yielding lower Maxpack points. Lower arrival rates sim-
ilarly obtain lower peak points, as more adapters are
required to saturate GPU memory, increasing adapter
overheads.
The choice of Amax introduces a trade-off
between reserving excessive memory for adapters (e.g.,
Amax = 320) and restricting achievable parallelism (e.g.,
3


--- Page 4 ---
GPU 3
GPU 2
GPU 1
GPU 0
Greedy loop
decide adapter 
placement based on (a)
ROUTER
RESOURCE
MANAGER
run periodically
  Expected
  workload (a)
  - Required adapters
  - Adapter sizes
  - Adapter request     
    arrival rates
FORECASTER
User B
predict future workload
  Adapter
  allocation (b)
  - Adapter-to-GPU 
    placement
  - Per-GPU Amax   
    configuration
A
Adapters
request for adapter A
request for adapter B
PROPOSED DATA-DRIVEN PIPELINE
Allocation maximizes
GPU utilization,
minimizing GPUs
needed (maximizing
efficiency)
ML model
Fast and
interpretable
model
refined to a
  - Expected         
    workload (a)
  - Candidate       
    adapter             
    allocation (b)
  - Expected         
    throughput
  - Starvation       
    risk
DT generates training
data, avoiding costly
and time-intensive
LLM benchmarking
trained offline with
created by a
Dataset of LLM-
adapter serving
performance under
heteregenous
workloads
Digital Twin (DT)
Predictive 
behaviour 
simulation
Code-based
behavior 
simulation
mixing
Complete simulation of an LLM-adapter
serving system
Small set of
experiments in a
single GPU system
parametrized by
Caching
greedy
algorithm
PRODUCTION SYSTEM
sends
returns
User A
C
F
B
Adapters
D
Adapters
E
GPU 4
HARDWARE
SPARED
GPUS
allocate
1
2
3
4
6
5
Figure 2: Proposed data-driven pipeline to address the adapter caching problem (right), shown alongside its expected usage within a production
system (left). The numbered red markers indicate the recommended reading order of the workflow.
Amax = 96). While the results shown correspond to homo-
geneous workloads, substantially higher variance arises un-
der heterogeneous adapter sizes and arrival rates. Lastly,
memory errors (marked as crosses) occur for large adapter
sizes and low arrival rates as Amax is trivially set equal
to the number of served adapters, resulting in the reser-
vation of more GPU memory for adapter weights than is
available.
3. Related work
3.1. LLM adapter optimization
A growing body of work has focused on improving the
efficiency of LLM-adapter serving systems. Existing ap-
proaches can be broadly categorized into three levels:
kernel-level optimizations, such as Punica [6], which en-
ables batching requests across multiple adapters; memory-
level optimizations, exemplified by S-LoRA [29], which
extends vLLM by dynamically partitioning GPU mem-
ory across both requests and adapters; and scheduler-level
techniques, including CaraServe [17], Chameleon [13], and
dLoRA [34].
CaraServe reduces cold-start overheads and optimizes
request scheduling for heterogeneous adapter sizes, while
Chameleon improves adapter cache management and in-
troduces an express-lane mechanism for short requests.
Both systems present detailed performance analyses, with
CaraServe focusing mainly on the computational overhead
of mixing adapters and Chameleon emphasizing Time To
First Token (TTFT) and adapter loading time.
The work most closely related to ours is dLoRA [34],
which proposes a distributed adapter-serving system that
incorporates placement decisions based on both short-term
and long-term workload patterns observed in production
traces. For short-term dynamics—largely driven by unpre-
dictable output lengths—dLoRA employs a reactive Inte-
ger Linear Programming (ILP)-based optimization to up-
date placement decisions at runtime. For longer-term and
more predictable workload patterns, it adopts a heuristic-
based algorithm that operates in a proactive manner. Both
strategies aim to minimize request latency while utilizing
all available resources.
In contrast, our work focuses on long-term behavior and
targets GPU resource efficiency, a largely unexplored di-
mension in prior studies. We adopt a data-driven approach
grounded in real system behavior and complement it with
a detailed performance analysis of adapter-serving over-
heads. In particular, we emphasize throughput and Inter-
Token Latency (ITL), which form the foundation for the
development of our proposed Digital Twin.
3.2. LLM simulators or digital twins
Several simulators have been proposed to model de-
fault LLM serving behavior. Vidur [1] aims to simplify
server configuration selection by training random forest
4


--- Page 5 ---
models on benchmarking data to predict performance met-
rics. LLMServingSim [7] emulates the continuous batching
loop of LLM serving systems and is primarily intended for
architecture exploration.
Beyond simulators, more spe-
cific analytical performance models have also been pro-
posed.
Latency is commonly approximated as a linear
function of batch size, following earlier studies on generic
AI models [38, 27].
In the context of adapter serving,
CaraServe [17] models adapter computation latency as a
linear function of batch size and either the sum or the
maximum adapter size within the current batch.
To the best of our knowledge, no existing simulator
or digital twin explicitly models the combined dynam-
ics of adapter caching, KV-cache allocation, and contin-
uous batching in multi-adapter LLM serving. Our Digital
Twin combines code-based simulation with predictive be-
havior modeling. The latter relies on performance models
that reuse existing analytical formulations where applica-
ble, while incorporating additional components and refine-
ments to accurately capture adapter-serving behavior un-
der heterogeneous workloads.
3.3. Extension of prior workshop version
A preliminary version of this work was presented at the
NeurIPS ML for Systems Workshop (2025) [20], where
throughput maximization was addressed in single-GPU
settings via Maxpack estimation.
This manuscript sub-
stantially extends that work by generalizing the problem
to distributed multi-GPU environments and introducing a
greedy placement algorithm for adapter allocation. More-
over, the ML component is reformulated as a distilled sur-
rogate of the Digital Twin (DT), enabling efficient perfor-
mance prediction to guide placement under heterogeneous
workloads. Finally, the experimental evaluation is signifi-
cantly expanded, including validation under unpredictable
arrival patterns and distributed scenarios not considered
in the workshop version.
4. Pipeline overview
Fig. 2 illustrates the proposed data-driven pipeline and
its expected integration within a production system. In-
spired by the long-term predictive strategy of dLoRA, the
pipeline is designed to be periodically reinvoked based
on an anticipated workload.
A workload is character-
ized by the required adapters, their sizes, and their re-
quest arrival rates. Given this workload, the pipeline com-
putes an adapter-to-GPU placement together with the op-
timal Amax configuration per device. The resulting allo-
cation maximizes per-GPU utilization by driving a subset
of devices to their maximum feasible packing throughput
(Maxpack), thereby minimizing the number of GPUs re-
quired to serve the workload. The remaining devices can
be reassigned to other workloads to improve overall system
efficiency or powered down to reduce energy consumption.
The pipeline consists of three components: (i) a Dig-
ital Twin (DT), (ii) an ML learning phase, and (iii) a
Send new arrivals from last
step to scheduler
Retrieve active batch from
scheduler
Update adapters in CPU and
GPU based on active batch
Run model forward pass for
active batch
SCHEDULER
Every step actions
ADAPTER
CACHE
MODEL
Components
Performance
models
 
scheduler latency
 
available memory
 
loading latency
 
model latency
Figure 3: Digital Twin behavior and architecture.
greedy adapter caching algorithm. The greedy algorithm
produces the final placement decision, relying on perfor-
mance predictions generated by the ML models. Trained
offline, these models estimate the achievable throughput of
a GPU under a given adapter placement and Amax config-
uration, and predict whether starvation may arise. An op-
tional refinement phase can simplify the models into faster
and more interpretable surrogates, at the cost of limited
accuracy degradation.
Training such models requires a large and diverse
dataset capturing LLM-adapter serving behavior across
heterogeneous workloads. Exhaustively constructing this
dataset via real-system benchmarking is computationally
prohibitive due to its execution time and resource cost. To
overcome this limitation, we introduce a Digital Twin that
emulates the internal dynamics of an LLM-adapter serving
system through a combination of code-based and predic-
tive behavior simulation. The DT operates orders of mag-
nitude faster and with substantially lower resource con-
sumption than full-system benchmarking, enabling large-
scale synthetic data generation to train the ML mod-
els. While the DT provides high-fidelity performance esti-
mates, it is not directly invoked by the greedy caching algo-
rithm, as the ML surrogate enables significantly faster in-
ference and improved interpretability, making the pipeline
suitable for production deployment. Prior to use, the DT
requires a lightweight parameterization phase based on a
small set of benchmarking experiments executed on the
target hardware and model configuration.
5. Digital twin
The proposed Digital Twin (DT) reproduces the behav-
ior of an online LLM–adapter serving system. Rather than
acting as a simple performance metric estimator, the DT
emulates system state transitions and execution dynam-
ics within the continuous batching loop that characterizes
modern serving frameworks. This design enables accurate
performance estimation under heterogeneous and diverse
workload distributions. The DT operates offline and ex-
clusively on CPU to facilitate cost-efficient generation of
training data for the ML models. Offline execution refers
5


--- Page 6 ---
to advancing a simulated clock while accounting for real
execution time, thereby avoiding idle waiting and preserv-
ing the possibility of easily extending the approach to an
online simulation if required.
The DT is built on a set of modular components, each
modeling a specific part of the real system. These com-
ponents reproduce system behavior through simplified yet
structurally analogous logic (code-based simulation) and
integrate lightweight predictive performance models to es-
timate the latency of the most computationally intensive
operations without executing them.
As depicted in Fig. 3, each simulation step begins by
injecting new request arrivals according to the real execu-
tion time and the workload arrival distribution. Requests
are then passed to the scheduler, which updates the ac-
tive batch by removing completed requests and admitting
new ones. Following the design of vLLM, a greedy KV-
cache allocation strategy is applied. The updated batch
is subsequently processed by the adapter cache and model
components, which emulate adapter loading/unloading as
well as the model forward pass, respectively.
As a standard Digital Twin, the DT requires the same
inputs as the real system to perform the simulation. These
include the execution duration and detailed workload char-
acteristics, namely the arrival time of each request, the
target adapter, adapter size, request input length, and
the configured GPU Amax value. Unlike the real system,
however, the DT does not internally derive the amount
of output tokens per request. Instead, the expected out-
put length must also be provided as an input parameter.
Nevertheless, our evaluation shows that using the aver-
age output length across requests yields sufficiently accu-
rate performance estimates while remaining practical to
approximate in production environments. By reproducing
all major execution stages of a real serving system, the DT
can generate a wide range of performance metrics, includ-
ing throughput, ITL, and TTFT.
5.1. Performance analysis
We describe the four main overheads that we encoun-
tered when working with adapters. This exploration rep-
resents the foundation for the design and implementation
of the DT and its predictive performance models. Exper-
iments setup is described in Section 8.1.
5.1.1. Increased memory usage
As introduced, storing adapter weights in GPU memory
reduces the capacity available for the requests KV-cache,
which limits the batch size and thus the throughput. Fig. 4
shows this decrease in both batch size and throughput,
which appears earlier and more sharply for larger models
and adapters due to their higher memory footprint. Un-
expectedly, throughput decays exponentially rather than
linearly as batch size.
This discrepancy arises from a
broader trait of LLM serving unrelated to adapter pro-
cessing. As reported in several works, increasing the batch
0
200
400
600
800
adapters in GPU (#)
0
50
100
150
Batch size (#)
0
200
400
600
800
adapters in GPU (#)
0
2000
4000
Throughput (toks/s)
50
100
150
200
batch size (#)
25
50
75
100
125
ITL (ms)
Llama-2-7B
Llama-2-13B
size 8
size 16
size 32
Figure 4: Evolution of batch size and throughput with increasing
numbers of loaded adapters (left, center) and ITL versus batch size
(right), across models and adapter sizes. Crosses denote the point
where GPU memory is exhausted.
Measurements were obtained
by oversaturating a single-GPU system and issuing backbone-only
requests to isolate the memory overhead of adapter weights.
Mi-
nor variations in ITL across adapter sizes are nevertheless observed,
likely due to additional operations triggered in vLLM when adapters
are activated, even if unused.
size beyond a certain point leads to diminishing returns
in throughput—a phenomenon known as the throughput
plateau [25, 26, 2]. This implies that, for example, with
Llama-2-7B although the first 100 loaded adapters reduce
the batch size, their impact on throughput is negligible, a
characteristic that, to the best of our knowledge, we are the
first to report. Lastly, the rightmost plot of Fig. 4 presents
the relationship between ITL and batch size, which, con-
sistent with prior reports for generic AI models [38, 27],
exhibits a linear scaling trend.
Insight. Each loaded adapter affects throughput, de-
pending on model and adapter size—but this impact may
fade due to the throughput plateau.
5.1.2. Increased computational workload
Fig. 5 shows the throughput slowdown and ITL over-
head caused by the additional computation and GPU in-
ternal transfers required to process adapters instead of
only the backbone LLM. Both metrics increase approxi-
mately linearly with the number of adapters, except for
the sharp drop from zero to one adapter. This drop corre-
sponds to the shift from a backbone-only setup to one that
must compute both backbone and adapter activations, in-
cluding the additional GPU data transfers involved. Be-
yond this point, computation and transfer overheads from
multiple adapters is partially parallelized.
Adapter size
has a limited impact, with size 32 occasionally yielding
lower overhead than size 16.
Insight.
Serving adapters introduces computational
overhead in both throughput and ITL compared to
backbone-only execution, increasing linearly with the
number of adapters.
5.1.3. Loading time
Fig. 6 presents the loading time to GPU memory rel-
ative to request latency, distinguishing between loading
from disk and from CPU memory.
Larger adapters in-
troduce greater overhead due to their increased size, and
disk loading is on average 70% slower than CPU loading.
Request length also strongly affects the relative impact:
6


--- Page 7 ---
1
20
40
60
80
100
adapters (#)
1
5
10
15
20
Throughput slowdown (%)
1
20
40
60
80
100
adapters (#)
1
5
10
15
20
ITL overhead (%)
Llama-2-7B
size 8
size 16
size 32
Figure 5: Throughput slowdown and ITL overhead for increasing
adapters across three adapter sizes. Results are shown for Llama-2-
7B and relative to backbone-only execution. To avoid the impact of
adapter weights, we fix the batch size and number of loaded adapters
within each line. Lines are shorter for larger adapter sizes due to their
reduced achievable batch size, which limits the maximum number of
runnable adapters.
size 8
size 16
size 32
0
20
40
60
80
relative load impact (%)
From disk
size 8
size 16
size 32
0
5
10
15
From CPU
23/27 lengths
250/230 lengths
423/357 lengths
Figure 6: Loading times for varying adapter sizes, shown relative
to request latency across three input/output lengths for Llama-2-
7B and storage type.
Request latency is computed as TPOT ∗
(output_tokens −1), where TPOT is the time per output token.
for small requests, CPU loading adds 7–16% latency de-
pending on adapter size, whereas for longer requests the
overhead falls below 2%. This reduction occurs because
the fixed cost of loading becomes negligible compared to
the computation time of longer requests.
Insight.
Loading overhead is significant only for
short requests and can be largely mitigated by preload-
ing adapters into CPU memory.
5.1.4. Scheduler
Fig. 7 shows the relative impact of the scheduler com-
ponent across varying numbers of adapters and configured
Amax. When the number of adapters is high but Amax is
small, scheduling accounts for nearly 6% of execution time;
in all other cases, its impact is negligible. This behavior is
specific to the vLLM implementation rather than to LLM
adapter serving in general. It occurs because vLLM iter-
ates over all pending requests to select those admissible to
the active batch; with small Amax, the scheduler must scan
a larger fraction of requests to find those corresponding to
loaded adapters, as requests from unloaded adapters can-
not be processed because Amax has already been reached.
Insight. The scheduler component of vLLM may in-
troduce an overhead when Amax is small relative to the
number of adapters.
5.2. Predictive performance models
As illustrated on the right side of Fig. 3, the Digital Twin
relies on four predictive performance models, summarized
in Equation (1).
Three of these models estimate task-
specific latency—Latsched, Latload and Latmodel—while
100
200
300
400
500
adapters (#)
2
4
Relative scheduler time (%)
Amax = 8
Amax = 32
Amax = 64
Amax = 128
Amax = 256
Amax = 448
Figure 7: Scheduler time relative to the average per-step execution
time, as a function of the number of adapters and configured Amax.
the fourth, Memmax, serves as an auxiliary estimator used
by the scheduler to determine the maximum number of
requests that can be batched together under the memory
pressure introduced by adapter weights (see Section 5.1.1).
Specifically, Memmax takes Amax and Smax as inputs and
outputs the maximum number of request tokens that can
fit within GPU memory (Tmax). This estimator is derived
directly from profiled data, analogous to the leftmost plot
in Fig. 4, but estimates the achievable token count rather
than batch size. Although an analytical formulation could
be derived from backbone and adapter sizes, using em-
pirical profiling results proved more straightforward and
equally accurate.
The latency model Latsched is used by the scheduler
to estimate the time spent in the original vLLM schedul-
ing component. It takes as input the batch size (B), the
number of pending requests (RP ), the number of unique
adapters currently in the batch (AB), and the total num-
ber of adapters being served (A). Its formulation follows
a parameterized analytical expression with constants cal-
ibrated through profiling. The first two terms represent
the baseline scheduling behavior: an iteration over the ac-
tive batch to detect completed requests and manage KV
allocation, followed by a partial iteration over pending
requests to assess their eligibility for inclusion.
The fi-
nal term models the overhead described in Section 5.1.4,
which accounts for the additional execution time caused
by scheduler-specific inefficiencies.
The model Latload estimates the time required to load
adapters during swapping (L) as a function of their size S
(see Section 5.1.3), assuming unloading is negligible. Sim-
ilar to Memmax, this model is derived directly from pro-
filed data, specifically the measurements used to generate
Fig. 6. Loading is modeled from CPU memory, since disk
loading is treated as a one-time initialization cost.
Finally, Latmodel estimates the latency arising from
GPU transfers and model forward pass.
It is decom-
posed into two components: the backbone LLM latency
(Latbackbone) and the additional computational overhead
from serving adapters (OverheadA).
The backbone la-
tency is modeled as a linear function of batch size, consis-
tent with prior work [38, 27] and supported by the profiling
results in the rightmost plot of Fig. 4. The adapter-related
overhead is modeled as a linear function of the number of
adapters, following the findings in Fig. 5, which differs
from previous modeling [17]. The constants for both com-
ponents are parametrized from the profiling data shown in
7


--- Page 8 ---
the referenced figures.
Memmax(Amax, Smax) = Tmax
Latsched(B, RP , AB, A) = K1B + K2RP + K3RP
AB
A
Latload(SA) = LA
Latmodel(B, A) = Latbackbone ∗OverheadA
= (K4B + K5) ∗(K6A + K7)
(1)
where all constants Kx are parametrized with bench-
marking data on the chosen backbone LLM, adapter types,
and hardware configuration.
6. ML modeling
The ML phase produces two predictive models that esti-
mate, for a single-GPU setting, (i) achievable throughput
and (ii) starvation risk for a given workload, adapter place-
ment and Amax configuration. These estimators are re-
peatedly invoked by the greedy caching algorithm to guide
distributed placement decisions. We adopt classical ma-
chine learning techniques, including Random Forests and
Support Vector Machines, which provide strong predictive
accuracy with moderate computational overhead. An op-
tional refinement phase further reduces inference latency
and improves interpretability, both critical for scalable and
accountable production deployment.
The models are trained on a performance dataset gen-
erated by executing the Digital Twin across a wide range
of workload and device configurations.
Each simulated
scenario contributes one sample consisting of: (i) a fea-
ture vector encoding workload and device characteristics,
(ii) the DT-estimated throughput, and (iii) a binary star-
vation indicator.
Starvation is defined as the condition
where DT-estimated throughput falls below 90% of the
total incoming token rate. Although the DT supports ar-
bitrary workload distributions, training data is restricted
to long-term workload patterns that can be anticipated
in advance. In practice, request arrivals are modeled as
a Poisson process with different arrival rates, and simula-
tions use the average input and output token lengths of
requests, which are assumed to be predictable in produc-
tion environments.
The feature vector characterizes both the expected
workload and the GPU configuration, comprising:
the
number of served adapters A; the sum and standard de-
viation of adapter arrival rates; the maximum, mean, and
standard deviation of adapter sizes; and the configured
Amax value. Two independent models are trained: a re-
gression model for throughput prediction and a binary
classifier for starvation detection.
6.1. Refinement phase
Among all evaluated model families, tree–based models
achieve the best trade-off between predictive accuracy and
interpretability. We therefore further refine these models
along two complementary dimensions: inference efficiency
and interpretability.
Starting from the best-performing
trained model, we progressively reduce model complexity
until obtaining a single shallow decision tree. To this end,
the hyperparameter optimization process is modified to
strongly penalize complex structures. Model complexity
is quantified as the number of logical decision rules of the
form "condition1 ∧condition2 ∧· · · →output" into which
a decision tree can be decomposed. After complexity re-
duction, inference performance is further optimized by ex-
tracting the learned decision logic and re-implementing it
in plain Python, accelerated using Numba [16]. This ap-
proach removes framework overhead and leverages code
compilation to generate efficient machine code. Overall,
this refinement phase substantially reduces inference la-
tency and improves model interpretability, at the cost of
a moderate degradation in predictive accuracy.
7. Caching greedy algorithm
The greedy caching algorithm constitutes the final stage
of the proposed pipeline.
Its objective is to solve the
adapter caching problem by minimizing the number of
GPUs required to serve a given workload through appro-
priate adapter placement and Amax configuration, while
avoiding starvation and memory errors.
The algorithm
leverages the ML models to estimate the expected through-
put and starvation risk associated with candidate GPU
allocations and device configurations.
This problem can be viewed as a sophisticated variant of
the bin packing problem [8], and is therefore NP-hard. To
address it efficiently, we adopt a tailored variation of the
First-Fit Decreasing (FFD) algorithm [14], adapted to the
specific constraints and objectives of the adapter caching
problem.
The pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 1. The algorithm
takes as input the expected future workload, defined by the
set of adapters to serve (A), and for each adapter a ∈A, its
expected size s[a] and arrival rate λ[a]. It also receives the
total number of GPUs in the system (G). The outputs are
the GPU assignment of each adapter (g[a]) and the config-
uration of Amax per GPU (Amax[g]). If no starvation-free
allocation is feasible, the algorithm raises an exception to
enforce the non-starvation constraint.
The algorithm follows a greedy strategy, allocating
adapters sequentially to maximize GPU packing up to the
optimal point Maxpack.
Allocation order is determined
by the PrioritySorting step: adapters are first sorted
by size (largest first) and then by arrival rate in a zigzag
order (alternating between high and low) while preserv-
ing size-based ordering. Sorting by size groups adapters
with similar sizes and prioritizes larger ones first, thereby
preventing newly allocated adapters from increasing Smax
device configuration. The zigzag ordering was selected em-
pirically, as it consistently improved throughput in our
8


--- Page 9 ---
experiments.
Exhaustive per-adapter testing is infeasi-
ble, so the algorithm performs provisional allocations via
ProvisionalInclude until a predefined testing point is
reached (ReachTestingPoint).
At that point, feasi-
bility is evaluated: successful allocations are committed
(CommitAllocation), while failed ones are rolled back
(RollbackAllocation), merged back into the pending
queue (Merge), and retried on another GPU. In this
work, testing points correspond to cumulative adapter
counts [8, 16, 32, 64, 96, 128, 160, 192, 256, 320, 384].
After the main loop terminates, any remaining provisional
allocations are validated and committed.
Algorithm 1 Caching greedy algorithm
Input: GPUs
G
=
{g1, . . . , gM};
adapters
A
=
{a1, . . . , aN}; sizes s[a]; rates λ[a]
Output: Assignment g[a]; configuration Amax[g]
1: g[a] ←∅for all a ∈A;
Amax[g] ←0 for all g ∈G
2: A ←PrioritySorting(A, key = (λ[a], s[a]))
3: Aq ←Queue(A);
Gq ←Queue(G)
4: while Aq ̸= ∅do
5:
a ←PopLeft(Aq)
6:
if Gq = ∅then Error Starvation
7:
g ←PopLeft(Gq)
8:
ProvisionalInclude(g, a, s[a], λ[a])
9:
if ReachTestingPoint(g) then
10:
(ok, alloc_set, pnew) ←TestAllocation(g)
11:
if ok then
12:
CommitAllocation(g)
13:
for all a′ ∈alloc_set do g[a′] ←g
14:
Amax[g] ←pnew
15:
PushLeft(Gq, g)
16:
else
17:
un_alloc_set
←
RollbackAllocation(g)
18:
Aq ←Merge(Aq, un_alloc_set)
19:
end if
20:
else
21:
PushLeft(Gq, g)
22:
end if
23: end while
24: for all g ∈G with non-tested allocation do
25:
(ok, alloc_set, pnew) ←TestAllocation(g)
26:
if not ok then Error Starvation
27:
repeat lines 12-14
28: end for
29: return (Assignment g[a], configuration Amax[g])
Feasibility
is
evaluated
by
the
TestAllocation
method, which also determines the optimal Amax config-
uration.
Its pseudocode is shown in Algorithm 2.
The
method receives as input the GPU under evaluation and
its internal state, including the number of firmly allocated
adapters, the set of provisionally included adapters, and
their respective sizes and arrival rates. For brevity, inter-
nal state management is omitted from the pseudocodes.
The method first queries the ML model for throughput
predictions using MLPredictThroughput, evaluating
the GPU state under two configurations: the current Amax
and the next candidate. As with adapter allocation, ex-
haustive exploration of all configurations is intractable. In-
stead, candidate Amax values are restricted to a predefined
set returned by NextGPUConfig, which reuses the same
array of adapter counts defined earlier. The configuration
yielding the highest predicted throughput is selected. Sub-
sequently, the method invokes MLPredictStarvation to
check whether the selected configuration, given the current
GPU internal state, would lead to starvation. If starva-
tion is predicted, the allocation is rejected as infeasible;
otherwise, the method returns the set of new allocatable
adapters along with the chosen Amax configuration.
Algorithm 2 TestAllocation(g)
Input: GPU g; internal state = (Aalloc, Aprov, s[·], λ[·], p)
Output: (ok, alloc_set, pnew)
1: pnext ←NextGPUConfig(g)
2: Aall ←Aalloc ∪Aprov
3: T ←MLPredictThroughput(Aall, s[·], λ[·], p)
4: Tnext ←MLPredictThroughput(Aall, s[·], λ[·], pnext)
5: if T > Tnext then pbest ←p else pbest ←pnext
6: starve ←MLPredictStarvation(Aall, s[·], λ[·], pbest)
7: if starve then return (False, ∅, ∅)
8: return (True, Aprov, pbest)
8. Evaluation
This section evaluates the Digital Twin and ML learning
phase in approximating real LLM-adapter serving behav-
ior, and the effectiveness of the caching greedy algorithm
in addressing the adapter caching problem.
8.1. Setup
Follows detailed information about the experimental
setup:
Data. We sample requests from a cleaned version of the
ShareGPT dataset [3], preserving their original heteroge-
neous input and output lengths. Nevertheless, for the data
used to parametrize the DT performance models, we gen-
erate synthetic requests composed of random words from
the /usr/share/dict/words file of Unix systems to avoid
bias in request content.
Metrics. In all textual references, figures, and tables,
throughput denotes the total processing rate, computed as
the sum of input throughput (tokens processed as input)
and output throughput (tokens generated as output).
LLM models. We use Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct [9] and
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct [35] with LoRA adapters of different
sizes derived from two HuggingFace adapters [33, 39]. As
of Section 5.1, developed early in this work, we test Llama-
2-7B and Llama-2-13B models [31] with LoRA adapters
9


--- Page 10 ---
also based on a HuggingFace adapter [36]. In all experi-
ments, we set Smax as the maximum adapter size found
in every tested scenario, which is the default behaviour
expected in vLLM.
ML learning phase. We evaluate three model types:
K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN), Random Forest (RF), and
Support Vector Machine (SVM), all coming from the
Python scikit-learn library [23].
Training is performed
with 5-fold cross-validation, and hyperparameter tuning is
conducted using the HalvingGridSearchCV method from
scikit-learn.
The details of the hyperparameter search
space are reported in Appendix B.
Framework.
All experiments are conducted with
vLLM version v0.8.5, except for the analyses in Sec-
tion 5.1,
which was performed earlier using version
v0.5.0.post1. In terms of implementation, we introduce mi-
nor modifications to the server components to collect aux-
iliary metrics and support additional arguments, and sub-
stantially update the benchmarking script to better em-
ulate realistic online environments with adapters. When
using multiple GPUs, a separate vLLM instance runs on
each GPU, and requests are routed according to the out-
put of the greedy algorithm.
Hardware. All experiments are conducted on a node
equipped with four NVIDIA Hopper H100 (64GB HBM2),
512GB RAM memory, and 80 CPU cores. When running
the Digital Twin, the GPU is not utilized.
8.2. Digital Twin
We evaluate the accuracy of the proposed Digital Twin
(DT) by comparing its predicted performance metrics
against those measured on a real LLM-adapter serving
system, assessing its ability to reproduce system behavior
across a wide range of different workloads. These are gen-
erated through a Cartesian combination of two adapter-
size
sets—high-to-low
{8, 16, 32}
and
medium-to-low
{8, 16}—and two arrival-rate regimes—high {1.6, 0.8, 0.4}
and low {0.1, 0.05, 0.025} requests per second. For each
workload, adapters randomly select a size and a Poisson
arrival rate from the chosen sets, producing heterogeneous
configurations. The number of served adapters is varied
from 8 to 384, and the corresponding values of Amax are
explored within the same range. Real-system experiments
are executed for one hour per configuration. DT accuracy
is quantified using the Symmetric Mean Absolute Percent-
age Error (SMAPE) across all scenarios. Results are sum-
marized in Table 1 under the Predictable arrivals setting.
Two variants of DT input information regarding request
lengths are evaluated. In the Original variant, the DT re-
ceives the exact input and output token lengths observed
in the real system. In the Mean variant, all requests use
identical token lengths equal to the workload average. This
latter configuration reflects the information typically avail-
able in practice and corresponds to the setup used during
the ML learning phase.
Overall, the DT accurately reproduces real-system be-
havior under predictable workloads for both models.
0
100
200
300
400
adapters (#)
0
5000
10000
15000
Throughput (toks/s)
0
100
200
300
400
adapters (#)
25
50
75
100
Mean ITL (ms)
0
100
200
300
400
adapters (#)
0
1
2
3
1e6 Mean TTFT (ms)
Real results
Digital Twin
ML
Low rates
High rates
Figure 8: Comparison between Digital Twin predictions and real-
system measurements for throughput, ITL, and TTFT under varying
numbers of adapters and arrival rates. Experiments are conducted
using adapter sizes 8 and 16 on the Qwen-2.5-7B model with Amax =
8, in the predictable setting and Mean version.
For throughput,
predictions produced by the ML model are also reported.
Throughput and ITL achieve maximum SMAPE values
of 5.08% and 9.63%, respectively, while TTFT exhibits
higher deviation, with a maximum SMAPE of 18.95%.
Although the Original variant consistently yields lower er-
ror, the Mean configuration remains comparably accurate,
supporting its use in practical scenarios.
Table 2 shows DT time and resource consumption. It
achieves up to a 90× speedup compared to one-hour real-
system executions, while requiring minimal resources: a
single CPU core, no GPU, and approximately 200 MB of
memory. Fig. 8 illustrates a comparison between DT pre-
dictions and real-system measurements for a subset of the
tested scenarios. Consistent with the aggregated results,
throughput and ITL are closely matched, whereas TTFT
shows larger deviations, particularly under higher arrival
rates.
Unpredictable arrivals: We further evaluate the ro-
bustness of the Digital Twin under unpredictable arrivals.
To that end, each adapter independently updates its ar-
rival process every five minutes. At each update, the ar-
rival distribution is randomly selected between Poisson
and log-normal, and the corresponding arrival rate is ran-
domly multiplied or divided by a factor of two. To pre-
vent unrealistic behaviors, arrival rates are clipped within
predefined bounds. This configuration generates strongly
non-stationary traffic patterns, providing a challenging
setting for assessing the DT’s ability to reproduce system
behavior under rapidly changing workloads. An example
of the resulting arrival traces is shown in the left plot of
Fig. 9.
We follow the same evaluation methodology as in the
predictable-arrival experiments; however, for efficiency
reasons, the number of evaluated scenarios is reduced.
Adapter sizes are fixed to 8, Amax is set to 32, and the
number of served adapters is varied among 32, 64, and 128.
Arrival rates follow the same ranges as in the previous ex-
periments. The resulting SMAPE values are reported in
the right part of Table 1.
Overall, the DT accurately reproduces system behav-
ior under unpredictable arrival patterns, achieving error
levels comparable to those observed for predictable work-
loads, albeit slightly lower due to the reduced evaluation
10


--- Page 11 ---
Model
Req. lengths
Predictable arrivals
Unpredictable arrivals
SMAPE comparison (%)
SMAPE comparison (%)
Through.
ITL
TTFT
Through.
ITL
TTFT
Llama
Original
2.25
7.09
18.83
1.00
3.55
13.92
Mean
4.18
9.63
17.44
2.06
9.87
21.28
Qwen
Original
2.59
7.18
18.95
1.71
3.54
12.26
Mean
5.08
9.07
17.92
4.29
5.60
21.49
Table 1: Final evaluation of the proposed Digital Twin across all predictable (left) and unpredictable (rigth) test scenarios. Reported values
correspond to SMAPE between Digital Twin predictions and real-system measurements, where lower values denote higher fidelity.
Resource consumption
Model
Time (s)
CPU (%)
Mem (MB)
Llama
38.94 ± 5.58
89.51 ± 1.69
202.58 ±
10.85
Qwen
39.61 ± 5.55
90.33 ± 1.30
204.32 ± 9.29
Table 2: Execution time and resource consumption results of the
Digital Twin across all tested scenarios.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time (min)
0
50
100
150
arrivals per adapter
Arrivals
adapter-14
adapter-18
adapter-2
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
time (min)
0
200
400
600
800
adapters (#)
Adapters in running and waiting queues
Real running
Real waiting
DT running
DT waiting
Figure 9: Execution with Llama-3.1-8B under initial high arrival
rates (1.6, 0.8, 0.4) for 32 adapters in the unpredictable regime.
(Left) Non-stationary arrival traces for randomly sampled adapters.
(Right) Comparison of running and waiting requests over time be-
tween the Digital Twin and the real system.
space. The right plot of Fig. 9 illustrates the evolution of
running and waiting requests over time for both the DT
and the real system in a specific scenario. The close align-
ment between the two traces highlights the DT’s ability to
replicate scheduler dynamics, greedy KV-cache allocation,
adapter loading behavior, and computation latency under
highly dynamic traffic conditions.
8.3. ML modeling
Leveraging
the
Digital
Twin
for
rapid
data
gen-
eration,
we train the proposed ML models over an
extended and diverse set of workload scenarios.
Work-
loads are generated through a Cartesian product of
adapter sizes and arrival rates.
Instead of evalu-
ating
only
a
small
number
of
predefined
sets,
we
construct all combinations of three values drawn from
the adapter-size set {8, 16, 32} and the arrival-rate set
{3.2, 1.6, 0.8, 0.4, 0.1, 0.05, 0.025, 0.0125, 0.00625, 0.003125}.
For each workload configuration, we further vary both the
number of served adapters and the device configuration
parameter Amax within the range 8 to 384. This process
results in a large and heterogeneous training dataset that
captures a wide range of workload conditions.
Table 3
summarizes the prediction accuracy of the three evalu-
ated ML model types (KNN, RF, and SVM), evaluated
against the same real-system executions employed for the
validation of the Digital Twin..
Throughput prediction
accuracy is quantified using SMAPE, while starvation
detection performance is evaluated using macro-averaged
F1 score across all scenarios.
Overall, the ML models achieve high predictive fidelity,
particularly for starvation detection. Throughput predic-
tion errors remain below 8%, slightly higher than those
obtained using the Digital Twin, as expected given the ad-
ditional abstraction introduced by the learning process.
Fig. 8 additionally reports throughput predictions pro-
duced by the best-performing RF model, showing close
agreement with real-system measurements. Prediction la-
tency, also reported in Table 3, remains below 0.3 ms for all
models except SVM, representing a substantial improve-
ment over DT execution time.
Model
Estimator
Throughput
Starvation
SMAPE
(%)
Time
(ms)
F1
(macro)
Time
(ms)
Llama
KNN
4.52
0.21
0.95
0.19
RF
4.39
0.25
0.95
0.16
SVM
6.84
1.70
0.98
0.02
Qwen
KNN
5.28
0.15
0.99
0.19
RF
5.28
0.21
0.99
0.22
SVM
7.46
2.24
0.93
0.05
Table 3: Final evaluation results of the proposed ML model across
the three model types and both LLMs.
It evaluates throughput
estimation (with SMAPE) and starvation detection (with macro-
F1), and reports the average prediction time in milliseconds.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Refinement phase: We further extend the ML learn-
ing phase with the refinement procedure described in Sec-
tion 6. Table 4 reports results for the original RF model,
the simplified shallow decision tree (Small Tree), and its
Numba-optimized implementation (Small Tree**).
The refinement process yields substantial improvements
in both inference efficiency and interpretability. The sim-
plified models require at most 32 decision rules, compared
to a minimum of 3.79e3 rules in the baseline RF. Infer-
ence latency is reduced by over 69× for the shallow tree
and up to 2120× for the Numba-optimized implementa-
tion, achieving inference times below 100 ns per prediction
in some occasions. These gains are obtained at the cost of
reduced predictive accuracy. On average, throughput esti-
mation exhibits a 6.74% increase in SMAPE, while starva-
tion detection experiences a decrease of 0.025 in macro-F1
score. This trade-off remains acceptable in scenarios where
inference speed and model interpretability are primary re-
quirements.
Beyond performance improvements, the simplified mod-
els enable direct interpretability and extraction of action-
able insights. Appendix C presents the learned decision
trees for both starvation and throughput prediction. For
instance, we can extract that starvation is unlikely when
the aggregate incoming rate remains below 23.52 tokens/s,
and that excessively large Amax values, above 144, can
negatively impact overall system throughput.
8.4. Caching decisions
We evaluate the proposed pipeline as a solution to the
adapter caching problem, with the greedy algorithm act-
ing as the final decision stage.
We first analyze single-
GPU scenarios to demonstrate throughput maximization
and identification of the per-GPU optimal packing point
(Maxpack).
We then extend the analysis to distributed
settings with four GPUs, showing how consistently reach-
ing Maxpack improves overall GPU efficiency, and com-
paring our approach against dLoRA. Finally, we evaluate
an alternative configuration of the pipeline in which the
optimization objective is shifted from resource efficiency
to latency minimization.
The evaluation covers a diverse set of workload scenar-
ios.
Arrival rates are grouped into high-rate (2.4, 1.2,
0.6, 0.3, 0.15), low-rate (0.075, 0.0375, 0.01875, 0.009375,
0.0046875), and mixed-rate (0.6, 0.3, 0.15, 0.075, 0.0375)
configurations, where adapter rates are randomly dis-
tributed from the considered configuration. Adapter sizes
are also evaluated under varying settings, high-size (32),
low-size (8), and mixed-size (8, 16, 32). For each workload
configuration, the pipeline output is validated by execut-
ing the real LLM-adapter serving system, from which all
reported figures and tables are obtained.
8.4.1. Single-GPU system
To the best of our knowledge, there are no established
baselines specifically addressing the adapter caching prob-
lem, i.e., identifying the optimal packing point Maxpack
0
2E3
5E3
8E3
10E3
12E3
through. (toks/s)
High sizes (mixed rates)
Low rates (mixed sizes)
20
40
60
80
100
120
adapters to serve (#)
0
50
100
150
Amax (#)
0
100
200
300
400
500
adapters to serve (#)
MaxBase
MaxBase*
Proposed
Starvation
Memory error
Figure 10:
(Top) Achieved throughput and (Bottom) configured
Amax on a single-GPU system for the allocations produced by the
proposed pipeline and the two baselines under two settings. The left
column shows results for Qwen and the right column for Llama. Each
line extends until the corresponding strategy deems the allocation of
the indicated number of adapters on the x-axis as infeasible, incurs
in starvation or trigger memory errors.
jointly with an appropriate Amax configuration. We there-
fore introduce two simple yet reasonable reference strate-
gies: MaxBase and MaxBase*. Both rely exclusively on
the benchmarked maximum throughput of the backbone
model, without accounting for adapter-specific dynamics
or overheads, and differ only in how GPU parallelism is
configured.
In both cases, adapters are allocated to a
GPU until the aggregate input rate reaches the backbone’s
maximum throughput. MaxBase sets Amax = A, whereas
MaxBase* constrains parallelism to Amax = A/2, where
A is the number of adapters being served by the system.
Fig. 10 reports the throughput achieved by the real sys-
tem and the configured Amax under the allocations gen-
erated by our pipeline and the two baselines, across two
representative scenarios. In both scenarios, our approach
identifies the optimal packing point Maxpack, achieving
maximum feasible throughput while stopping before star-
vation or memory errors, which are treated as infeasi-
ble configurations.
By contrast, the baselines—guided
solely by backbone throughput—continue allocating be-
yond Maxpack, as they are unaware of adapter-induced
overheads and serving dynamics. In the left scenario, both
baselines incur starvation due to insufficient GPU mem-
ory to hold the requests KV cache. In the right scenario,
they trigger memory errors by exceeding GPU capacity
with overly large Amax values, first in MaxBase and sub-
sequently in MaxBase*. These results highlight that our
method adaptively adjusts Amax to workload conditions:
while initially allowing high parallelism, it avoids excessive
values to avoid memory errors, obtaining higher achievable
throughput compared to both baselines.
8.4.2. Distributed system
We now evaluate how accurate identification of Maxpack
translates into improved GPU efficiency in distributed sce-
narios with four GPUs. We continue using the MaxBase
12


--- Page 13 ---
Model
No.
Throughput
No.
Starvation
rules
SMAPE (%)
Time (ms)
rules
F1 (macro)
Time (ms)
Llama
RF
7.13e6
4.39
0.25
4.44e4
0.95
0.16
Small Tree
32
10.25
3.24e-3
16
0.92
3.25e-3
Small Tree**
32
10.25
1.13e-4
16
0.92
8.30e-5
Qwen
RF
6.33e6
5.28
0.21
3.79e3
0.99
0.22
Small Tree
16
12.89
2.52e-3
15
0.97
3.21e-3
Small Tree**
16
12.89
9.36e-5
15
0.97
10.5e-4
Table 4: Evaluation results of the ML models obtained by progressively simplifying the best-performing RF model into a shallow, interpretable
decision tree (Small Tree), and its Numba-optimized implementation (Small Tree**).
0
50
100
150
200
250
adapters to serve (#)
1
2
3
4
needed GPUs (#)
High rates (mixed sizes)
0
250
500
750
1000 1250 1500
adapters to serve (#)
Low rates (mixed sizes)
0
50
100
150
200
250
adapters to serve (#)
High sizes (mixed rates)
0
50
100
150
200
250
adapters to serve (#)
Low sizes (mixed rates)
MaxBase
MaxBase*
Random
Proposed
ProposedFast
Starvation
Memory error
Figure 11: Number of GPUs required by each baseline and by the proposed pipeline on a 4-GPU system, across heterogeneous workloads with
varying numbers of adapters, adapter sizes, and input rates. The two left plots correspond to Qwen and the two right plots to Llama. Each
curve terminates when the corresponding method reaches an infeasible allocation, whereas Random is extended until starvation is clearly
observed. Starvation or memory errors are extracted from running each method allocation in a real LLM-adapter serving system.
and MaxBase* baselines and additionally include a Ran-
dom baseline, representing a trivial strategy that randomly
assigns adapters to GPUs and samples Amax uniformly be-
tween 1 and the number of adapters allocated per GPU.
Fig. 11 reports the number of GPUs that are used from
the 4 available by each method to served adapters across
heterogeneous workloads. The Proposed approach uses the
best-performing ML model from Section 8.3, without the
refinement phase, which is discussed later in this section.
As shown in the figure, the proposed pipeline dynami-
cally adjusts the number of GPUs used for each workload.
For example, in the leftmost scenario, when fewer than 50
adapters need to be served, all adapters are packed into
a single GPU, while all four GPUs are only used once
the number of adapters exceeds 80.
The MaxBase and
MaxBase* baselines exhibit a similar trend but propose
allocations that lead to starvation or memory errors, as
already observed in Section 8.4.1. In contrast, the Ran-
dom baseline almost always utilizes all available GPUs,
as expected.
Overall, these results show that the pro-
posed pipeline improves GPU efficiency by assigning the
minimum number of GPUs required to serve a workload
without incurring starvation or memory errors, effectively
addressing the adapter caching problem. This is achieved
by packing as many adapters as possible per utilized GPU
while selecting an appropriate Amax, as discussed in Sec-
tion 8.4.1.
In addition, the proposed pipeline can sometimes serve
more adapters without starvation within the four avail-
able GPUs than the baselines, as observed in the two
middle scenarios (e.g., 1280 adapters in the second plot
and 128 in the third).
However, the opposite can also
occur:
in the rightmost scenario, Random reaches 160
adapters without starvation, while the proposed approach
stops at 128. This behavior is expected given the stochas-
tic nature of Random, which can occasionally find a fea-
sible configuration by chance but is not reliable.
No-
tably, while Random, MaxBase, and MaxBase* are highly
unstable—frequently triggering memory errors or starva-
tion—the proposed method consistently produces valid al-
locations.
Finally, Table 5 reports the execution time of the place-
ment algorithms. The proposed approach is slower than
the baselines for both single- and multi-GPU placements,
taking approximately 2 seconds in the four-GPU case.
This overhead is acceptable for the target use case of peri-
odic reconfiguration under predictable workload patterns.
Nevertheless, we further evaluate the faster variant, Pro-
posedFast, which uses the Small Tree** model obtained in
the refinement phase of Section 8.3. This variant reduces
execution time to below 3 ms for four GPUs. However,
this speedup comes at the cost of less stable predictions,
13


--- Page 14 ---
as illustrated by the second scenario in Fig. 11, due to the
increased simplification of the learned model, which may
be an acceptable tradeoff depending on the use case.
No.
Method
time(s)
GPUs
Llama
Qwen
1
Proposed
1.54
0.43
MaxBase
4.79e-4
5.38e-4
MaxBase*
5.06e-4
5.54e-4
4
Proposed
2.16
2.18
ProposedFast
2.17e-3
9.61e-4
MaxBase
6.22e-4
5.28e-4
MaxBase*
6.50e-4
5.40e-4
Random
6.52e-4
6.37e-4
dLoRAProactive
1.52e-1
2.34e-2
Table 5: Execution time of each baseline and of the two variants
of the proposed pipeline, Proposed and ProposedFast, which respec-
tively omit and include the refinement phase of the ML modeling
stage.
8.4.3. Comparison with dLoRA
To compare against a recent placement algorithm, we
include an evaluation against dLoRA. Although dLoRA
is primarily designed to minimize latency rather than to
maximize GPU efficiency, it remains one of the few systems
that proactively compute adapter placements for LLM-
adapter serving. Given the limited prior work targeting
utilization-oriented objectives, this comparison serves as
a useful reference to highlight the practical differences be-
tween latency- and resource-driven optimization goals. We
implement dLoRA variant with their original proactive
placement code, which is originally periodically invoked
to compute allocations for long-term workload patterns;
other components of dLoRA are not included, as they are
orthogonal to the adapter placement problem studied here.
Fig. 12 reports the required GPUs, throughput, and ITL
for our pipeline (Proposed) and dLoRA across a set of
heterogeneous scenarios, reflecting their contrasting objec-
tives. Our approach aims to minimize the number of GPUs
required to serve a workload while maintaining feasibil-
ity (i.e., avoiding starvation and memory errors), whereas
dLoRA favors utilizing all available GPUs to reduce la-
tency. As a result, our method consistently requires fewer
GPUs, while dLoRA achieves lower latency at the cost of
reduced GPU efficiency.
Besides, in the top scenario, dLoRA fails at large
adapter counts due to a time-limit error, indicating that
allocation computation does not scale to higher adapter
number under our evaluation settings.
This behavior
is consistent with dLoRA’s original scope, which targets
smaller adapter sets. In contrast, our approach continues
to scale and successfully serves significantly larger num-
bers of adapters. In the bottom scenario, dLoRA initially
supports slightly more adapters and achieves higher peak
throughput; however, as the workload increases further, it
fails to detect starvation conditions, resulting in infeasi-
ble allocations. Our approach is more conservative in this
case, stopping earlier and yielding lower peak throughput,
but consistently avoiding starvation and memory errors.
Finally, Table 5 reports execution times for all place-
ment algorithms. dLoRA is approximately one order of
magnitude faster than our default pipeline. However, our
refined variant, ProposedFast, achieves more than two or-
ders of magnitude speedup over dLoRA, at the cost of less
stable predictions, as discussed in the previous section.
8.4.4. Latency oriented
To assess whether the proposed pipeline can be adapted
to alternative objectives beyond GPU efficiency, we im-
plement a proof-of-concept variant targeting latency mini-
mization. This prototype, denoted ProposedLat, reuses the
learned ML models but replaces the throughput-oriented
greedy algorithm with a latency-oriented heuristic. Specif-
ically, it assigns adapters sequentially to the GPU with the
lowest aggregated arrival rate and configures Amax as the
number of adapters served on each GPU. After all adapters
are assigned, the resulting allocation is validated using the
learned ML models; allocations predicted to trigger star-
vation or memory errors are deemed infeasible. Results for
ProposedLat are included in Fig. 12 alongside the compar-
ison with dLoRA.
Overall, ProposedLat tends to utilize all available GPUs,
achieving latency comparable to dLoRA while consistently
proposing allocations that do not incur in starvation or
trigger memory errors. As expected, ProposedLat scales to
fewer adapters than the default Proposed approach in the
top scenario, primarily due to its trivial Amax configura-
tion, which can over-reserve GPU memory. In the bottom
scenario, ProposedLat, as discussed for default Proposed in
previous section, remains more conservative than dLoRA,
prioritizing feasible allocations over slight throughput im-
provements.
9. Discussion
Our evaluation shows that accurately identifying the
single-GPU packing limit Maxpack is a key enabler for
efficient adapter placement.
As illustrated in Fig. 10,
the proposed pipeline maximizes throughput while pre-
venting infeasible configurations, stopping before starva-
tion or memory errors and selecting an appropriate Amax.
This highlights that, in LLM-adapter serving, adapter-
induced overheads and the interaction between Amax and
KV cache growth are essential for proposing feasible allo-
cations. When extending the same decision logic to dis-
tributed settings (Fig. 11), the accurate identification of
Maxpack translates directly into improved GPU efficiency.
14


--- Page 15 ---
0
500
1000
adapters to serve (#)
2
4
needed GPUs (#)
0
500
1000
adapters to serve (#)
0
10k
through. (tks/s)
0
500
1000
adapters to serve (#)
50
100
ITL (ms)
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
Time error
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
Time error
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
Time error
(a) Low rates (mixed sizes)
0
100
200
adapters to serve (#)
2
4
needed GPUs (#)
0
100
200
adapters to serve (#)
20k
40k
through. (tks/s)
0
100
200
adapters to serve (#)
50
100
150
ITL (ms)
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
Proposed
dLoRAProactive
ProposedLat
Starvation
(b) High rates (mixed sizes)
Figure 12:
Number of GPUs required, throughput, and ITL achieved by each method on a 4-GPU system, across two heterogeneous
workloads using Qwen. Each curve terminates when the corresponding method reaches an infeasible allocation. Starvation and memory
errors are identified by executing the allocations on a real LLM-adapter serving system. The time-limit failure observed for dLoRA occurs
when its placement algorithm does not complete within one hour for large numbers of adapters.
By packing adapters up to the feasibility boundary on each
GPU, the pipeline dynamically determines the minimum
number of GPUs required for a workload, reducing hard-
ware usage whenever additional GPUs are not needed.
As shown in Table 5, the execution time required to
compute allocations is compatible with the target use case
of periodic reconfiguration under predictable workloads.
Moreover, the optimized variant ProposedFast, obtained
through refinement of the learned ML models, reduces ex-
ecution time by orders of magnitude and is therefore bet-
ter suited for scenarios where fast placement estimation is
prioritized over prediction accuracy.
The comparison with dLoRA further emphasizes the
impact of the optimization objective. dLoRA’s proactive
mechanism is designed to minimize latency and therefore
tends to use all available GPUs (Fig. 12). Our pipeline in-
stead targets resource efficiency, using only the minimum
number of GPUs needed to serve a given workload. Fig. 12
also includes a proof-of-concept latency-oriented variant
of our method, ProposedLat, which achieves latency com-
parable to dLoRA while avoiding starvation and memory
errors. This suggests that the proposed pipeline can be
adapted to alternative optimization objectives, such as la-
tency minimization, confirming its versatility beyond re-
source utilization.
Beyond its role in the proposed pipeline, the Digital
Twin constitutes an additional contribution. To the best
of our knowledge, it is the first Digital Twin specifically
tailored to LLM-adapter serving.
As shown in Table 1
and Figs. 8 and 9, it closely reproduces real-system perfor-
mance—particularly throughput—across both predictable
and unpredictable workloads, while operating significantly
faster and at substantially lower computational cost (Ta-
ble 2). This enables not only rapid synthetic dataset gen-
eration, but also broader applications such as scheduling
optimization and server configuration.
Finally, Section 5.1 provided an in-depth characteri-
zation of LLM-adapter serving behavior, detailing the
impact of the four principal overheads introduced by
adapters. Beyond being the basis for the design and im-
plementation of the proposed Digital Twin, this analysis
offers independent value to the research community by ex-
posing key system-level relationships, such as the connec-
tion between the adapter memory footprint overhead and
the throughput plateau.
9.1. Limitations and future work
Although the Digital Twin supports dynamic input and
output length distributions, the ML models are trained
on simulations generated from a single dataset with a
fixed request-length distribution. This limits generaliza-
tion to workloads with substantially different sequence-
length characteristics.
Future work will extend dataset
generation to cover diverse length distributions, enabling
both the ML models and the placement algorithm to gen-
eralize to more heterogeneous serving conditions. In ad-
dition, our workload model assumes predictable Poisson
arrivals parameterized by a per-adapter rate. While this
15


--- Page 16 ---
assumption is widely adopted in prior work and schedul-
ing theory, real production traces may exhibit different
predictable long-term arrival patterns, which should be in-
corporated in future evaluations.
10. Conclusions
We presented a data-driven pipeline to improve GPU
efficiency in distributed LLM-adapter serving through
workload-aware adapter placement. We evaluated the ap-
proach under heterogeneous workloads against multiple
baselines, including a comparison with dLoRA’s proactive
mechanism. The results show that the pipeline accurately
identifies the feasible packing limit Maxpack and selects an
appropriate Amax to maximize throughput and minimize
the number of required GPUs to serve a given workload.
The pipeline can be integrated into production systems
to periodically update placements for predictable work-
load patterns, reducing the amount of needed hardware.
The freed GPUs can be reassigned to other workloads to
improve overall system efficiency or powered down to re-
duce energy consumption. Central to this approach is a
high-fidelity Digital Twin for LLM-adapter serving, which
closely reproduces real-system performance at low cost,
enabling efficient ML training and supporting additional
optimization tasks beyond this work.
Acknowledgment
This work has been partially financed by the EU-
HORIZON MSCA programme under grant agreement
EU-HORIZON MSCA GA.101086248. Also, it has been
partially financed by Generalitat de Catalunya (AGAUR)
under grant agreement 2021-SGR-00478, by Severo Ochoa
Center of Excellence CEX-2021-001148-S-20-3, and by
the Spanish Ministry of Science (MICINN), the Research
State Agency (AEI) and European Regional Development
Funds (ERDF/FEDER) under grant agreement PID2021-
126248OB-I00,
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/
501100011033/
FEDER, UE.
The authors used OpenAI’s GPT model to assist with
text rephrasing and stylistic refinement. All content was
originally written and subsequently reviewed and validated
by the authors.
Appendix A. S-LoRA
We include a brief analysis using the S-LoRA frame-
work [29] to show that the adapter caching problem is
not specific to vLLM and also arises in other serving sys-
tems.
Fig. A.13 reports the Maxpack point in S-LoRA
across different arrival rates, for a fixed adapter size and
a fixed request-length distribution, following the same
methodology as the middle plot of Fig. 1 for vLLM. No-
tably, throughput degradation plateaus as the number of
adapters increases, whereas vLLM exhibits a more pro-
nounced decline, highlighting the impact of S-LoRA’s de-
sign choices. Nevertheless, identifying Maxpack remains
necessary to determine how many adapters can be al-
located per GPU without triggering starvation, and the
throughput level at which Maxpack occurs still varies
across workloads, with additional variability expected
when changing adapter sizes and request-length distribu-
tions.
100
200
300
400
500
600
adapters (#)
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
throughput (tokens/s)
arrival rate
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.4
Not starvation
Starvation
Maxpack
Figure A.13: Throughput obtained when running S-LoRA with vary-
ing adapter arrival rates on Llama-2-7B, using adapters of size 32 and
requests with fixed lengths of 250 input tokens and 231 output to-
kens.
Appendix B. ML hyperparameter search space
Hyperparameter optimization in the ML learning phase
is performed using HalvingGridSearchCV with 5-fold
cross-validation. Distinct search spaces are defined for the
two tasks, throughput regression and starvation classifi-
cation, using the corresponding scikit-learn model classes.
The evaluated values for each hyperparameter are listed
below.
Throughput
(Regression).
a) Random Forest
(RandomForestRegressor): n_estimators {32,128,256},
max_depth
{None,5,10,20},
min_samples_split
{2,5,10,20},
criterion
{squared_error,
abso-
lute_error, friedman_mse, poisson}, min_samples_leaf
{1,2,5,10,32,128}, max_features {auto,sqrt,log2}.
b)
SVM (SVR): C {0.1,1,10,100,1000,10000}, kernel {lin-
ear,poly,rbf,sigmoid},
epsilon
{0.1,0.5,1,5},
degree
{2,3,4,5},
gamma
{scale,auto,0.01,0.1,1,10},
coef0
{0,0.1,0.5,1}.
c)
KNN
(KNeighborsRegressor):
p
{1,2},
with
fixed
n_neighbors=1,
leaf_size=8,
weights=uniform, algorithm=kd_tree.
Starvation
(Classification).
a)
Random
For-
est
(RandomForestClassifier):
n_estimators
{32,128,256},
max_depth
{None,5,10,20},
min_samples_split
{2,5,10,20},
criterion
{gini,entropy,log_loss},
min_samples_leaf
{1,2,5,10,32,128},
max_features
{None,sqrt,log2}.
b)
SVM
(SVC):
C
{0.1,1,10,100,1000,10000},
kernel
16


--- Page 17 ---
{linear,poly,rbf,sigmoid},
degree
{2,3,4,5},
gamma
{scale,auto,0.01,0.1,1,10},
coef0
{0,0.1,0.5,1}.
c)
KNN (KNeighborsClassifier):
p {1,2},
with fixed
n_neighbors=1,
leaf_size=8,
weights=uniform,
algorithm=kd_tree.
Appendix C. Derived lightweight tree estimators
Fig. C.14 depicts two of the shallow trees resulting from
the refinement phase described in Section 6.
References
[1] Agrawal, A., Kedia, N., Mohan, J., Panwar, A., Kwa-
tra, N., Gulavani, B.S., Ramjee, R., Tumanov, A.,
2024a. Vidur: A large-scale simulation framework for
llm inference. Proceedings of Machine Learning and
Systems 6, 351–366.
[2] Agrawal, A., Kedia, N., Panwar, A., Mohan, J., Kwa-
tra, N., Gulavani, B., Tumanov, A., Ramjee, R.,
2024b. Taming throughput-latency tradeoff in llm in-
ference with sarathi-serve, in: 18th USENIX Sympo-
sium on Operating Systems Design and Implementa-
tion (OSDI 24), pp. 117–134.
[3] anon8231489123,
2023.
Clean sharegpt dataset.
URL:
https://huggingface.co/datasets/
anon8231489123/ShareGPT_Vicuna_unfiltered.
[4] Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Ka-
plan, J.D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., Shyam, P.,
Sastry, G., Askell, A., et al., 2020. Language models
are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information
processing systems 33, 1877–1901.
[5] Brüel-Gabrielsson,
R.,
Zhu,
J.,
Bhardwaj,
O.,
Choshen,
L.,
Greenewald,
K.,
Yurochkin,
M.,
Solomon, J., 2024.
Compress then serve:
Serving
thousands of lora adapters with little overhead. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.00066 .
[6] Chen, L., Ye, Z., Wu, Y., Zhuo, D., Ceze, L., Krishna-
murthy, A., 2024. Punica: Multi-tenant lora serving.
Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems 6, 1–
13.
[7] Cho, J., Kim, M., Choi, H., Heo, G., Park, J., 2024.
Llmservingsim: A hw/sw co-simulation infrastructure
for llm inference serving at scale, in: 2024 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Workload Characterization
(IISWC), IEEE. pp. 15–29.
[8] Garey, M.R., Johnson, D.S., 1979.
Computers
and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-
Completeness.
W. H. Freeman and Company, San
Francisco.
[9] Grattafiori, A., et al., 2024.
The llama 3 herd
of models.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.
21783, arXiv:2407.21783.
[10] Guo, D., Rush, A., Kim, Y., 2021. Parameter-efficient
transfer learning with diff pruning, in: Proceedings of
the 59th annual meeting of the association for com-
putational linguistics and the 11th international joint
conference on natural language processing (volume 1:
Long papers), pp. 4884–4896.
[11] Houlsby, N., Giurgiu, A., Jastrzebski, S., Morrone,
B., De Laroussilhe, Q., Gesmundo, A., Attariyan, M.,
Gelly, S., 2019. Parameter-efficient transfer learning
for nlp, in: International conference on machine learn-
ing, PMLR. pp. 2790–2799.
[12] Hu, E.J., Shen, Y., Wallis, P., Allen-Zhu, Z., Li, Y.,
Wang, S., Wang, L., Chen, W., et al., 2022. Lora:
Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ICLR
1, 3.
[13] Iliakopoulou, N., Stojkovic, J., Alverti, C., Xu, T.,
Franke, H., Torrellas, J., 2025. Chameleon: Adap-
tive Caching and Scheduling for Many-Adapter LLM
Inference Environments. Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA. p. 217–231. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3725843.3756083.
[14] Johnson, D.S., 1974. Fast algorithms for bin packing.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences 8, 272–314.
URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0022000074800267,
doi:https:
//doi.org/10.1016/S0022-0000(74)80026-7.
[15] Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L.,
Yu, C.H., Gonzalez, J., Zhang, H., Stoica, I., 2023. Ef-
ficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention, in: Proceedings of the
29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
pp. 611–626.
[16] Lam, S.K., Pitrou, A., Seibert, S., 2015. Numba: A
llvm-based python jit compiler, in: Proceedings of the
Second Workshop on the LLVM Compiler Infrastruc-
ture in HPC, pp. 1–6.
[17] Li, S., Lu, H., Wu, T., Yu, M., Weng, Q., Chen, X.,
Shan, Y., Yuan, B., Wang, W., 2024. Caraserve: Cpu-
assisted and rank-aware lora serving for generative llm
inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11240 .
[18] Li, X.L., Liang, P., 2021. Prefix-tuning: Optimizing
continuous prompts for generation. Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume
1:
Long Papers) , 4582–4597URL: https://api.
semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:230433941.
17


--- Page 18 ---
True
False
False
True
Figure C.14: Shallow decision trees derived from the best performing RF model to improve inference performance and enhance model
interpretability. (Left) To estimate starvation for Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. Final value represents the probability of starvation arising. (Right)
To estimate throughput for Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct. Final value represents the expected throughput in toks/s.
[19] Liu, H., Tam, D., Muqeeth, M., Mohta, J., Huang, T.,
Bansal, M., Raffel, C.A., 2022. Few-shot parameter-
efficient fine-tuning is better and cheaper than in-
context learning.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 35, 1950–1965.
[20] López, F.A., Oliveras, J., Wang, C., Gutierrez-Torre,
A., Tardieu, O., Youssef, A., Torres, J., Berral, J.L.,
2025. A data-driven ml approach for maximizing per-
formance in llm-adapter serving, in:
9th Machine
Learning for Systems (ML for Systems) Workshop,
NeurIPS 2025. Poster session, San Diego, CA.
[21] Microsoft, 2022–2025.
DeepSpeed-MII.
GitHub
repository.
URL:
https://github.com/
deepspeedai/DeepSpeed-MII.
[22] NVIDIA, 2023–2025.
TensorRT-LLM.
GitHub
repository.
URL: https://github.com/NVIDIA/
TensorRT-LLM.
[23] Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel,
V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer,
P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos,
A., Cournapeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., Duch-
esnay, E., 2011.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12,
2825–2830.
[24] Qin, G., Eisner, J., 2021. Learning how to ask: Query-
ing lms with mixtures of soft prompts, in: Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 5203–
5212.
[25] Recasens, P.G., Agullo, F., Zhu, Y., Wang, C., Lee,
E.K., Tardieu, O., Torres, J., Berral, J.L., 2025. Mind
the memory gap: Unveiling gpu bottlenecks in large-
batch llm inference, in: 2025 IEEE 18th International
Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), IEEE.
pp. 277–287.
[26] Recasens, P.G., Zhu, Y., Wang, C., Lee, E.K.,
Tardieu, O., Youssef, A., Torres, J., Berral, J.L., 2024.
Towards pareto optimal throughput in small language
model serving, in: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop
on Machine Learning and Systems, pp. 144–152.
[27] Shen, H., Chen, L., Jin, Y., Zhao, L., Kong, B.,
Philipose, M., Krishnamurthy, A., Sundaram, R.,
2019.
Nexus:
a gpu cluster engine for accelerat-
ing dnn-based video analysis, in: Proceedings of the
27th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
ciples, Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA. p. 322–337. doi:10.1145/3341301.
3359658.
18


--- Page 19 ---
[28] Shen, Z., He, Y., Wang, Z., Zhang, Y., Sun, G., Ye,
W., Li, A., 2025.
EdgeLoRA: An Efficient Multi-
Tenant LLM Serving System on Edge Devices. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA. p. 138–153. URL: https://doi.org/10.1145/
3711875.3729141.
[29] Sheng, Y., Cao, S., Li, D., Hooper, C., Lee, N., Yang,
S., Chou, C., Zhu, B., Zheng, L., Keutzer, K., et al.,
2024.
Slora: Scalable serving of thousands of lora
adapters. Proceedings of Machine Learning and Sys-
tems 6, 296–311.
[30] Sung, Y.L., Cho, J., Bansal, M., 2022. Lst: Ladder
side-tuning for parameter and memory efficient trans-
fer learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems 35, 12991–13005.
[31] Touvron, H., et al., 2023. Llama 2: Open foundation
and fine-tuned chat models. URL: https://arxiv.
org/abs/2307.09288, arXiv:2307.09288.
[32] Wang, L., Chen, S., Jiang, L., Pan, S., Cai, R., Yang,
S., Yang, F., 2025. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning in
large language models: a survey of methodologies.
Artificial Intelligence Review 58, 227. URL: https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10462-025-11236-4, doi:10.
1007/s10462-025-11236-4.
[33] Wengwengwhale,
2024.
Finance
lora
adapter
for
llama-3.1-8b
instruct.
URL:
https:
//huggingface.co/Wengwengwhale/llama_3.1_
8B_Instruct_Finance_lora_adapter.
[34] Wu, B., Zhu, R., Zhang, Z., Sun, P., Liu, X., Jin,
X., 2024. dlora: Dynamically orchestrating requests
and adapters for lora llm serving, in: 18th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (OSDI 24), pp. 911–927.
[35] Yang,
A.,
et al.,
2025.
Qwen2.5 technical re-
port.
URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115,
arXiv:2412.15115.
[36] yard1,
2024.
Sql
lora
for
llama-2-7b.
URL:
https://huggingface.co/yard1/
llama-2-7b-sql-lora-test.
[37] Yu, G.I., Jeong, J.S., Kim, G.W., Kim, S., Chun,
B.G., 2022.
Orca:
A distributed serving system
for transformer-based generative models, in:
16th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 22), pp. 521–538.
[38] Zhang, H., Tang, Y., Khandelwal, A., Stoica, I., 2023.
Shepherd: Serving dnns in the wild, in: 20th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Imple-
mentation (NSDI 23), pp. 787–808.
[39] zjudai,
2025.
Medical
lora
for
qwen2.5-7b-
instruc.
URL: https://huggingface.co/zjudai/
flowertune-medical-lora-qwen2.5-7b-instruct.
19
