--- Page 1 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
Raghav Gupta1†, Akanksha Jain2, Abraham Gonzalez2, Alexander Novikov3, Po-Sen Huang3,
Matej Balog3, Marvin Eisenberger3, Sergey Shirobokov3, Ngân V˜u3,
Martin Dixon2, Borivoje Nikolić1, Parthasarathy Ranganathan2, Sagar Karandikar1†
1University of California, Berkeley
2Google
3Google DeepMind
raghavgupta@berkeley.edu,{bora,sagark}@eecs.berkeley.edu
{avjain,abegonzalez,mgdixon,parthas}@google.com
{anovikov,posenhuang,matejb,meisenberger,shirobokov,nganvu}@google.com
Abstract
Agile hardware design flows are a critically needed force multi-
plier to meet the exploding demand for compute. Recently, agentic
generative artificial intelligence (AI) systems have demonstrated
significant advances in algorithm design, improving code efficiency,
and enabling discovery across scientific domains.
Bridging these worlds, we present ArchAgent, an automated com-
puter architecture discovery system built on AlphaEvolve. We show
ArchAgent’s ability to automatically design/implement state-of-the-
art (SoTA) cache replacement policies (architecting new mechanism-
s/logic, not only changing parameters), broadly within the confines
of an established cache replacement policy design competition.
In two days and without human intervention, ArchAgent gen-
erated a policy achieving a 5.3% IPC speedup improvement over
the prior SoTA on public multi-core Google Workload Traces. On
the heavily-explored single-core SPEC 2006 workloads, in only 18
days ArchAgent generated a policy showing a 0.9% IPC speedup
improvement over the existing SoTA (a similar "winning margin"
as reported by the existing SoTA). Comparing against the effort
involved in developing the prior SoTA policies, ArchAgent achieved
these gains 3-5× faster than humans.
Agentic flows also create an opportunity once a hardware system
is deployed, which we call “post-silicon hyperspecialization”. This
means having the agent tune runtime-configurable parameters
exposed in hardware policies to further align the policies with a
specific workload (mix). Exploiting this, we demonstrate a 2.4% IPC
speedup improvement over prior SoTA on the SPEC 2006 workloads.
Since ArchAgent is a first-of-its-kind architectural discovery
system, we also outline lessons learned and broader implications
for computer architecture research in the era of agentic AI. For
example, we demonstrate the phenomenon of “simulator escapes”,
where the agentic AI flow discovered and exploited a loophole in
a popular microarchitectural simulator—a consequence of the fact
that these research tools were designed for a (now past) world where
they were exclusively operated by humans acting in good-faith.
1
Introduction
The computing industry continues to battle the rift between the
exploding demand for compute and the need for human-time-
intensive per-domain specialization to make up for the plateau
†Work done while the author was also affiliated with Google.
Evaluators Pool
Sim
…
Workload
Suite
…
AlphaEvolve
Distributed
Simulation
Cluster
policy.h
- Core count
- $ levels + sizes
- DRAM bandwidth
Sim
Run 
SoTA LLMs 
 w/ 
sampled 
prompts 
Evolve
Generate
Evaluate
Compute metrics 
and populate the 
evolutionary DB
Workload N
Workload 0
ChampSim Instance
Database
Result
aggregation
Evolved
policies
Results
Choose candidate(s) to evolve 
from w/ evolutionary DB
Database
Evolutionary
Figure 1: High-level system diagram of ArchAgent, our
agentic-AI-based computer architecture discovery system.
In this example, novel cache replacement policy candidates
are automatically designed/implemented by AlphaEvolve in
ChampSim, a popular trace-based microarchitectural simu-
lator. ChampSim is then compiled and run with a specified
workload suite (e.g., SPEC) to evaluate the new policy on a
target metric (e.g., IPC). This process continues iteratively,
with ArchAgent continually proposing and evaluating new
logic/mechanisms within the policy.
in classical hardware scaling techniques. Continued efforts in agile
hardware design, more recently driven by the infusion of machine
learning (ML), are welcomed to help bridge this gap. While in-
roads have been made in applying ML to RTL-to-chip flows, there
is less focus on enabling automated “discovery” in earlier stages
of the hardware design process, beyond using ML to explore pa-
rameterized design spaces. In this paper, we answer the following:
Can modern generative AI tools help computer architects in early
discovery, ideation, and pathfinding, so that we can more quickly
architect a greater number of specialized architectures?
Recently, agentic flows based on large language models (LLMs)
have emerged as useful tools to automate algorithm design, soft-
ware systems design, software efficiency, and scientific discov-
ery [11, 47]. Guided by high-level prompting from a human, such
a flow can generate, implement, and evaluate ideas much faster
1
arXiv:2602.22425v1  [cs.AI]  25 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Gupta et al.
than a human designer. This shifts the designer’s focus to problem
formulation, creative ideation, and experimental design.
The basic premise of ArchAgent is straightforward: Agentic,
evolutionary ML-based tools can automatically and iteratively ex-
press and evaluate new concepts as code, so we should have these
tools write code to express new architectures in the context of our
community standard (micro)architectural simulators. Closing the
loop, since our simulators can provide quantitative feedback, these
agents can work iteratively to improve their solutions with new
mechanisms/logic developed on-the-fly by an LLM. In the rest of
this paper, we discuss the benefits and tradeoffs of this approach
and express a call-to-action for our community infrastructure to
enable us to get the most out of these agentic AI tools.
More concretely, we make the following key contributions:
1.0.1
The ArchAgent system. We design and implement ArchA-
gent, an agentic AI system that automates computer architecture
discovery. ArchAgent expresses architectures as C++ models in
ChampSim [19] and builds on AlphaEvolve [47], including a highly
distributed evaluation setup to discover novel architectures. An
outline of ArchAgent is shown in Figure 1.
1.0.2
Automatically designing state-of-the-art cache replacement
policies. We show that ArchAgent can discover state-of-the-art
(SoTA) cache replacement policies, broadly adhering to the experi-
mental design of established community cache replacement policy
design championships, such as the Cache Replacement Champi-
onship [20], most recently held in early 2017. The discovered policy
improves IPC speedup normalized to LRU over the prior SoTA pol-
icy (published in followup work [56] in 2022) by 0.7% on single-core
SPEC 2006 [21] in the absence of prefetching, and by 0.9% in the
presence of prefetching. These gains are similar to prior “winning
margins” reported by championship winners/new SoTA work in
this domain. Notably, comparing against the effort involved in de-
veloping the prior SoTA policies, ArchAgent achieved these gains
3-5× faster than humans.
1.0.3
Policy deep-dive. To demonstrate the kinds of mechanisms/-
logic that ArchAgent can design, we perform an ablation study on
Policy31, one of the winning replacement policies generated by
ArchAgent. We break down the novel policy mechanisms created
by ArchAgent qualitatively and quantitatively.
1.0.4
Designing beyond SPEC. In addition to discovering new poli-
cies for SPEC workloads, which is known to not be representa-
tive of cloud workloads [15, 16, 59], we use the publicly-available
Google Workload Traces [1] to discover high-performance poli-
cies for hyperscale workloads, and we show that ArchAgent can
design a policy that produces a 5.3% IPC speedup improvement
over prior SoTA policies within two days. Previously designing a
handcrafted hyperscale-centric policy would require a concerted,
human-intensive effort spanning months.
1.0.5
Post-silicon “hyperspecialization”. Design flows like ArchA-
gent represent a new paradigm in automated discovery. Although
we have only explored pre-silicon discovery thus far, we can now
ask the question: Could ArchAgent further improve its generated
policy post-silicon, by configuring the policy specifically for each
workload at runtime? While this process would traditionally be
extremely human-intensive, we show that ArchAgent can further
improve IPC speedup by 2.4% on average (up to 8.1% on mcf_46B)
over the prior state-of-the-art by customizing post-silicon runtime-
configurable policy parameters on memory-intensive SPEC 2006
workloads. It is important to note that this is the only part of this
work where we only tune parameters; all other uses of ArchAgent are
for devising new policy logic and mechanisms.
1.0.6
Strengths, pitfalls, and a call-to-action. ArchAgent provides a
proof-of-concept that ML-assisted design flows can enable architec-
tural discovery. However, this leaves many open questions still to
be answered. We take an experiential and evidence-based deep-dive
on the strengths and weaknesses of such systems today, including
critical issues around about overfitting versus specialization, ex-
trapolation from representative workloads, and the implications for
our community evaluation infrastructure in the era of agentic AI.
2
Background
To set the context, we briefly cover very recent advances in two
core areas: (1) agentic LLM-based evolutionary discovery tools
and (2) cache replacement policy design and competition-based
evaluation. A more substantial discussion of related work can be
found in Section 8.
2.1
LLM-based Evolutionary Agents
Recently, there has been an emergence of coding agents designed
for algorithmic and scientific discovery, such as Google DeepMind’s
AlphaEvolve. These agents use LLMs in combination with evolu-
tionary search to discover new solutions across varied domains
such as their use in mathematical proofs [18] and software systems
research [11]. Such agentic systems allow for the evolution of an
entire code file (e.g., hundreds of lines of code) in any program-
ming language through automatic generation and evaluation of
code. This is done by a human programmer first providing setup in-
structions (e.g., task directives, evaluation criteria, and background
knowledge) to the system and an initial solution to seed an evolu-
tionary database. Next, the setup instructions and prior code blocks
from the evolutionary database are sampled to create prompts,
which are fed to LLMs to generate new code blocks. These new
code blocks are fed into an evaluator, then ranked and fed into the
evolutionary database before continuing on iteratively. Such rank-
ing and evolution is done by way of evolutionary algorithms such
as island-based evolution [52, 62] or MAP-Elites evolution [44],
which balance genetic diversity based on behaviors (e.g., code size
and complexity) as well as performance on a specified metric (i.e.,
fitness score).
2.2
Cache Replacement Championships
With the goal of incentivizing the community to develop novel
cache replacement policies, The 1st Journal of Instruction-Level
Parallelism (JILP) Cache Replacement Championship (CRC-1) [3]
was held in 2010 to compare different last level cache (LLC) cache
replacement algorithms in a common evaluation framework. Given
a fixed storage budget and predefined single- and multi-core con-
figurations, competitors could submit cache replacement policies
that would then be ranked by a common set of workloads. The
latest championship, CRC-2 [20], had four tracks: (1) single-core
2


--- Page 3 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
without prefetching, (2) single core with prefetching, (3) multi-
core without prefetching, and (4) multi-core with prefetching. Each
track was ranked separately, and the winner was decided based on
the aggregate score across all tracks. The single-core track score
was determined by the geometric-mean of replacement algorithm
speedups across a set of single-threaded workloads, while in the
multi-core track, scores were determined by the weighted speedup
across a set of multi-program and multi-threaded workloads.
Looking across CRC-1, CRC-2, and other non-championship pub-
lications in the cache replacement policy domain [17, 23, 45, 56, 67,
71], margins of instructions-per-cycle (IPC) improvement normal-
ized to LRU compared to prior winners are typically reported to
be in the range of 1% to 3%, for single-core ChampSim configura-
tions across various mixes of workloads (including SPEC, GAP [6],
CVP1 [49], and more). For direct comparison, Mockingjay [56], the
prior state-of-the-art cache replacement policy, saw a 1.6% and 1.2%
increase in single-core performance normalized to LRU over Hawk-
eye [23] across a memory-intensive subset of SPEC 2006 workloads,
without prefetching and with prefetching, respectively. We make
two observations across the winning policies:
• The winning margins are typically small and are getting
smaller, which attests to the difficulty of the problem do-
main and the expectation that the headroom is shrinking.
• Nevertheless, the field of cache replacement has progressed
gradually with wins in the 1%-3% range accumulating over
time. However, each advance requires a concerted effort,
with (usually) multiple researchers studying the problem
over a long period of time.
3
ArchAgent System Design
ArchAgent harnesses an agentic generative AI system to automate
computer architecture discovery. At its core, we utilize the fact that
a common mechanism for expressing new computer architectures
is writing code in a software (micro)architectural simulator, which
is a good match for an evolutionary large language model-based
code-authoring agent such as AlphaEvolve. ArchAgent integrates
ChampSim, a widely used trace-based microarchitectural simula-
tor written in C++, with AlphaEvolve and a distributed evaluation
backend. AlphaEvolve is capable of rewriting any C++ code file in
ChampSim, but for the results presented in this paper, we restrict
it to designing last-level cache replacement policies. ArchAgent
works iteratively: automatically implementing candidate policies in
ChampSim and running large-scale, distributed ChampSim simula-
tions to evaluate quality (primarily on instructions per cycle (IPC)
achieved). The candidate policies and evaluation feedback guide
an evolutionary search algorithm to propose changes for a new
generation of candidates. Figure 1 shows a high-level overview of
ArchAgent. In the rest of this section, we show the key compo-
nents of ArchAgent in the context of using it to design new cache
replacement policies.
3.1
Prompting an LLM to be an Architecture
Research Agent
To automatically generate new policies, we provide AlphaEvolve
with an instruction prompt to describe the task and provide rele-
vant background and context. Figure 2 lists a simplified example
Act as an expert software developer and computer
architect. The codebase that you are working on is a
simulator for an out -of -order superscalar processor
running a program trace. Your task is to iteratively
improve the indicated section of the codebase , which
models a replacement policy for the caches in the
simulated processor and win the Cache Replacement
Championship. That is , you want to design the best
possible cache replacement policy for an out -of -order
superscalar processor and implement it in the simulator.
The primary goal is to increase the scores on the
provided evaluation metrics , where larger values are
better. One of these metrics is the number of
instructions -per -cycle (IPC) that the processor executes.
A better processor will achieve a higher IPC.
[...]
Ensure the code you introduce is realizable in hardware.
Ensure you don 't use more than 48KB state for your
replacement policy. This is separate from the size of the
cache itself. This is a strict limit and you must adhere
to it honestly. Otherwise you will be disqualified.
[... context about simulator caveats/APIs , max lines to
change , workloads , system configs , prior working programs
, and prior literature ...]
Figure 2: Simplified example of a prompt given to the AlphaE-
volve used in ArchAgent including persona, background in-
formation, guidance.
of a prompt used, that we aimed to be an expert computer archi-
tect persona. Combinations of prior policies (such as DRRIP, SHiP,
Mockingjay), literature references, expectations of IPC headroom,
and simulator interface information were provided to help an en-
semble of fast and efficient (Gemini 2.5-Flash) and deep reasoning
(Gemini 2.5-Pro) LLMs to generate varied policies. After each run,
the prompt is automatically configured to provide solutions and
metadata from previous runs to create the next evolution to test.
Importantly, optimizations added included prompting the models
to have more variation, respect hardware budget constraints (e.g.,
state size) required by the prior cache replacement championships,
and reduce code complexity (e.g., upper bound of 1K lines of code).
This included variations of word-play to “entice" the models to gen-
erate sufficiently different responses. The prompt described above
is templatized, with various components probabilistically sampled
and inserted to generate a variety of prompts at runtime to improve
the volume of ideas explored.
3.2
Starter Code
We provide ChampSim’s default replacement policy C++ implemen-
tation files as starter code for AlphaEvolve to add new policy logic
and change/remove ineffective logic. While we experimented with
simple policies as starting points (e.g., LRU), we eventually con-
verged on providing the Mockingjay policy source code, for faster
progress and convergence due to slow simulation speeds. Similar
to detailed documentation in the prompt, the file was also anno-
tated extensively with additional API information, assumptions,
and more.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Gupta et al.
Table 1: Simulated ChampSim memory system configura-
tions obtained from the 2nd Cache Replacement Champi-
onship.
Parameter
Single-Core Config.
Multi-Core Config. (4 Cores)
Prefetch
Prefetch
Disabled
Enabled
Disabled
Enabled
Cache Sizes
L1 Data
48 KiB
48 KiB
48 KiB
48 KiB
L1 Instruction
32 KiB
32 KiB
32 KiB
32 KiB
L2 (Per Core)
512 KiB
512 KiB
512 KiB
512 KiB
LLC (Shared)
2 MiB
2 MiB
8 MiB
8 MiB
Prefetchers
L1 Data
-
Next Line
-
Next Line
L2 (Per Core)
-
PC Stride
-
PC Stride
DRAM
Bandwidth
25.6 GB/s
25.6 GB/s
25.6 GB/s
25.6 GB/s
3.3
Workloads and ChampSim Hardware
Configurations
The choice of workload that can be fed to ChampSim in ArchAgent
is flexible. In this case, we selected both SPEC 2006 and Google
Workload Traces Version 2, representing a mix of publicly-available
workloads with a variety of memory-traffic characteristics. These
SPEC 2006 traces, obtained from CRC-2, use SimPoints [50] on mul-
tiple high LLC misses-per-kilo-instruction (MPKI) workloads [56].
We use the publicly-available Google Workload Traces Version
2 and convert into a ChampSim-compatible format. For Champ-
Sim microarchitectural configurations, we also used the default
CRC-2 single- and multi-core configurations as seen in Table 1.
In Section 3.5, we describe the process of running ChampSim on
our distributed backend to maximize parallelism on long-running
evaluations.
3.4
Evaluation Metrics
To match CRC-2, ArchAgent optimizes for the IPC of the cores
running the given workloads. For single-core ChampSim configu-
rations, this amounts to the geometric-mean IPC speedup over the
baseline ChampSim LRU policy. For multi-core configurations, this
is the weighted IPC speedup over the same LRU policy.
While the initial LLM prompt was given a hardware budget and
tips to improve explainability of generated responses, the under-
lying LLMs occasionally ignored instructions given. This resulted
in combinations of unrealistic hardware implementations, circum-
venting the championship constraints, and complex and difficult to
understand policies.
In addition to stronger prompt verbiage (e.g. explicit lines of
code wanted), we added the ability to measure the number of lines
of code generated and negatively rewarded the system for longer
responses. Once a final candidate policy was identified (i.e., after
sufficient iterative progress on target metrics), additional manual
checking was also done to verify that output policies represented
realistic, hardware-implementable designs.
3.5
Challenges in Using a Microarchitectural
Simulator as an AI Evaluator
Evaluation of each policy change takes a significant amount of time
because microarchitectural simulations are slow and ChampSim
itself is single threaded. For example, the evaluation for single-core
SPEC 2006 using ChampSim in the CRC-2 competition framing
requires running workload traces for 1B instructions. Depending
on the host machine running a simulation, the ChampSim config-
uration, and the benchmark being simulated, this can result in a
single simulation taking over 12 hours on a SoTA server-class CPU.
Multi-core evaluations are even slower, often taking 2-4 days for
some workload mixes since simulation is single threaded, resulting
in at least a proportional increase in runtime relative to the number
of cores simulated.
To reduce ArchAgent’s overall iteration time and avoid overfit-
ting, we reduced the number of instructions run when evaluating
proposed policies in each iteration of the evolutionary discovery
process. While this resulted in some generalization issues—where
results on shorter runs did not generalize to longer, representative
runs—we took a cascaded approach wherein policies were created
on shorter runs (i.e., 100M instructions) then later validated on
longer runs (e.g., 1B instructions for SPEC results to match compe-
tition framing).
To maximize iteration speed, we also added the capability to
run parallel long-running simulations on a distributed cluster. As
we began to run microarchitectural simulations in this fashion,
we experienced issues common to building distributed systems,
including seeing simulations get canceled due to maintenance oper-
ations (e.g., kernel updates) and other hardware instability. Typical
scale-out software workloads would avoid this issue by periodically
checkpointing intermediate state to persistent storage to restart
from. However, the ChampSim simulator does not support this
functionality, resulting in failed multi-day simulations (used for
validating proposed policies) having to be restarted from scratch.
Thus, additional infrastructure was built to automatically restart
jobs and a locally managed persistent cluster was set up to handle
long running jobs susceptible to interruption. In Section 7.3 we dis-
cuss augmenting computer architecture evaluation infrastructure
to avoid these issues.
3.6
Putting Together the Pieces
After the above inputs are provided and the environment con-
figured, ArchAgent controls the discovery process, automatically
generating novel policies, testing them against the evaluation en-
vironment, and continually improving them using evolutionary
search guided by quantitative evaluator feedback. Due to prompt
randomization, LLM entropy, and evolutionary algorithm sampling,
evolution speed varies as the system explores the design space and
reaches a state-of-the-art solution.
4
Using ArchAgent to Automatically Design
LLC Replacement Policies for Single-Core
Systems
In this case study, we use ArchAgent to design a last-level cache
replacement policy, Policy31, to compete in the single-core portion
of the CRC-2.
4.1
Methodology
Policy31 is constructed by ArchAgent optimizing for SimPoint [50]
traces from the SPEC 2006 workload suite on single-core ChampSim
system configurations with both prefetching and no prefetching,
as shown in Table 1. To align with recent cache replacement policy
4


--- Page 5 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
Table 2: Comparison of Policy Evolution Setups. In Evaluation Metric, geomean is geometric-mean across benchmarks while
mean(IPC) refers to the arithmetic mean of IPC across all cores.
Policy
Workload
Simulation Instructions
Evaluation Metric
Evolution Time
Evolution
Validation
Policy31
19 Memory Intensive
SPEC06 Benchmarks
max(50M, 100M)
within 1 hr
1B
𝑔𝑒𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
 IPCpolicy
IPClru

18 days
Policy31-Tuned
19 Memory Intensive
SPEC06 Benchmarks
1B
1B
𝑔𝑒𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
 IPCpolicy
IPClru

< 8 days
Policy61
11 Google Workload Traces
50M
75M
𝑔𝑒𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
 mean(IPCpolicy)
mean(IPClru)

4 days
Policy62
11 Google Workload Traces
20M
75M
𝑔𝑒𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛
 mean(IPCpolicy)
mean(IPClru)

2 days
evaluations [56], we only use memory-intensive SPEC workloads
that have LLC MPKI > 1 with the LRU replacement policy. Workload-
level speedup is measured as the IPC ratio of the generated policy
over an LRU baseline (
𝐼𝑃𝐶𝑝𝑜𝑙𝑖𝑐𝑦
𝐼𝑃𝐶𝑙𝑟𝑢) while suite-level speedup is mea-
sured as the geometric-mean of workload-level speedups as seen
in Table 2.
For speedy evolution and to prevent overfitting, we provide
feedback to ArchAgent by simulating a relatively small number of
instructions (i.e., upto 100M instructions for each individual work-
load trace) to allow the simulations to complete within one hour.
However, for validation, we collect final results by executing 1B
instructions for each workload trace to comply with the CRC-2
competition framing. Quicker feedback allows ArchAgent to ex-
plore more solutions in the given time frame (further discussed in
Section 7.3).
4.2
Policy31 Description
Starting from the Mockingjay codebase, ArchAgent experimented
for 18 days by adding (or changing/removing) code for new policy
logic/mechanisms to create Policy31.
Mockingjay predicts the future reuse distance of each line using
a PC-based predictor and then evicts the line whose predicted reuse
is furthest in the future. ArchAgent augmented the policy with
several new techniques discussed below.
4.2.1
Insertion Quality. Policy31 includes an Insertion Quality
Predictor (IQP) to identify PCs that bring in dead blocks (i.e., blocks
that are never used), and it penalizes reuse distance prediction for
dead blocks by inflating their predicted reuse distance (which makes
them more likely to get evicted).
4.2.2
Hawks and Doves. Policy31 tracks the usage intensity of
each block with a 2-bit saturating counter. Blocks with a higher
usage count are considered more valuable and are less likely to be
evicted. Figure 3 shows the logic to adjust ETR (Estimated Time of
Reuse) based on usage.
4.2.3
Prefetch-Aware Retention. Policy31 introduces logic to de-
prioritize easy-to-prefetch sources by giving them a high ETR and
prioritize difficult-to-prefetch sources by giving them a low ETR.
4.2.4
Cache Pressure-Aware Adaptive Throttling (CPAAT). Policy31
+ // --- HAWKS AND DOVES STATE ---
+ // A bit -packed 2b sat. ctr per cache line
+ // Tracks usage intensity and follows state budget
+ // Each byte holds 4 counters
+ std::vector <uint8_t > packed_usage_counter;
/* find a cache block to evict */
long policy31 :: find_victim (...) {
for (...) {
+
// Retrieve H&D usage and use for ETR
+
current.usage = get_usage(set , way);
+
current.effective_etr = abs(current.etr_val) - (
current.usage * BONUS_PER_USE);
}
}
/* called on every cache hit and cache refill */
void policy31 :: update_replacement_state (...) {
+
if (hit) {
+
// Inc. usage counter (saturating at 3)
+
// This makes frequently -used blocks stickier
+
increment_usage(set , way);
+
} else {
+
// Fill on a miss (a new line inserted)
+
// The new block starts with a usage of 0
+
reset_usage(set , way);
+
}
}
Figure 3: Example Policy31 modifications in the form of a
diff to implement the Hawks and Doves mechanism. The
packed_usage_counter and corresponding get-, increment-,
and reset_usage setter/getters are used to help determine
eviction candidates.
introduces a new mechanism to dynamically adjust the bypass ag-
gressiveness based on the overall miss rate (i.e., cache pressure).
Under high pressure, it’s more conservative with new insertions,
preserving the existing working set.
4.3
Results
We compare suite-level IPC speedup improvement normalized to
the standard LRU baseline. We find that Policy31 improves IPC
speedup normalized to LRU by 12.2% and 8.0% in the no prefetch
and prefetch configurations, respectively (versus 11.4% and 7.0%
for Mockingjay). Figure 6 shows the workload-level improvement
across the suite in the prefetch-enabled case, demonstrating overall
5


--- Page 6 ---
Gupta et al.
+180
+240  
+18
       +8
Estimated Development Time (Days)
0
2
4
6
8
10
% Geomean IPC Speedup Improvement
Normalized to LRU
0.015%/d
0.011%/d
0.050%/d
0.183%/d
SHiP
Hawkeye
+2.70%
Mockingjay
+2.73%
Policy31
+0.91%
Policy31-Tuned
+1.47%
Human
Driven
AI
Driven
Performance Improvement v. Estimated Development Time
Figure 4: Performance improvement (suite-level geomean IPC speedup normalized to LRU) compared to estimated development
time of replacement policies for the single-core prefetch-enabled ChampSim configuration on memory-intensive SPEC06
workloads. Slope (grey, italics) denotes percentage point improvement per day.
improvement and no significant outliers.
To put these improvements in context, Section 2.2 describes that
the historical rate of improvement for cache replacement for single-
core ChampSim configurations is reported to be in the 1-3% range
per solution. Each improvement in prior work has needed signifi-
cant effort by multiple researchers over several months, whereas
here we have demonstrated that ArchAgent can achieve similar
gains in less than 3 weeks.
Figure 4 compares the performance improvement achieved by
successive SoTA cache replacement policies compared to the esti-
mated time of developing these policies for the single-core prefetch-
enabled ChampSim configuration on memory-intensive SPEC06
workloads. The estimated development time was obtained from
their creators. These reported times include only time to develop
the policies, excluding, for example, paper writing time. When com-
paring the effort involved in developing Policy31 and the prior
SoTA policies, we find that ArchAgent achieved its gains 3-5× faster
than humans. Furthermore, replacement policy development for
SPEC workloads is well explored as prior work has demonstrated
that existing solutions come within 90% of the hit rate optimal
solution [56]. This points to the increasing difficulty of finding
performance improvements for this problem domain.
Mockingjay
+ IQP
+ Prefetcher Features
+ CPAAT
+ Hawks and Doves
Replacement Policy
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
% Improvement in
Geomean IPC Speedup
Normalized to LRU
7.066
6.833
7.155
7.537
7.973
Figure 5: Ablation study measuring improvement in suite-
level geomean IPC speedup with each new technique that
composes Policy31 for the single-core prefetch-enabled
ChampSim configuration running SPEC06 memory inten-
sive workloads.
6


--- Page 7 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
GemsFDTD_109B
astar_163B
bwaves_1861B
bzip2_183B
cactusADM_734B
calculix_2670B
gcc_13B
lbm_94B
leslie3d_1116B
libquantum_1210B
mcf_46B
milc_360B
omnetpp_340B
soplex_66B
sphinx3_2520B
tonto_2834B
wrf_1212B
xalancbmk_748B
zeusmp_600B
SPEC 2006 Workload
0
20
40
60
80
100
% Improvement in IPC Speedup
Normalized to LRU
 -1.44
 3.84
 0.49
 1.04
 3.16
 0.00
 29.03
 18.55
 0.71
 10.03
 9.09
 1.14
 2.19
 9.27
 56.06
 -0.02
 0.57
 4.82
 -0.62
 -1.84
 6.82
 0.60
 2.58
 5.68
 0.00
 28.87
 18.53
 1.22
 8.62
 12.35
 2.89
 3.18
 10.88
 59.55
 0.03
 0.22
 6.92
 -1.09
 -0.47
 8.50
 0.77
 3.90
 7.38
 0.00
 34.06
 18.79
 2.23
 12.11
 17.23
 2.95
 4.26
 11.59
 62.87
 0.16
 2.23
 8.16
 -1.09
Replacement Policy
Mockingjay
Policy31
Policy31-Tuned
Figure 6: Per-workload improvement in policy IPC speedup normalized to LRU for the single-core prefetch-enabled ChampSim
configuration running SPEC 2006 memory intensive workloads.
4.4
Ablation Study
To better understand the source of performance improvement for
Policy31, we run an ablation study breaking down the impact of
key policy features created by ArchAgent (described in 4.2). Figure 5
shows the ablation study results when running on the default single-
core prefetch-enabled ChampSim configuration running workloads
from SPEC 2006 suite for 1B instructions. Selectively, the study re-
enables the various mechanisms that comprise Policy31 one-by-
one, until the complete Policy31 is evaluated. As seen in the figure,
most of the improvement is coming from CPAAT and Hawks and
Doves, providing a 0.8% improvement, combined. IQP and prefetch
management result in marginal gains and only show benefits when
combined with all other mechanisms.
This highlights a challenge with machine-generated policies,
where manual work is still needed to not only validate the perfor-
mance improvement but also understand the root cause. To have
high confidence in machine-generated policies, the process of abla-
tion and verification will remain a key bottleneck that could also
benefit from automation, as discussed further in 7.1.
5
Using ArchAgent for Runtime-Configurable,
Workload-Specific Hyperoptimization
We observe that ArchAgent-generated policies such as Policy31
introduce new microarchitectural techniques that make the policies
flexible and amenable to runtime tuning. These runtime parameters
are expressions in the policy that do not affect storage size and are
instead either constants or simple arithmetic expressions derived
from constants. We identify 13 runtime parameters in Policy31
that fall into the following two categories:
• Constants used in scores such as ETR or bonuses/penalties
for particular categories of accesses (e.g., prefetches).
• Thresholds such as those used to detect long ETR blocks or
initiate adaptive decay of cache counters.
5.1
Methodology
Since we are exploring runtime tuning, both evolution and valida-
tion are performed on the memory intensive SPEC 2006 workload
subset mentioned in Section 4.1 running for 1B instructions (Ta-
ble 2). ArchAgent optimizes each workload individually and we
enforce that it only changes runtime parameters instead of the
entire replacement policy.
5.2
Results
ArchAgent creates a new runtime parameter-tuned variant of
Policy31, called Policy31-Tuned, tuned for individual SPEC 2006
workloads on the championship single-core ChampSim prefetch-
enabled configuration. When comparing suite-level speedups,
Policy31-Tuned achieves an additional 1.5% overall geometric-
mean IPC improvement as compared to Policy31 and 2.3% overall
improvement compared to Mockingjay, normalized to LRU. When
analyzing workload-level speedups, Figure 6 shows that workloads
such as gcc_13B and mcf_46B show >5.0% gain while others show
limited improvement (e.g., calculix_2670B).
To put these results in context, Figure 4 shows that ArchAgent’s
rate of improvement with Policy31-Tuned is over 10× faster than
prior SoTA policies. Notably, this improvement was achieved in
less than eight days.
These results highlight the potential of AI-driven runtime spe-
cialization of hardware to specific workloads and we envision that
such post-silicon hyperoptimizations could be commonplace, simi-
lar to automatic profile-guided optimizations prevalent in hyper-
scalers [4, 10, 36].
6
Using ArchAgent to Automatically Design
Multi-Core LLC Replacement Policies for
Google Workload Traces
With Policy31, we show ArchAgent can win within an established
competition environment on SPEC 2006. However, it is widely
established that SPEC 2006 is not representative of hyperscale cloud
7


--- Page 8 ---
Gupta et al.
workloads [15]. For example, SPEC workloads have much smaller
instruction footprints and significantly lower instruction cache
pressure as compared to hyperscale workloads. While Mockingjay
shows clear wins on both single- and multi-core SPEC, Figure 8
shows it performs much worse than even LRU on Google Workload
Traces.
Thus, in this case study, we use ArchAgent to generate multi-core
cache replacement policies, Policy61 and Policy62, specialized
for publicly-available Google Workload Traces Version 2.
6.1
Methodology
Policy61 and Policy62 are generated by running 11 workloads
from the Google Workload Traces Version 2 suite across both
prefetch and non-prefetch multi-core ChampSim configurations
stated in Table 1. The DynamoRIO trace scheduler [8], similar to an
operating system scheduler, is used to schedule thread-level traces
from each workload onto the four cores of the multi-core system.
Final validation is done by simulating the two policies for 75M
instructions as seen in Table 2. Here, workload mix speedup is
computed as the arithmetic mean of IPC across cores normalized to
the arithmetic mean of IPC across cores using the LRU replacement
policy. We find this to be a suitable metric because all four cores
are executing threads from the same workload. Suite-level speedup
is measured as the geometric-mean of workload-level speedups.
For speed, we provide evolution feedback by simulating 50M
and 20M instructions for Policy61 and Policy62, respectively.
The feedback metric averages suite-level speedup scores for both
multi-core configurations.
We provide the Mockingjay source code as the starter code for
both policies, and we allow ArchAgent to change the entire replace-
ment policy code.
6.2
Policy Description
Two different ArchAgent runs on these traces resulted in two vastly
different policies, but both are building on the premise that code
characteristics of hyperscale workloads are different, so the use of
PC as a feature needs to be revisited.
Policy61. Policy61 was generated over the course of four days.
It maintains the core algorithm of Mockingjay, but makes one crit-
ical change: it enriches the signature used for prediction with in-
formation about the path taken to reach the current instruction as
seen below.
// XOR prev. hist. with PC to make a uniq. signature
core_pc_history[cpu] = (( history << 1) | (history >> 63))
^ instr_pc;
This is expected to help in scenarios where the calling context of
a PC is important for its caching behavior. For example, a generic
memcpy routine might be called to copy small, frequently-reused
data structures in one part of a program, and to perform large,
non-temporal streaming copies in another. A predictor that only
looks at the PC of the memcpy’s load/store instructions will conflate
these distinct behaviors, leading to an average prediction that is
optimal for neither case.
Similar ideas have been proposed in the literature before [41, 57],
but not in the context of Mockingjay.
Policy62. Policy62 was generated over the course of two days
and uses a completely different approach from Mockingjay. It first
removes all the key components of Mockingjay (including reuse
prediction and eviction based on estimated time of reuse) and then
evolves into something that is very close to SHiP, but is much more
adaptive and sensitive to larger code footprints.
In particular, two key ideas make Policy62 different:
• Tagged Predictor Table: PC-based cache predictors usually
allow for aliasing, and the tables are simply indexed by a
hash without any tag matching. Policy62 explicitly stores
a 3-bit tag inside the predictor entry. Predictions are re-
trieved only if the tags match. If the tags don’t match, it
resets the entry. This prevents “destructive aliasing," mak-
ing the predictor more precise.
• Learning Signal: SHiP typically trains its predictor at the
time of eviction. When a block is kicked out of the cache,
SHiP checks whether the block was used. If yes, the counter
for the PC that inserted it is incremented. If not, the counter
is decremented. By contrast, Policy62 updates the predic-
tor when the line is accessed. If the line hits, the counter
for the PC corresponding to the access is incremented. If
the line misses, the counter for the PC corresponding to
the access is decremented.
While subtle, the second difference is significant because it allows
Policy62 to learn much quicker than SHiP or Mockingjay. Waiting
for cache eviction to learn can prolong learning feedback. The
key idea here is that some PCs have a small working set that can
be cached, while most others will not see reuse due to the large
working set. Thus, PCs that miss frequently (and fetch a lot of data)
are penalized and PCs that hit frequently are prioritized for cache
residency.
6.3
Results
Figures 7 and 8 compare suite-level speedups on multi-core config-
urations with prefetching disabled and enabled, respectively. We
find a major inversion in trends here with Mockingjay performing
much worse than even LRU and SHiP emerging as the prior SoTA
policy.
• On the non-prefetch configuration, we find that SHiP, Policy61,
and Policy62 achieve a 3.0%, 4.7%, and 6.1% improvement
over LRU, respectively.
• On the prefetch-enabled configuration, we find that SHiP,
Policy61, and Policy62 achieve a 2.9%, 5.4%, and 8.2%
improvement over LRU, respectively.
• On the prefetching-enabled configuration, Mockingjay, the
starter code for ArchAgent policies, shows a slowdown of
9.5% over LRU. Thus, ArchAgent recovers a performance
deficit of 17.8% with a simpler policy.
Figure 9 shows workload-level speedups across the Google Work-
load Traces suite in the prefetch-enabled case with Policy61 and
Policy62 showing consistently strong performance compared to
prior work.
In our understanding, the trend inversion between Mocking-
jay, SHiP, and LRU, and the strong performance of Policy61 and
Policy62—simpler policies derived from Mockingjay—can be at-
tributed to the unique characteristics of these hyperscale workloads,
8


--- Page 9 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
SHiP
Mockingjay
Policy61
Policy62
Replacement Policy
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
% Improvement in Geomean IPC
Speedup Normalized to LRU
3.003
-7.697
4.732
6.116
Figure 7: Improvement in geomean IPC speedup normalized
to LRU for the multi-core prefetch-disabled ChampSim con-
figuration running Google Workload Traces.
SHiP
Mockingjay
Policy61
Policy62
Replacement Policy
10
5
0
5
10
% Improvement in Geomean IPC
Speedup Normalized to LRU
2.905
-9.538
5.444
8.227
Figure 8: Improvement in geomean IPC speedup normalized
to LRU for the multi-core prefetch-enabled ChampSim con-
figuration running Google Workload Traces.
arizona_0
bravo.a_0
charlie_0
delta_0
merced_0
sierra.a.3_0
sierra.a.6_0
tahoe_0
tango_0
whiskey_0
yankee_0
Google Workload
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
% Improvement in IPC Speedup
Normalized to LRU
 1.54
 5.48
 1.11
 1.16
 1.72
 4.96
 3.82
 3.50
 4.95
 0.91
 2.95
 -2.15
 -11.23
 -6.54
 -7.12
 -10.99
 -15.57
 -26.26
 -4.40
 -10.53
 -1.67
 -5.52
 0.72
 9.97
 1.55
 4.02
 2.74
 9.26
 6.19
 8.89
 8.91
 1.98
 6.21
 0.39
 14.81
 2.84
 6.13
 4.19
 12.70
 8.95
 12.35
 14.24
 2.50
 12.71
Replacement Policy
SHiP
Mockingjay
Policy61
Policy62
Figure 9: Per-workload improvement in policy IPC speedup normalized to LRU for the multi-core prefetch-enabled ChampSim
configuration running Google Workload Traces.
such as deep call stacks, high degree of multithreading, and high
context switch rates.
We show that ArchAgent enables designers to rapidly customize
replacement policies to previously unexplored workload classes.
7
Discussion, Future Work, and a Call-to-Action
The use of evolutionary coding agents in computer architecture
research shows great promise, but will require significant improve-
ments to our community research infrastructure, as well as contin-
ued experimentation with AI tools. In this section, we outline some
of the key takeaways and potential next steps in this area.
7.1
LLM Capabilities and Constraints
A central finding of this study is the remarkable capability of LLMs
to generate new microarchitectural designs, including both mi-
croarchitectural technique discovery and parameter optimization.
Given a rich context, our evolutionary agent automatically gen-
erated novel, complex, and functionally correct hardware policies
that improved on the performance achieved by state-of-the-art
human-designed policies for both classical workloads (SPEC) and
hyperscale workloads (Google Workload Traces).
Given the current approach however, confirming the realizability
of generated policies remains a human intensive process, due to
the lack of ASIC quality-of-result data (e.g., frequency and area) in
most microarchitectural simulators. In our case, while we found
specialized prompts to be effective at generally guiding the LLMs
9


--- Page 10 ---
Gupta et al.
along these lines, significant human-driven verification was still
needed to guarantee compliance. For example, to avoid complex,
difficult-to-understand policies with thousands of lines of changes,
we combined the use of additional prompting to limit code size (a
proxy for code complexity and hardware realizability) as well as a
rule-based verifier that calculated the number of total/added lines
of code and discarded samples violating constraints. This signifi-
cantly improved the explainability of solutions found, reducing the
time-consuming manual ablation studies needed to understand any
improvement and estimate its true hardware overhead. However,
writing rule-based verifiers is not feasible for all constraints. As an
example, inferring physical storage size from a microarchitectural
model is non-trivial and thus we still rely on prompting and manual
pruning/assessment for such a constraint. This highlights a criti-
cal and interesting avenue for future work: developing principled,
automated methods to inject these hard architectural constraints
directly into the design process, moving beyond simple prompting
or post-generation manual verification.
Additionally, despite the high quality of generated solutions
evidenced in this work, there remains significant opportunity in
pushing the limits of the type of solutions ArchAgent can generate.
For one, there is an opportunity to collect a dataset representing a
much greater sample of prior art in the cache replacement space,
both in terms of implementations (software code, RTL) and descrip-
tions (documentation, academic papers, industrial reports). Adding
additional agents in the loop is another opportunity. Each of a
group of multiple agents can employ a different persona, e.g., a
microarchitect, an SRAM design/process design expert, a physical
design expert, and a workload expert, each of which are responsible
for providing different (and perhaps competing) feedback on the
design, potentially using industry standard EDA tools.
7.2
Hardware/Software Co-Design For
Hyperspecialization
The automated nature of evolutionary coding agents will have
significant implications for computer architecture and systems re-
search. Historically, the immense human effort and simulation time
required to design and validate even a single new heuristic has
biased the field toward generalist solutions; policies that perform
adequately, but rarely optimally, across all workloads. The sheer
productivity of an automated parallelizable agent, which can gen-
erate and evaluate thousands of policy variants in a short time,
shatters this barrier and makes specialization computationally fea-
sible, especially if deployed systems support experimentation.
This capability can usher in a new era of hardware-software
co-design, moving beyond the “one-size-fits-all" paradigm. Instead
of a static, general-purpose cache policy, a system built with even
greater runtime configurability (vs. the simpler runtime parameter
tuning we explored in Section 5) could deploy purpose-built heuris-
tics per workload. For example, a heuristic evolved specifically for
a critical database, a high-priority AI model, or a latency-sensitive
video pipeline could yield significant efficiency benefits. This re-
quires the right low-cost flexible hardware-software interfaces that
allow an operating system or hypervisor to securely and efficiently
specialize hardware components, a promising and critical direction
for future systems research.
7.3
A Call-to-Action: Evaluation Methodology
Improvements
Evaluation methodology, namely computer architecture simulator
performance and quality, needs to be re-evaluated in the new era
of (potentially adversarial) AI agent-driven execution.
In our early experiments, we found that ArchAgent was “willing”
to take any shortcut made available by the simulation environment,
unlike a human researcher acting in good faith. We describe one
such “simulator escape”—a situation where the agentic AI flow
discovered and exploited a loophole in the simulator used for eval-
uations.
The ChampSim simulator does not support write-bypassing in
the LLC. Verification that a policy is not performing write-bypassing
only takes place in an assertion that is eliminated by the compiler
when ChampSim is compiled with optimizations enabled. Given the
simulator performance concerns described in Section 3.5 and below,
building with these optimizations enabled is crucial. In this case,
ArchAgent developed a policy called Policy12, that appeared to
be beating Mockingjay on the SPEC06 workloads in the single-
core no-prefetch and prefetch scenarios by 3% and 4%, respectively.
However, ArchAgent won by taking advantage of the fact that a
bypassed write in the LLC would disappear from the system en-
tirely. This not only avoided evicting a potentially more useful line,
but also eliminated the corresponding DRAM write pressure entirely,
drastically improving IPC. Since there is no notion of “correct com-
putation” in such a trace-driven simulator, there was no further
way to detect this issue.
Building simulators that are either better verified or closer to
the actual hardware design (e.g., RTL simulation or hardware-
accelerated emulation) and thus less susceptible to “abuse” by the
AI agents is crucial. Incorporating simulators that are closer to the
actual hardware design (e.g., RTL-derived) would also have the
added advantage of providing additional feedback to ArchAgent-
like tools, including frequency, area, and power data collected from
ASIC EDA tools.
As discussed briefly in Section 3.5, simulation speed also limits
ArchAgent’s rate of discovery. ArchAgent’s ability to reach cre-
ative solutions is inversely proportional to the evaluation latency.
This becomes untenable for long, complex simulations which are
commonplace in computer architecture. For example, evaluating
a single design point for a multi-core system using ChampSim,
executing hundreds of millions of instructions, can require a 12-
to 24-hour turnaround. An evolutionary search, which needs to
evaluate thousands of candidates for enough variation, can be se-
verely limited by the simulation speed, reducing the chances for the
tool to try sufficiently interesting and “risky” ideas. Similarly, this
simulation speed also hinders evaluation of longer representative
workloads (e.g., instead of simulating 1B instructions, simulating
hundreds of billions of instructions representative of production
programs).
As established in this discussion, to truly unleash the power of
AI-driven architecture discovery, computer architecture simulators
must become both more accurate and orders of magnitude faster,
warranting more research into higher fidelity frameworks and simu-
lators. Hardware-accelerated simulators such as FireSim [28] could
provide solutions to this problem.
10


--- Page 11 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
8
Related Work
There has been decades of research in designing efficient cache
replacement policies and applying broader automated techniques
for hardware-software discovery.
8.1
Designing Cache Replacement Policies
Prior work on cache replacement policy design can be viewed from
the lens of different design methodologies, which can be broadly
categorized into three main paradigms: handcrafted heuristics, ML-
based policies, and evolutionary parameter tuning.
8.1.1
Heuristic-based Replacement. Over three decades, handcrafted
heuristics have changed from simple, static rules to highly sophis-
ticated, adaptive algorithms. Early work proposed static heuris-
tics [17, 26, 29, 35, 48, 51, 54, 58, 66] to avoid pathologies of LRU
and LFU. More recent heuristics take a predictive approach [2, 12,
14, 22, 23, 27, 30–34, 39, 61, 63, 67]. They leverage past behavior
to predict future caching priorities. The Mockingjay policy [56]
use predicted reuse distances to mimic Belady’s optimal caching
solution [7]. More recently, Mostofi et al. use offline profiling to
determine Insertion and Promotion Vectors for an unseen trace,
however, this solution does not outperform Mockingjay [42]. We
use Mockingjay as the initial code that the AI agent starts from for
better performance.
Another line of work recognizes that cache replacement policies
must operate in the context of the system they are in. For exam-
ple, prefetch-aware policies [24, 68, 72] recognize the distinction
between demand and prefetch accesses to make replacement de-
cisions; other policies make a similar distinction for instruction
accesses [42] or TLB accesses. There is also work that recognizes
the need for adapting replacement policies to the nature of the
cache hierarchy, such as inclusive caches [25] or sliced caches [60].
From a methodological perspective, all these solutions are based
on human intuition and insight. These works do not leverage any
automated methods to search the design space of replacement poli-
cies.
8.1.2
ML-based Replacement. One branch of research deploys ML
models directly in hardware, ranging from lightweight online learn-
ing [75] to full deep learning inference [37, 64]. For example, PAR-
ROT [38] casts cache replacement as an imitation learning problem
to approximate the “oracle" decisions of Belady’s optimal policy.
These policies result in high implementation complexity and over-
head, as they require online neural network inference.
Therefore, a second line of research uses powerful, unconstrained
ML models in an offline setting to discover features and insights,
which are used to design hardware-friendly online policies [55, 57].
For example, the Glider policy [57] leveraged a powerful, attention-
based Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) network to discover novel
features for a simple online model. In this case, the ML model serves
as a “discovery engine," but interpreting the model and designing
the final simple policy remains a manual process.
Our work is the first to bridge the divide between these two
schools. We introduce an evolutionary coding framework that au-
tomates the discovery process of the “Offline Insight" school, while
explicitly optimizing for the simplicity and hardware-efficiency
that is the key bottleneck for the “Online Learning" school.
8.1.3
Evolutionary Computation for Replacement Policy Tuning.
Prior work that has used evolutionary computation to discover
replacement policies has focused on using genetic algorithms to
tune parameters within a predefined policy structure [9, 43, 73].
While these works established a precedent for using evolutionary
search, they were limited to optimizing parameters within a fixed-
model, rather than evolving the structure of the algorithm itself.
More recently, an evolutionary coding framework was used to
build web-based caching policies [13]. This work uses an approach
that is similar to ours, but applies it to software caches, where the
constraints and performance tradeoffs are different.
8.2
ML For Other Design Tasks
Beyond predictive policies like cache replacement or branch predic-
tion, ML has been used across a wide-variety of hardware-software
co-design domains.
With the growing importance of ML accelerators, multiple prior
works have focused on hardware-software co-design of neural net-
work accelerators through various search space optimization tech-
niques [46, 53, 69, 70, 74]. These works often formulate the search
problem to explore both hardware mixes and software mappings
to newly generated hardware, leveraging advanced analytical mod-
eling to quickly iterate through the design space. Our work differs
from these by focusing on policies, with a well defined set of champi-
onship constraints that resulting policies need to be evaluated with
a detailed microarchitectural simulator running a mix of standard
and realistic hyperscale CPU workloads.
Other techniques focused on optimizing microarchitectures [5],
instead focus on other reinforcement learning techniques to ex-
plore pre-silicon parameters of microarchitectures or in the case of
software, optimizing existing codebases/systems [11, 40, 65]. Our
work is different from these approaches as it tackles the whole-scale
design (of a cache replacement policy) rather than parametric opti-
mization of an existing system using LLM-based discovery tooling.
9
Conclusions
In this paper, we have introduced ArchAgent, a first step towards
building an agentic artificial intelligence system for automatic novel
computer architecture discovery. Using ArchAgent, we automati-
cally designed and implemented four novel cache replacement pol-
icy algorithms, Policy31, Policy31-Tuned, Policy61, Policy62,
that beat SoTA cache replacement policies tested in various cache
replacement championships. On the public multi-core Google Work-
load Traces, ArchAgent achieved a 5.3% better IPC speedup over
the prior SoTA within two days, and on the single-core SPEC06
workloads, it achieved a 0.9% better IPC speedup over the prior
SoTA in 18 days. Comparing against the effort involved in develop-
ing the prior SoTA policies, ArchAgent achieved these gains 3-5×
faster than humans. We identified that agentic flows such as ArchA-
gent enable post-silicon hyperspecializtion of hardware systems
to a specific workload (mix) demonstrating a 2.4% IPC speedup
improvement over prior SoTA on single-core SPEC06 workloads.
While we highlight that the use of these agentic systems allows
for a dramatic increase in computer architecture discovery, further
improvements are needed to improve simulator fidelity and speed
in the era of agentic-AI-assisted research.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Gupta et al.
10
Acknowledgments
This paper has used generative AI technologies in the following
ways. First, the core work done by this paper uses AI tooling to
develop novel cache replacement policies. Minor use of generative
AI tooling was used to generate tables, plot graphs, and assist with
clarity and flow, limited to phrases and single sentences. The au-
thors have reviewed, verified, and edited all such generated content
and take full responsibility for the content of the paper, including
any errors or omissions.
References
[1] [n. d.]. Google Workload Traces Version 2. https://console.cloud.google.com/
storage/browser/external-traces-v2. Accessed: 2025-11-13.
[2] Jaume Abella, Antonio González, Xavier Vera, and Michael FP O’Boyle. 2005.
IATAC: a smart predictor to turn-off L2 cache lines.
ACM Transactions on
Architecture and Code Optimization (TACO) 2, 1 (2005), 55–77.
[3] Alaa R. Alameldeen, Aamer Jaleel, and Moinuddin Qureshi. 2010. Cache Replace-
ment Championship. https://jilp.org/jwac-1/
[4] Grant Ayers, Heiner Litz, Christos Kozyrakis, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan.
2020.
Classifying Memory Access Patterns for Prefetching. In Proceedings
of the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
gramming Languages and Operating Systems (Lausanne, Switzerland) (ASP-
LOS ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 513–526.
doi:10.1145/3373376.3378498
[5] Chen Bai, Jianwang Zhai, Yuzhe Ma, Bei Yu, and Martin DF Wong. 2024. To-
wards automated risc-v microarchitecture design with reinforcement learning.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 38. 12–20.
[6] Scott Beamer, Krste Asanović, and David Patterson. 2015. The GAP benchmark
suite. arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.03619 (2015).
[7] Laszlo A. Belady. 1966. A study of replacement algorithms for a virtual-storage
computer. IBM Systems Journal (1966), 78–101.
[8] D. Bruening, T. Garnett, and S. Amarasinghe. 2003. An infrastructure for adap-
tive dynamic optimization. In International Symposium on Code Generation and
Optimization, 2003. CGO 2003. 265–275. doi:10.1109/CGO.2003.1191551
[9] Fouad Butt and Abdolreza Abhari. 2010. Genetic algorithms: an approach to
optimal web cache replacement. In Proceedings of the 2010 Spring Simulation
Multiconference. 1–4.
[10] Dehao Chen, David Xinliang Li, and Tipp Moseley. 2016. AutoFDO: Automatic
Feedback-Directed Optimization for Warehouse-Scale Applications. In Proceed-
ings of the 2016 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization
(Barcelona, Spain) (CGO ’16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 12–23. doi:10.1145/2854038.2854044
[11] Audrey Cheng, Shu Liu, Melissa Pan, Zhifei Li, Bowen Wang, Alex Krentsel,
Tian Xia, Mert Cemri, Jongseok Park, Shuo Yang, Jeff Chen, Lakshya Agrawal,
Aditya Desai, Jiarong Xing, Koushik Sen, Matei Zaharia, and Ion Stoica. 2025.
Barbarians at the Gate: How AI is Upending Systems Research.
(2025).
arXiv:2510.06189 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06189
[12] Nam Duong, Dali Zhao, Taesu Kim, Rosario Cammarota, Mateo Valero, and
Alexander V. Veidenbaum. 2012. Improving Cache Management Policies Using
Dynamic Reuse Distances. In 45th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium
on Microarchitecture (MICRO). 389–400.
[13] Rohit Dwivedula, Divyanshu Saxena, Aditya Akella, Swarat Chaudhuri, and Dae-
hyeok Kim. 2025. Man-Made Heuristics Are Dead. Long Live Code Generators!
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08803 (2025).
[14] Priyank Faldu and Boris Grot. 2017. Leeway: Addressing Variability in Dead-
Block Prediction for Last-Level Caches. In 26th Annual International Conference
on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT). 180–193.
[15] Michael Ferdman, Almutaz Adileh, Onur Kocberber, Stavros Volos, Mohammad
Alisafaee, Djordje Jevdjic, Cansu Kaynak, Adrian Daniel Popescu, Anastasia
Ailamaki, and Babak Falsafi. 2012. Clearing the clouds: a study of emerging
scale-out workloads on modern hardware. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages
and Operating Systems (London, England, UK) (ASPLOS XVII). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 37–48. doi:10.1145/2150976.2150982
[16] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Dailun Cheng, Ankitha Shetty, Priyal Rathi, Nayan Katarki,
Ariana Bruno, Justin Hu, Brian Ritchken, Brendon Jackson, Kelvin Hu, Meghna
Pancholi, Yuan He, Brett Clancy, Chris Colen, Fukang Wen, Catherine Leung,
Siyuan Wang, Leon Zaruvinsky, Mateo Espinosa, Rick Lin, Zhongling Liu, Jake
Padilla, and Christina Delimitrou. 2019. An Open-Source Benchmark Suite for
Microservices and Their Hardware-Software Implications for Cloud & Edge
Systems. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Archi-
tectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Providence,
RI, USA) (ASPLOS ’19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 3–18. doi:10.1145/3297858.3304013
[17] Hongliang Gao and Chris Wilkerson. 2010. A dueling segmented LRU replace-
ment algorithm with adaptive bypassing. In JWAC 2010-1st JILP Workshop on
Computer Architecture Competitions: Cache Replacement Championship.
[18] Bogdan Georgiev, Javier Gómez-Serrano, Terence Tao, and Adam Zsolt Wag-
ner. 2025. Mathematical exploration and discovery at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.02864 (2025).
[19] Nathan Gober, Gino Chacon, Lei Wang, Paul V Gratz, Daniel A Jimenez,
Elvira Teran, Seth Pugsley, and Jinchun Kim. 2022. The championship sim-
ulator: Architectural simulation for education and competition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.14324 (2022).
[20] Paul V. Gratz, Jinchun Kim, and Gino Chacon. 2017. The 2nd Cache Replacement
Championship. https://crc2.ece.tamu.edu/?page_id=53. Accessed: 2025-11-13.
[21] John L. Henning. 2006. SPEC CPU2006 benchmark descriptions. SIGARCH
Comput. Archit. News 34, 4 (Sept. 2006), 1–17. doi:10.1145/1186736.1186737
[22] Zhigang Hu, Stefanos Kaxiras, and Margaret Martonosi. 2002. Timekeeping in
the memory system: predicting and optimizing memory behavior. In 29th Annual
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 209–220.
[23] Akanksha Jain and Calvin Lin. 2016. Back to the Future: Leveraging Belady’s
Algorithm for Improved Cache Replacement. In 43rd Annual ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 78–89.
[24] Akanksha Jain and Calvin Lin. 2018. Rethinking Belady’s Algorithm to Ac-
commodate Prefetching. In 45th Annual ACM/IEEE International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA). 110–123.
[25] Aamer Jaleel, Eric Borch, Malini Bhandaru, Simon C Steely Jr, and Joel Emer. 2010.
Achieving non-inclusive cache performance with inclusive caches: Temporal
locality aware (TLA) cache management policies. In 2010 43rd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture. IEEE, 151–162.
[26] Aamer Jaleel, Kevin B. Theobald, Simon C. Steely Jr, and Joel Emer. 2010. High
performance cache replacement using re-reference interval prediction (RRIP).
In 45th Annual ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA). 60–71.
[27] Daniel A. Jiménez and Elvira Teran. 2017. Multiperspective Reuse Prediction. In
50th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO).
436–448.
[28] Sagar Karandikar, Howard Mao, Donggyu Kim, David Biancolin, Alon Amid,
Dayeol Lee, Nathan Pemberton, Emmanuel Amaro, Colin Schmidt, Aditya
Chopra, et al. 2018. FireSim: FPGA-accelerated cycle-exact scale-out system
simulation in the public cloud. In 2018 ACM/IEEE 45th Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 29–42.
[29] Ramakrishna Karedla, J Spencer Love, and Bradley G Wherry. 1994. Caching
strategies to improve disk system performance. Computer 3 (1994), 38–46.
[30] Stefanos Kaxiras, Zhigang Hu, and Margaret Martonosi. 2001. Cache decay:
exploiting generational behavior to reduce cache leakage power. In 18th Annual
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 240–251.
[31] Georgios Keramidas, Pavlos Petoumenos, and Stefanos Kaxiras. 2007. Cache
replacement based on reuse-distance prediction. In 25𝑡ℎInternational Conference
on Computer Design (ICCD). 245–250.
[32] Samira Khan, Yingying Tian, and Daniel A Jiménez. 2010. Sampling dead block
prediction for last-level caches. In 43rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Sympo-
sium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). 175–186.
[33] Mazen Kharbutli and Yan Solihin. 2005. Counter-Based Cache Replacement
Algorithms. In 23rd International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD). 61–68.
[34] An-Chow Lai, Cem Fide, and Babak Falsafi. 2001. Dead-block prediction & dead-
block correlating prefetchers. In 28th Annual ACM/IEEE International Symposium
on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 144–154.
[35] Donghee Lee, Jongmoo Choi, Jong-Hun Kim, Sam H Noh, Sang Lyul Min, Yookun
Cho, and Chong Sang Kim. 1999. On the existence of a spectrum of policies
that subsumes the Least Recently Used (LRU) and Least Frequently Used (LFU)
policies. In ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, Vol. 27. 134–143.
[36] Heiner Litz, Grant Ayers, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. 2022. CRISP: Critical
Slice Prefetching. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (Lau-
sanne, Switzerland) (ASPLOS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 300–313. doi:10.1145/3503222.3507745
[37] Evan Liu, Milad Hashemi, Kevin Swersky, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and
Junwhan Ahn. 2020. An imitation learning approach for cache replacement. In
International Conference on Machine Learning. 6237–6247.
[38] Evan Liu, Milad Hashemi, Kevin Swersky, Parthasarathy Ranganathan, and
Junwhan Ahn. 2020. An imitation learning approach for cache replacement. In
International Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 6237–6247.
[39] Haiming Liu, Michael Ferdman, Jaehyuk Huh, and Doug Burger. 2008. Cache
bursts: A new approach for eliminating dead blocks and increasing cache effi-
ciency. In 41st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO). 222–233.
[40] Henry Massalin. 1987. Superoptimizer: a look at the smallest program. ACM
SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 15, 5 (1987), 122–126.
12


--- Page 13 ---
ArchAgent: Agentic AI-driven Computer Architecture Discovery
[41] Samira Mirbagher-Ajorpaz, Elba Garza, Gilles Pokam, and Daniel A Jiménez. 2020.
Chirp: Control-flow history reuse prediction. In 2020 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 131–145.
[42] Saba Mostofi, Setu Gupta, Ahmad Hassani, Krishnam Tibrewala, Elvira Teran,
Paul V Gratz, and Daniel A Jiménez. 2025. Light-weight Cache Replacement for
Instruction Heavy Workloads. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International
Symposium on Computer Architecture. 1005–1019.
[43] Amr Abdelhai Mourad, Saleh Mesbah, and Tamer F Mabrouk. 2020. A novel
approach to cache replacement policy model based on genetic algorithms. In 2020
Fourth World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and Sustainability
(WorldS4). IEEE, 405–411.
[44] Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. 2015. Illuminating search spaces by mapping
elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909 (2015).
[45] Todd C. Mowry, Monica S. Lam, and Anoop Gupta. 1992. Design and Evaluation
of a Compiler Algorithm for Prefetching. In Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems (ASPLOS). 62–73.
[46] Gauthaman Murali, Min Gyu Park, and Sung Kyu Lim. 2024. 3DNN-Xplorer: A
Machine Learning Framework for Design Space Exploration of Heterogeneous
3-D DNN Accelerators. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI)
Systems (2024).
[47] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen
Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco
J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri,
George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej
Balog. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery.
(2025). arXiv:2506.13131 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131
[48] Elizabeth J O’Neil, Patrick E O’Neil, and Gerhard Weikum. 1993. The LRU-K
page replacement algorithm for database disk buffering. In ACM SIGMOD Record.
297–306.
[49] Arthur Perais, Rami Sheikh, Eric Rotenberg, Chris Wilkerson, Vinesh Srinivasan,
Alla R. Alameldeen, and Mikko Lipasti. 2018. https://www.microarch.org/cvp1/
cvp1/index.htm
[50] Erez Perelman, Greg Hamerly, Michael Van Biesbrouck, Timothy Sherwood, and
Brad Calder. 2003. Using simpoint for accurate and efficient simulation. ACM
SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review 31, 1 (2003), 318–319.
[51] Moinuddin K Qureshi, Aamer Jaleel, Yale N Patt, Simon C Steely, and Joel Emer.
2007. Adaptive insertion policies for high performance caching. In 34th Annual
ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). 381–391.
[52] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov,
Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S.
Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi.
2024. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language models.
Nature 625, 7995 (01 Jan 2024), 468–475. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06924-6
[53] Chirag Sakhuja, Zhan Shi, and Calvin Lin. 2023. Leveraging domain information
for the efficient automated design of deep learning accelerators. In 2023 IEEE
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA).
IEEE, 287–301.
[54] Vivek Seshadri, Onur Mutlu, Michael A Kozuch, and Todd C Mowry. 2012. The
Evicted-Address Filter: A unified mechanism to address both cache pollution
and thrashing. In the 21st International Conference on Parallel Architectures and
Compilation Techniques (PACT). 355–366.
[55] Subhash Sethumurugan, Jieming Yin, and John Sartori. 2021. Designing a cost-
effective cache replacement policy using machine learning. In 2021 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA). IEEE,
291–303.
[56] Ishan Shah, Akanksha Jain, and Calvin Lin. 2022. Effective mimicry of belady’s
min policy. In 2022 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA). IEEE, 558–572.
[57] Zhan Shi, Xiangru Huang, Akanksha Jain, and Calvin Lin. 2019. Applying
Deep Learning to the Cache Replacement Problem. In 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). 413–425.
[58] Yannis Smaragdakis, Scott Kaplan, and Paul Wilson. 1999. EELRU: simple and
effective adaptive page replacement. In ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation
Review. 122–133.
[59] Wei Su, Abhishek Dhanotia, Carlos Torres, Jayneel Gandhi, Neha Gholkar, Shob-
hit Kanaujia, Maxim Naumov, Kalyan Subramanian, Valentin Andrei, Yifan Yuan,
and Chunqiang Tang. 2025. DCPerf: An Open-Source, Battle-Tested Performance
Benchmark Suite for Datacenter Workloads. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual In-
ternational Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA ’25). Association for Com-
puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1717–1730. doi:10.1145/3695053.3731411
[60] Sweta, Prerna Priyadarshini, and Biswabandan Panda. 2025. Drishti: Do Not
Forget Slicing While Designing Last-Level Cache Replacement Policies for Many-
Core Systems. In Proceedings of the 58th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture®. 519–532.
[61] Masamichi Takagi and Kei Hiraki. 2004. Inter-reference gap distribution re-
placement: an improved replacement algorithm for set-associative caches. In
Proceedings of the 18th Annual International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS).
20–30.
[62] Reiko Tanese. 1989. Distributed genetic algorithms for function optimization.
University of Michigan.
[63] Elvira Teran, Zhe Wang, and Daniel A Jiménez. 2016. Perceptron learning
for reuse prediction. In 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO). 1–12.
[64] Giuseppe Vietri, Liana V Rodriguez, Wendy A Martinez, Steven Lyons, Jason
Liu, Raju Rangaswami, Ming Zhao, and Giri Narasimhan. 2018. Driving cache
replacement with {ML-based}{LeCaR}. In 10th USENIX Workshop on Hot Topics
in Storage and File Systems (HotStorage 18).
[65] Rich Vuduc and James Demmel. 2000. Code Generators for Automatic Tuning of
Numerical Kernels: Experiences with FFTW. In Proceedings of the International
Workshop on Semantics, Applications, and Implementation of Program Generation
(SAIG ’00). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 190–211.
[66] Wayne A Wong and Jean-Loup Baer. 2000. Modified LRU policies for improving
second-level cache behavior. In 6th International Symposium on High-Performance
Computer Architecture (HPCA). 49–60.
[67] Carole-Jean Wu, Aamer Jaleel, Will Hasenplaugh, Margaret Martonosi, Simon C.
Steely, Jr., and Joel Emer. 2011. SHiP: Signature-based Hit Predictor for High
Performance Caching. In 44th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO). 430–441.
[68] Carole-Jean Wu, Aamer Jaleel, Margaret Martonosi, Simon C. Steely, Jr., and Joel
Emer. 2011. PACMan: Prefetch-aware Cache Management for High Performance
Caching. In 44th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture
(MICRO). 442–453.
[69] Qingcheng Xiao, Size Zheng, Bingzhe Wu, Pengcheng Xu, Xuehai Qian, and
Yun Liang. 2021. Hasco: Towards agile hardware and software co-design for
tensor computation. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE, 1055–1068.
[70] Yifeng Xiao, Yurong Xu, Ning Yan, Masood Mortazavi, and Pierluigi Nuzzo. 2025.
CORE: Constraint-Aware One-Step Reinforcement Learning for Simulation-
Guided Neural Network Accelerator Design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03474
(2025).
[71] Vinson Young, Chia-Chen Chou, Aamer Jaleel, and Moin Qureshi. 2017. Ship++:
Enhancing signature-based hit predictor for improved cache performance. In
The 2nd Cache Replacement Championship (CRC-2 Workshop in ISCA 2017).
[72] Samuel Yuan, Divyanshu Saxena, Jiayi Chen, Nihal Sharma, and Aditya Akella.
2025. A Joint Learning Approach to Hardware Caching and Prefetching. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.10862 (2025).
[73] Martin Zadnik and Marco Canini. 2010. Evolution of cache replacement policies
to track heavy-hitter flows. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM/IEEE Symposium on
Architectures for Networking and Communications Systems. 1–2.
[74] Dan Zhang, Safeen Huda, Ebrahim Songhori, Kartik Prabhu, Quoc Le, Anna
Goldie, and Azalia Mirhoseini. 2022. A full-stack search technique for domain op-
timized deep learning accelerators. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operat-
ing Systems (Lausanne, Switzerland) (ASPLOS ’22). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 27–42. doi:10.1145/3503222.3507767
[75] Yang Zhou, Fang Wang, Zhan Shi, and Dan Feng. 2022. An end-to-end automatic
cache replacement policy using deep reinforcement learning. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling, Vol. 32.
537–545.
13
