--- Page 1 ---
SERVING COMPOUND INFERENCE SYSTEMS ON DATACENTER GPUS
Sriram Devata 1 Rahul Singh 1 Sarita Adve 1
ABSTRACT
Applications in emerging domains such as XR are being built as compound inference systems, where multiple
ML models are composed in the form of a task graph to service each request. Serving these compound systems
efficiently raises two questions: how to apportion end-to-end latency and accuracy budgets between different
tasks in a compound inference system, and how to allocate resources effectively for different models with varying
resource requirements. We present JIGSAWSERVE, the first serving framework that jointly optimizes for latency,
accuracy, and cost in terms of GPU resources by adaptively choosing model variants and performing fine-grained
resource allocation by spatially partitioning the GPUs for each task of a compound inference system. Analytical
evaluation of a system with a large number of GPUs shows that JIGSAWSERVE can increase the maximum
serviceable demand (in requests per second) by 11.3× when compared to the closest prior work. Our empirical
evaluation shows that for a large range of scenarios, JIGSAWSERVE consumes only 43.3% of the available GPU
resources while meeting accuracy SLOs with less than 0.6% latency SLO violations. All of the features in
JIGSAWSERVE contribute to this high efficiency – sacrificing any one feature of accuracy scaling, GPU spatial
partitioning, or task-graph-informed resource budgeting significantly reduces efficiency.
1
INTRODUCTION
As machine learning (ML) inference becomes a dominant
workload for datacenter resources (HPC Wire, 2019; Patter-
son et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2022), there is growing emphasis
on maximizing the efficiency of inference serving systems.
Compound inference systems (Zaharia et al., 2024) are be-
coming increasingly important in many emerging domains
such as multi-agent systems (Zhou et al., 2025) and ex-
tended reality (XR) (Kwon et al., 2023). Such systems
compose multiple ML models, each performing a specific
task, to provide complex functionalities, and present new
challenges and opportunities for increased efficiency. This
work focuses on efficient serving of compound inference
systems on datacenter GPUs, where each request requires
invoking a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of ML inference
tasks, which are potentially dynamically determined.
We focus on two aspects that are unique to compound in-
ference systems. First, we expect that any latency and ac-
curacy Service Level Objectives (SLOs) are provided for
the end-to-end compound inference system and need to be
apportioned among the individual tasks. This affords new
sources of flexibility for the serving system to choose among
multiple model variants (with different latencies and accu-
racies) and GPU resource allocation for each task, when
compared to a single task system with a given SLO con-
1Siebel School of Computing and Data Science, University of
Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Email: {sdevata2, rahuls10, sadve}@illinois.edu
straint. Second, the ML model variants across the various
tasks in a compound inference system have different re-
source requirements, motivating finer-grained heterogeneity
in the optimal resource choice for the different tasks. Re-
cent GPU hardware provide spatial partitioning mechanisms
that enable fine-grained allocation of GPU resources. For
example, NVIDIA GPUs provide spatial partitioning mech-
anisms such as Multi-Process Service (MPS) (nvi, 2025b)
and Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) (nvi, 2025a).
We present JIGSAWSERVE 1, the first work to jointly opti-
mize for latency, accuracy, and fine-grained cost (in terms of
GPU resources required) by adaptively choosing model vari-
ants and allocating fine-grained spatial partitions of GPUs
for each task of a compound inference system, while pre-
serving end-to-end accuracy and latency SLOs.
There is a plethora of literature on increasing the efficiency
of serving systems for requests with a single model infer-
ence, including systems that perform accuracy scaling and
spatial partitioning (Shen et al., 2019; Romero et al., 2021;
Tan et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2022; Ahmad et al., 2024a; Lee
et al., 2024). Compound inference systems have received
relatively less attention. Table 1 summarizes key prior works
that consider resource budgeting for compound inference
systems, accuracy scaling through different model variants
1The name highlights the features of JIGSAWSERVE to choose
model variants and use multiple small spatial partitions on GPUs,
similar to how one can choose multiple small pieces that fit together
in a jigsaw puzzle.
arXiv:2603.08797v1  [cs.DC]  9 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
of a task, and/or spatial partitioning of GPU resources. The
darker grayed systems do not consider compound inferences
but are shown for completeness. The lighter grayed systems
do consider compound inferences but in a limited way –
they apportion latency across different tasks (only pipelines
for IPA (Ghafouri et al., 2024)), but do not apportion ac-
curacy or consider accuracy scaling or GPU partitioning
for higher efficiency. Of the remaining systems that con-
sider compound inferences, DREAM (Kim et al., 2024) is
a single user, multi-accelerator system and IPA does not
consider GPUs, both presenting different use cases from our
datacenter GPU efficiency scenario; consequently, neither
considers the fine-grained spatial partitioning opportunity
from GPUs. Loki (Ahmad et al., 2024b) is the closest to our
goals, but does not consider GPU partitioning and considers
accuracy scaling only if GPU resources are exhausted. Our
evaluations show that GPU partitioning presents the most
significant efficiency opportunity and jointly optimizing for
GPU resources and accuracy for compound inference sys-
tems is critical to highest efficiency.
Specifically, we make the following contributions.
1. We introduce JIGSAWSERVE, a novel framework to
jointly optimize latency, accuracy, and fine-grained cost
for compound inference systems on datacenter GPUs.
JIGSAWSERVE uniquely combines: (1) per-task accu-
racy scaling via choosing model variants, (2) GPU spatial
partitioning, and (3) task-graph-informed latency and ac-
curacy SLO budgeting.
2. Our analytical evaluation compares the various combi-
nations of the features in Table 1. We find that spatial
partitioning (S) delivers the highest standalone gain in
serving capacity for the same GPU resources (5.25× over
Unopt), compared to accuracy scaling (A: 1.6×) and task-
graph-informed budgeting (T: 1.1×). JIGSAWSERVE’s
full integration of the three features (A+S+T) achieves
21.6× capacity, surpassing combinations of S with A or
T in S+A (12.1×) and S+T (7.8×).
3. We emphasize that no prior work has evaluated GPU
spatial partitioning for compound inference systems. Sys-
tems without S (A, T, A+T) show significantly lower
serving capacity than any system with S. A+T, in particu-
lar, is closest to (and explores a larger search space than)
prior work of Loki (Ahmad et al., 2024b). We find that
JIGSAWSERVE allows 11.3× higher capacity than A+T.
4. Our empirical evaluation compares the four top perform-
ing systems (S+T, A+T, S+A, and JIGSAWSERVE) un-
der a wide range of compound inference systems and
workload demand conditions. JIGSAWSERVE shows the
best overall performance, using just 43.3% of the avail-
able GPU resources on average, respecting the accuracy
SLO, and showing less than 0.6% average SLO violations.
Alternatives suffer significantly: S+T/A+T exceed 10%
Table 1. Summary of key related work.
Related Work
Model variants for
accuracy scaling
Interference-free
spatial partitioning
Task-graph-informed
latency & accuracy budgets
INFaaS
(Romero et al., 2021)
MIG-serving
(Tan et al., 2021)
ParvaGPU
(Lee et al., 2024)
Clover
(Li et al., 2023)
Nexus
(Shen et al., 2019)
Only apportions latency
GPUlet
(Choi et al., 2022)
Only apportions latency
DREAM
(Kim et al., 2024)
Considers a single-client
multi-accelerator system
IPA
(Ghafouri et al., 2024)
Only considers pipelines.
Apportions CPU cores.
Loki
(Ahmad et al., 2024b)
JIGSAWSERVE
violations and have 2× resource usage in at least one
case; S+A (which does not exist in prior work) requires
33% more resources than JIGSAWSERVE with 6.7% SLO
violations.
Overall, our work proposes a novel serving framework for
compound inference systems, performs a detailed compara-
tive evaluation of efficiency-enhancing features, and shows
that the combination of all features we explore provides
significant efficiency improvement relative to any subset of
features.
2
BACKGROUND
Compound inference systems. ML-based applications are
evolving from relying on the inference of a single mono-
lithic ML model to compound inference, where multiple ML
models each performing a particular task are composed to
provide complex functionalities (Kwon et al., 2023). Similar
to single ML model inference, the demand (in requests per
second) for compound inference systems can vary over time.
The serving system must increase the allocated GPU re-
sources when demand rises and reduce them when demand
falls, avoiding both SLO violations and over-provisioning.
Tasks in a compound inference system often have unequal
throughput demands—for instance, an object detector may
output several detections per image, each triggering addi-
tional downstream inferences. Prior works (Zhao et al.,
2025; Ahmad et al., 2024b) have noted this multiplicative
behavior between tasks and used it to divide latency budgets,
but none have jointly optimized model variants, resource
allocation, and accuracy across the entire system. A serving
system for compound inference must incorporate per-task
multiplicative factors to estimate each task’s throughput
and use it for task-graph-informed latency, accuracy and
resource budgeting. The system must ensure that every
task receives sufficient resources while the overall system
satisfies the latency, accuracy, and resource constraints
Model variants. Each task in a compound inference system


--- Page 3 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
can be executed by multiple model variants that perform the
same function but differ in parameters, accuracy, latency,
and resource cost. These variants may come from model
families, compiler optimizations such as TVM or TensorRT,
or techniques like quantization, pruning, and layer fusion.
While allocating accuracy budget for each task, a serving
system must meet the end-to-end accuracy threshold of
the compound inference system. They key challenge is to
identify a set of task variants that have minimal impact on
end-to-end quality, while maximizing the throughput or cost
benefit.
GPU spatial partitioning mechanisms. Recent genera-
tions of GPUs in GPU-based datacenters are large and are
typically underutilized by most ML workloads. To address
the underutilization, modern GPUs allow multiple work-
loads to be co-located on the same physical GPU through
temporal and spatial sharing mechanisms such as MPS and
MIG for NVIDIA GPUs. Workloads co-located with MPS
share internal GPU memory resources, which can result in
performance degradation through destructive interference
between co-located workloads (Li et al., 2022). MIG can
divide a GPU into isolated MIG instances, each formed
by multiple GPU slices that contain a dedicated proportion
of SMs, caches, GPU memory, and memory bandwidth.
This hardware-supported isolation minimizes interference
between workloads on different MIG instances.
To achieve even higher GPU utilization, we leverage
NVIDIA GPUs’ capability to use MPS within MIG in-
stances (Tan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2024; Lee et al.,
2024). We use the GPU segment (Lee et al., 2024) abstrac-
tion to describe these MPS-enabled MIG instances. Each
GPU segment is described by its MIG instance size and
the number of concurrent identical MPS processes running
within it. Crucially, when we co-locate multiple GPU seg-
ments on one physical GPU, workloads in different GPU
segments minimally interfere with each other due to MIG’s
hardware isolation.
Configuration search space. We define a configuration
as the combination of model variants, GPU segment types,
and maximum batch sizes that the serving system selects
for each model instance across all tasks. As Table 1 shows,
JIGSAWSERVE has all three features of performing accu-
racy scaling, enabling spatial partitioning, and performing
task-graph-informed resource budgeting. For a compound
inference system with T tasks, M model variants per task,
N instances for each task, S GPU segment types, and B
possible batch sizes, the configuration search space has
(M ∗S ∗B)N∗T possible configurations. When a serv-
ing system performs accuracy scaling and enables spatial
partitioning while being task-graph-uninformed, the config-
uration search space has T ∗(M ∗S ∗B)N configurations
due to per-task resource budgets. Without accuracy scaling
Register a 
compound 
inference system
Profiler
Profiles latency and throughput for model 
variants, GPU segments, and batch sizes
Requests
Responses
Frontend
Handles client 
requests, and tracks 
demand
Controller
Runs MILP, sets up spatial partitions on 
GPUs, and sets up model instances
1/7
…
2/7
…
Partitioned 
GPUs
3/7
4/7
T1
T1
T2
T3
TN
Generated 
configuration
…
T1
T2
T3
TN
…
…
…
Model 
Instances
Profiled latency 
and throughput
Registration Handler
Registers the task 
graph, model variants, 
and model accuracies
Demand
Runtime latency, 
multiplicative 
factors
Figure 1. An overview of JIGSAWSERVE.
(M = 1) or spatial partitioning (S = 1), the configuration
search space reduces further.
3
DESIGN OF JIGSAWSERVE
JIGSAWSERVE is made of four major components as shown
in Figure 1: a registration handler to register the compound
inference system, a profiler that performs offline-profiling
of each task, a controller to find the best configuration and
set up model instances, and a frontend that clients can use
to submit requests to the compound inference system. §3.1
describes the components of JIGSAWSERVE in detail. §3.2
describes the Mixed Integer Linear Programming Problem
(MILP) formulation used by the controller. §3.3 details
the batching and early drop mechanisms employed by each
model instance in the compound inference system.
3.1
Components of JIGSAWSERVE
Registration handler. Registering the compound inference
system involves listing the tasks in the system, providing
the weights of all model variants for each task along with
their accuracies, describing the dependencies (edges) in
the task graph, and specifying the end-to-end latency and
accuracy SLO. The accuracy SLO is specified in terms of
the acceptable drop in accuracy relative to the maximum
achievable with the most accurate model variants.
Profiler. After a compound inference system is registered
with JIGSAWSERVE, the profiler profiles the tasks in the
system to find the 95th percentile latency and throughput
(inferences per second) for all combinations of model vari-
ants, batch size, and GPU segment types. JIGSAWSERVE
considers the GPU segments formed by all possible MIG in-
stance sizes with up to 4 concurrent MPS processes running
the same model in each MIG instance to avoid exhaustive
search and GPU out-of-memory issues (Zhang et al., 2024;
Lee et al., 2024). The one-time profiling cost is compensated
by sustained performance gains made possible by the profil-
ing information. JIGSAWSERVE also refines this data using


--- Page 4 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
actual runtime latency and throughput during the compound
inference system execution.
Controller. The controller uses the profiled information
to generate an optimal configuration to serve the required
demand while satisfying latency and accuracy SLOs. We
formulate the problem of finding the optimal configuration
as an MILP, and use a commercial solver to find solutions
for the MILP. We describe the MILP formulation in more
detail in §3.2.
The controller uses the generated configuration to set up
spatial partitions on the GPUs and assigns the spatial parti-
tions to the model instances. The controller uses a greedy
rule-based bin-packing algorithm (Turkkan et al., 2024) to
efficiently set up the MIG instances on the minimal num-
ber of GPUs. The controller then spawns workers for each
model instance, assigns the MIG instances to the workers,
and sets up inter-task data dependencies.
Frontend. The frontend collects requests from the clients,
sets up the metadata for each request (request ID, and a
deadline derived from the latency SLO), and routes the re-
quest to the first task of the compound inference system.
The frontend also returns the output of the compound infer-
ence system to the client. The frontend continuously tracks
the incoming demand and the SLO violation rate, triggering
the controller to find a new configuration when the demand
changes.
3.2
MILP Formulation
The controller formulates the problem of finding an optimal
configuration as an MILP. Table 2 summarizes the inputs
and terms used for the MILP formulation. The inputs and
profiling information are provided to the MILP. The inter-
mediate variables are calculated within the MILP while
evaluating candidate configurations. The decision variable
candidate by the MILP is M(t, v, s, b), which denotes for
each task t, the number of instances of model variant v,
running on GPU segment type s with a maximum batch size
b. N(t, v, s, b) is a binary variable that denotes if there is at
least 1 instance as described by the tuple (t, v, s, b).
N(t, v, s, b) =
(
1,
if M(t, v, s, b) ≥1
0,
otherwise.
(1)
Latency constraints. To enforce the latency SLO, we en-
sure the maximum request time along any path respects the
request’s deadline. The worst-case latency occurs when a
request encounters the slowest instance of every task in its
path. ˆL(t) calculates the per-task time using the binary vari-
able N(t, v, s, b) to find the latency of the slowest instance
of t in a candidate configuration.
ˆL(t) = max
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
(L(t, v, s, b) ∗N(t, v, s, b))
(2)
Table 2. Terms in the MILP.
Term
Description
Inputs
SLOl
end-to-end latency SLO of the entire system
SLOa
threshold for the overall system accuracy, ex-
pressed as a fraction of the maximum possible
accuracy
Amax
the maximum overall system accuracy possible
for an application
R
demand (req/s) for the first task
T
set of tasks in the compound inference system
Vt
set of all model variants that perform task t ∈T
S
set of all GPU segment types (MPS-enabled MIG
instances)
sn
cost of GPU segment type s in terms of GPU
slices
Savail
number of total available GPU slices
P
set of all paths that a request can take in the com-
pound inference system inferred from the task
graph
P(t)
preceding tasks of task t inferred from the task
graph
fp
fraction of requests that take path p in the com-
pound inference system
B
set
of
all
possible
batch
sizes
[1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128]
Profiled Information
L(t, v, s, b)
offline-profiled latency of model variant v on GPU
segment s with batch size b for task t
H(t, v, s, b)
offline-profiled throughput (req/s) of model vari-
ant v on GPU segment s with batch size b for task
t
F(t, v, t′)
multiplicative factor of model variant v in task t
to task t′
A(t, v)
accuracy of model variant v for task t
Intermediate Variables
N(t, v, s, b)
boolean to denote if there are any instances of
model variant v for task t running on GPU seg-
ment s with a maximum batch size b
ˆL(t)
latency of the slowest instance of task t
ˆF(t, t′)
average multiplicative factor from task t to task t′
ˆR(t)
demand (req/s) at task t
ˆS(t)
total GPU slices to run task t
ˆH(t, v, s, b)
throughput of an instance described by (t, v, s, b)
ˆA(t)
effective accuracy of task t
Ap
accuracy of path p
Aobj
accuracy of a candidate configuration normalized
to the maximum possible accuracy
Decision Variables
M(t, v, s, b)
number of instances of model variant v for task
t running on GPU segment s with a maximum
batch size b
Similar to prior works (Shen et al., 2019; Choi et al., 2022;
Ahmad et al., 2024b;a), we double the inference latency to
account for queuing delays in forming a batch. The sum
of queuing and inference times across all tasks must not


--- Page 5 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
exceed the latency SLO.
X
t∈p
2 ∗ˆL(t) ≤SLOl, ∀p ∈P
(3)
Throughput constraints.
To meet throughput demands,
JIGSAWSERVE determines the number of instances for
each task’s model variants. We calculate a task’s required
throughput by multiplying its preceding task’s request load
by the task’s average multiplicative factor (over the past 5 de-
mand timestamps if the data is available), which can change
across different MILP runs. ˆF(t, t′) calculates the multi-
plicative factor of task t to t′ by using the active instances
inferred from N(t, v, s, b), to aggregate the multiplicative
factor over all active model variants of task t.
ˆF(t, t′) =
X
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
F(t, v, t′) ∗N(t, v, s, b)
(4)
The demand at task t from all the preceding tasks P(t) is
ˆR(t). For the first task in the compound inference system,
ˆR(t) = R, which can change across different MILP runs.
For any other task t, ˆR(t) is calculated by summing the
product of the multiplicative factor and the demand of all
preceding tasks.
ˆR(t) =
X
t′∈P (t)
ˆR(t′) ∗ˆF(t′, t)
(5)
To satisfy all the requests of a task t, the total throughput
of all the model instances must be greater than the required
throughput of that task.
X
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
M(t, v, s, b) ∗H(t, v, s, b) ≥ˆR(t), ∀t ∈T
(6)
Total resources constraints. To explore the tradeoff of vary-
ing the amount of computational resources allocated to each
task, we add a constraint on the number of GPU slices 2 the
entire compound inference system can use. To calculate the
total number of GPU slices used, an intermediate variable
ˆS(t) denotes the total number of GPU slices used for task t
in the candidate configuration.
ˆS(t) =
X
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
M(t, v, s, b) ∗sn
(7)
The total resource cost in terms of GPU slices in the entire
compound inference system has to be less than the total
available resources.
X
t∈T
ˆS(t) ≤Savail
(8)
2This might not correspond to the number of GPUs due to the
placement constraints of MIG instances.
Accuracy constraints. To measure the accuracy of each path
in the compound inference system, we use the pipeline accu-
racy score (PAS) proposed by (Ghafouri et al., 2024). PAS is
calculated as the product of the individual accuracy metrics
of each task. We use PAS as a heuristic, and our work is
orthogonal to research that finds better ways to measure the
accuracy of composed ML models. The effective accuracy
of a task ˆA(t) is the weighted average of the accuracies of
the candidate model variants in each instance, where the
weights are the total throughput of each instance. The to-
tal throughput of an instance type (t, v, s, b) is ˆH(t, v, s, b),
and the total throughput of all instance types are used to
calculate the effective accuracy of a task t.
ˆH(t, v, s, b) = M(t, v, s, b) ∗H(t, v, s, b)
(9)
ˆA(t) =








P
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
ˆH(t, v, s, b) ∗A(t, v)
P
v∈Vt
s∈S
b∈B
ˆH(t, v, s, b)








(10)
The accuracy for a path p is Ap, and can be calculated by
multiplying the accuracies of each task in the candidate
configuration.
Ap =
Y
t∈p
ˆA(t)
(11)
To find the overall accuracy of the entire compound infer-
ence system, we take a convex combination 3 of the accu-
racies along each path weighted by the number of requests
that take each path. We then normalize the weighted average
with the maximum possible overall system accuracy (Amax)
of the application. We calculate Amax in the same way as
Aobj, but we use only the most accurate model variants for
Equation 10 instead of all variants v ∈Vt.
Aobj =
P
p∈P
fp ∗Ap
Amax
(12)
We add a constraint on the overall accuracy to be above
the specified threshold, relative to the maximum overall
accuracy possible for the application.
Aobj ≥SLOa
(13)
Objective function. The objective of the optimization is to
maximize the overall system accuracy and minimize the
resources used with equations (3), (6), (8), and (13) as
constraints. The MILP maximizes the objective function
described by (14) while choosing the decision variables
M(t, v, s, b), where α and β scale the relative importance
3A convex combination is a weighted average where the
weights are non-negative and add up to 1.


--- Page 6 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
of the overall accuracy and the total resources used for a
configuration.
max
M(t,v,s,b)
 
αAobj −β
X
t∈T
ˆS(t)
!
(14)
3.3
Batching and Early Dropping
The MILP finds the maximum batch size b that a model
instance can use. After waiting a maximum time of ˆL(t)
or if the inference of the previous batch has finished early,
the model instance starts executing the inference for a new
batch even if the size of the batch is less than b.
Similar to prior works (Ahmad et al., 2024b), JIG-
SAWSERVE implements early dropping mechanisms where
some requests are dropped to decrease the overall SLO vio-
lation rate. At runtime, each task can take a decision to drop
a request if it is not possible to meet the latency SLO for the
request even if the fastest model variants of the subsequent
tasks serve the request with no delay due to batch forma-
tion. A task also drops requests that are considered to be
stale, which can happen if all the model instances filled up
their batches and the request is not picked up by any model
instance of the task.
4
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
To empirically evaluate JIGSAWSERVE, we implemented
the system in ∼5K lines of Python code. We run all experi-
ments on a Dell PowerEdge XE9640 server equipped with
four NVIDIA H100 SXM 80GB GPUs. The node features
96 CPU cores, 1,007 GiB of RAM, and a configurable stor-
age capacity. Our software environment includes Ubuntu
22.04, Python 3.10, CUDA 12.4, and PyTorch 2.6.0. We use
the nvidia−mig−parted4 tool to set up the MIG instances on
all GPUs, and Gurobi (Gurobi Optimization, LLC, 2024) to
find solutions to the MILP. We provide more details on the
parameters chosen for the evaluation in §4.4, and the imple-
mentation of the compound inference system in Appendix
A.
4.1
Workloads
We evaluate JIGSAWSERVE with three applications, built
as compound inference systems with different depths of the
paths a request can take. These applications consist of a
diverse range of ML models in terms of their functionality,
number of parameters, and resource requirements. The tasks
of the applications and the model variants JIGSAWSERVE
considered for each task are summarized in Figure 2.
1. Social media (Ahmad et al., 2024b) (depth of 1): Each
input image is processed by two models for the social
4https://github.com/NVIDIA/mig-parted
media application. A ResNet model (He et al., 2015)
predicts the object present in the image, and a GIT model
(Wang et al., 2022) generates a caption for the image.
2. Traffic analysis (Ahmad et al., 2024b) (depth of 2): Each
input image is processed by a YOLO (Redmon et al.,
2016) model to detect if there are any cars or people in
the image. For each detected car, an EfficientNet model
(Tan and Le, 2020) predicts the make and model of the
car. For each detected person, a VGG model (Simonyan
and Zisserman, 2015) predicts the gender and age of the
person.
3. AR assistant (depth of 3): Each input image is first pro-
cessed by a YOLO model (Redmon et al., 2016) to detect
an object. A GIT model (Wang et al., 2022) generates a
caption to describe the object, and a text-to-speech (TTS)
model (Kim et al., 2021; 2020) converts the textual de-
scription of the object into an audio description.
When performing accuracy scaling, the accuracy values we
use for each model variant are the relevant metrics reported
in the available public repositories (yol, 2024; res, 2017;
vgg, 2017) and the manuscripts (Kim et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022; Tan and Le, 2020) of the model architecture
families.
To evaluate the configurations generated by JIGSAWSERVE
at different demand (req/s) values that a serving system can
observe in an entire day, we obtain values for the demand
over a day using the request timing information from a Twit-
ter trace (twi, 2022; Donnelly, 2023). We bin the requests
into 5-minute intervals, where each demand timestamp in
the binned demand trace represents the average demand
over each 5-minute interval throughout the day from the
Twitter trace. The trace contains a diurnal pattern that is
representative of production serving demand (Zhang et al.,
2019; Shahrad et al., 2020). We scale the entire trace to the
maximum demand that can be served by JIGSAWSERVE for
each application, while preserving the broad trends within
the trace.
For the payload of the requests, we use the COCO dataset
(Lin et al., 2015) for the social media and AR assistant ap-
plications, and the Bellevue traffic dataset (City of Bellevue,
2017) for the traffic analysis application.
4.2
MILP and Reconfiguration Frequency
To test the efficacy of JIGSAWSERVE at different demand
conditions a serving system can observe in a day, we invoke
the MILP and consequent system reconfiguration at each
demand timestamp bin of the trace described above. We use
a rudimentary demand prediction approach to average the
demand of the 5 previous timestamp bins with an additional
slack. We run our complete system for a short duration for
each timestamp bin until it reaches a steady state. While
the MILP and system reconfiguration incur overheads, these


--- Page 7 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
ResNet
GIT
ResNet 18, 34, 50, 101, 152
70, 73, 76, 77, 78
GIT-base, GIT-large
13.4, 14.4
(a) Social media application.
YOLOv5
n, s, m, l, x
28, 37, 45, 49, 51
EfficientNet
VGG
B0, B1, B2, B3, B4, B5, B7, B7
77, 79, 80, 81.6, 83, 83.6, 84, 84.3
VGG11, VGG13, VGG16, VGG19
69, 70, 71.5, 72.4
(b) Traffic analysis application.
YOLOv5
n, s, m, l, x
28, 37, 45, 49, 51
GIT
GIT-base, GIT-large
13.4, 14.4
TTS
Glow TTS, VITS
3.76, 4.38
(c) AR assistant application.
Figure 2. Applications and their inference task graphs used to evaluate JIGSAWSERVE. Each task is annotated with the model variants that
can perform the task, along with the relevant accuracy metrics.
are negligible relative to the frequency at which they are
invoked. The MILP in particular can be invoked in the
background and takes 2s to 20s, depending on the demand
conditions and application.
4.3
Baselines Evaluated
We point out the configuration search spaces that the base-
lines consider when they perform accuracy scaling (A),
enable spatial partitioning (S), and perform task-graph-
informed resource budgeting (T).
For the analytical evaluation, we compare the maximum
serviceable demand of JIGSAWSERVE with baselines that
contain all combinations of A/S/T in their configuration
search space. For the empirical evaluation, we compare JIG-
SAWSERVE against baselines whose configuration search
spaces perform task-graph-informed resource budgeting
along with A or S. We also compare against A+S, which is
task-graph-uninformed and does not exist in prior work but
performs well in our analytical evaluation. Some of these
baselines are equivalent or close to the configuration search
spaces of relevant prior works Loki (Ahmad et al., 2024b),
Clover (Li et al., 2023), and ParvaGPU (Lee et al., 2024).
Loki performs accuracy scaling for each task in a task-graph-
informed manner, and is equivalent to A+T. ParvaGPU+T is
equivalent to S+T since it enables spatial partitioning and is
task-graph-informed and does not perform accuracy scaling.
Clover performs accuracy scaling and enables spatial par-
titioning in a task-graph-uninformed manner, but does not
use MPS within the MIG instances to increase the utiliza-
tion. Clover+MPS correctly describes A+S, since A+S will
perform at least as well as Clover due to better utilization of
the GPUs. Loki is the only previous work that represents a
configuration space of using any two of the three features
from Table 1. JIGSAWSERVE’s configuration search space
is A+S+T, and is the superset of all relevant prior works.
Baselines that do not perform accuracy scaling consider only
the highest-accuracy variant, and those that do not enable
spatial partitioning exclusively use whole-GPUs for each
model. For task-graph-uninformed baselines we detail a
static task-wise budget allocation method in Appendix B
that makes them as strong as possible.
4.4
Parameters for Evaluation
When finding a configuration for a demand timestamp, we
use a slack of 5% similar to previous inference serving sys-
tems (Romero et al., 2021). We use α = 1 and β = 0.035
for Equation 14 to scale the range of available GPU slices
(0 −28) in our testbed to the range of the overall system
accuracy (0 −1) and give equal importance to both objec-
tives. For the accuracy SLO, we allow JIGSAWSERVE to
decrease the overall system accuracy until a threshold of
90% of the maximum possible system accuracy for each
application. We use latency SLOs of 650ms, 700ms, and
1550ms for the traffic analysis, social media, and AR assis-
tant applications to make sure that all configuration spaces
would be able to serve the applications at some demand.
When running the end-to-end system, we account for the
communication latency by adding the time for each commu-
nication hop (∼10ms) to the latency SLO based on the depth
of the application. To measure the staleness of requests, we
use values of 20ms for the social media and traffic analysis
applications, and 40ms for the AR assistant application in
proportion to their end-to-end latency SLOs.
4.5
Metrics
We present three metrics for each baseline in the empirical
evaluation: cost in terms of percentage of available GPU
slices used, overall system accuracy drop, and the latency
SLO violation rate. We define the overall system accuracy
drop as a percentage of the maximum overall accuracy possi-
ble for an application. We define the latency SLO violation
rate (also referred to as the SLO violation rate for brevity)
as the ratio of number of requests that miss their deadline
to the total number of requests, similar to previous works
that consider compound inference systems (Ahmad et al.,
2024b). We highlight that a baseline performs particularly
poorly if the SLO violation rate is ≥10%. We also consider
an early dropped request as a deadline violation, and multi-
ple violations if the task performing the early dropping has
a multiplicative factor greater than 1.


--- Page 8 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
5
RESULTS
We first analyze the solutions of the MILP to find the max-
imum throughputs that can be served with each configu-
ration search space. We then run empirical evaluations of
the end-to-end compound inference systems with the gen-
erated configurations to report the metrics, and analyze the
configurations chosen by JIGSAWSERVE.
Figure 3. Maximum demand that can be satisfied for the traffic
analysis application on a large testbed by exploring combinations
of A/S/T. Higher maximum demand is better.
Maximum serviceable demand. Figure 3 shows the max-
imum possible demand that can be served for the traffic
analysis application to compare scenarios where a serving
system performs accuracy scaling (A) while keeping the
overall system accuracy above a threshold of 90%, enables
spatial partitioning (S), and does task-graph-informed re-
source budgeting (T). We choose to run the MILP for a
hypothetical testbed of 120 GPUs (840 GPU slices) to en-
sure that all configurations would be able to exactly follow
any task-wise resource budgets. Figure 3 shows the maxi-
mum serviceable demand of each configuration search space
normalized to that of an unoptimized system, along with
the actual percentage of GPU slices that each configuration
search space uses to achieve its highest serviceable demand.
When the serving system is unoptimized (Unopt), it does not
perform accuracy scaling, disables spatial partitioning, and
does task-graph-uninformed resource budgeting. Unopt has
the lowest maximum serviceable demand among all other
configuration search spaces. Unopt is also unable to use
all the available GPUs due to the task-wise resource bud-
gets since it is task-graph-uninformed. T does task-graph-
informed budgeting, resulting in a maximum serviceable
demand that is 1.1× that of Unopt while being able to use
all the available GPUs. All other task-graph-uninformed
configuration search spaces (S, A, A+S) similarly do not
use all available GPUs, or GPU slices if they enable spatial
partitioning.
S enables spatial partitioning of GPUs enabling fine-grained
resource distribution among tasks, and achieves a maximum
serviceable demand that is 5.25× the Unopt version. S
delivers the highest standalone gain over Unopt in serving
capacity for the same GPU resources, compared to A (1.6×)
and T (1.1×).
A+T and S+T achieve a higher maximum serviceable de-
mand that is 1.9× and 7.8× respectively while using all the
available GPUs. A+S achieves a maximum serviceable de-
mand that is 12×, which is a great increase compared to all
the other configuration search spaces that use either one or
two of A, S, and T. A+S+T corresponds to JIGSAWSERVE,
and achieves the highest maximum serviceable demand that
is 21.6× that of Unopt. A+T is closest to (and explores a
larger search space than) prior work of Loki (Ahmad et al.,
2024b), and JIGSAWSERVE’s maximum serviceable demand
is 11.3× that of A+T. This demonstrates how performing
accuracy scaling by choosing the model variants for each
task in the compound inference system, enabling spatial
partitioning on GPUs, and performing task-graph-informed
resource budgeting allows JIGSAWSERVE to serve a much
higher demand using the same GPU resources.
Empirical evaluation of the end-to-end system. We em-
pirically evaluate the top four performing systems identified
through our comprehensive analytical evaluation that use
at least two features from Table 1: S+T, A+T, A+S, and
JIGSAWSERVE. Figure 4 shows the demand, resource con-
sumption, accuracy drop, and SLO violations when JIG-
SAWSERVE and the selected baselines find configurations
to serve various demands for the evaluated applications.
JIGSAWSERVE and A+S, both use only 40% of the available
GPU slices on average across all demand timestamps for
the social media application. The configurations chosen by
them are also identical, since the social media application
only has a depth of 1 and does not benefit from task-graph-
informed resource budgeting. For the traffic analysis (depth
2) and AR assistant (depth 3) applications, JIGSAWSERVE
needs less GPU slices when compared to A+S and highlights
the advantage of performing task-graph-informed budgeting
of resources. A+S also results in an SLO violation rate that
is ≥10% at high demand conditions for the traffic analysis
application even though it uses less GPU slices than A+T
and S+T.
When comparing JIGSAWSERVE and S+T, JIGSAWSERVE
uses fewer GPU slices across all applications. For the social
media and traffic analysis applications, S+T is unable to
serve a high demand and results in ≥10% SLO violation
rate. A+T performs the worst among all the baselines, and
has ≥10% SLO violation rate even at low demand condi-
tions in two of three applications. Since S+T, A+T, and
JIGSAWSERVE are task-graph-informed, they are able to
make use of all available resources at high demand condi-
tions if necessary, unlike A+S.
Broad trends across all applications and baselines. All


--- Page 9 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
(a) Social media application.
(b) Traffic analysis application.
(c) AR assistant application.
(d) Social media application.
(e) Traffic analysis application.
(f) AR assistant application.
Figure 4. (a), (b), and (c) show the statistics of all demand timestamps for the evaluated applications. We cap the SLO violation rate at
50% for better visualization. (d), (e), (f) show the aggregated statistics for the low demand conditions (timestamp 180-240), high demand
conditions (timestamp 100-150), and the average over all demand timestamps. The bars are hatched if the SLO violation rate is ≥10%.
For all metrics, lower is better.
the baselines are able to find valid configurations at low
demand conditions, which can be seen by the relative low
SLO violation rate. When any baseline is unable to find a
valid configuration to solve a demand, it uses the configura-
tion that can serve the highest demand. This results in the
percentage of resources used plateauing at its highest value
during high demand conditions for all baselines. At low de-
mand conditions, even though all baselines are able to find
valid configurations, they are sensitive to fluctuations in the
demand and result in spikes in the SLO violation rate. This
happens when the actual demand of a timestamp is greater
than the demand predicted from the previous timestamps. A
difference of 5 req/s appears small in the demand graph, but
can be a 2× increase if a baseline finds a configuration for
5 req/s but actually observes a demand of 10 req/s.
JIGSAWSERVE shows the best overall performance, using
just 43.3% of the available GPU resources on average, re-
specting the accuracy SLO, and showing less than 0.6% av-
erage SLO violations. In contrast, S+T and A+T show over
10% SLO violations and use more than 2× the resources of
JIGSAWSERVE in at least one case. A+S reaches 6.7% SLO
violations and 33% more resources than JIGSAWSERVE in
at least one case.
Analyzing the configurations chosen by JIGSAWSERVE.
Figure 5 shows the model variants and GPU segments JIG-
SAWSERVE chooses for each task in the evaluated applica-
tions. When performing accuracy scaling, JIGSAWSERVE is
able to choose to scale down the accuracy for tasks that will
have the greatest impact on the resources required based
on the application. For example, JIGSAWSERVE chooses
to run the yolov5l variant of YOLO for the traffic analy-
sis, but chooses the yolov5x variant of YOLO for the AR
assistant application. For the AR assistant application, JIG-
SAWSERVE chooses to run less accurate model variant for
the GIT task, while using the high accuracy models for the
YOLO and TTS tasks. For the traffic analysis application,
JIGSAWSERVE typically chooses a mix of model variants
for the EfficientNet task to keep the overall accuracy above
the accuracy threshold.
JIGSAWSERVE also identifies the most efficient GPU seg-


--- Page 10 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
(a) Social media application.
(b) Traffic analysis application.
(c) AR assistant application.
Figure 5. The frequency of model variants and GPU segment types
in the configurations chosen by JIGSAWSERVE for the evaluated
applications. The GPU segment types are described by both a MIG
instance type (1/7 - 7/7) and an MPS concurrency level (1, 2, 3, 4).
ment type to run each model. VGG19 always uses the
GPU segments described by a 1/7 MIG instance with vary-
ing MPS concurrency. In both the social media and the
AR assistant application, the GIT-base model frequently
uses the GPU segments described by a 1/7 MIG instance
with an MPS concurrency of 1, and the GPU segments de-
scribed by a 2/7 MIG instance with an MPS concurrency of
4. JIGSAWSERVE chooses to run all ResNet model variants
exclusively on a 1/7 MIG instance type with varying MPS
concurrency. The EfficientNet model variants are frequently
run on a 1/7 MIG instance with varying MPS concurrency,
while occasionally using the 2/7 MIG instance type. JIG-
SAWSERVE almost never uses the 1/7+extra memory and
3/7 MIG instance types, since they are just as expensive to
use as a 2/7 or 4/7 MIG instance respectively due to their
placement constraints on a GPU.
5.1
Overhead of JIGSAWSERVE
The profiler takes 7-12 hours to exhaustively profile the
entire configuration search space of all model variants, MIG
instance sizes, MPS concurrency, and batch sizes. This
profiling happens before the system starts serving, and has
to be done only once. The time spent doing the profiling
is compensated by the higher throughput and lower cost
achieved when JIGSAWSERVE uses the profiled information
to serve the compound inference system.
The average time taken by the MILP in the controller to
find the optimal configuration varies from 2-20 seconds on
our testbed based on the demand and application. Find-
ing the optimal configuration is not on the critical path of
serving requests, since the controller can run the MILP asyn-
chronously on the CPU. Repartitioning the MIG instances
on GPUs would be another overhead due to its disruptive
nature, since the serving system cannot use the GPUs while
they are being repartitioned. Previous works (Turkkan et al.,
2024) provide solutions for non-disruptive repartitioning by
making use of additional GPUs during the repartitioning
period, which is feasible when JIGSAWSERVE is deployed
on large clusters of datacenter GPUs.
6
RELATED WORKS
There exists extensive research on serving systems for infer-
ence workloads. Most relevant to our work is research on
compound inference systems (Shen et al., 2019; Ghafouri
et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2025; Ahmad et al., 2024b; Kim
et al., 2024), adaptation techniques to perform accuracy
scaling (Ahmad et al., 2024b;a; Romero et al., 2021; Kim
et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023), and fine-
grained hardware resource allocation with spatially parti-
tioned GPUs (Zhang et al., 2024; Choi et al., 2022; Li et al.,
2022; Lee et al., 2024; Hui et al., 2025; 2024; Tan et al.,
2021). Table 1 summarizes the most closely related works.
Prior works either do not consider compound systems or do
not explore spatial partitioning schemes to address datacen-
ter GPU under-utilization, among other limitations when
compared to JIGSAWSERVE (§1). As we point out in §4,
JIGSAWSERVE’s configuration search space is a superset of
prior works, and outperforms all of them.
Model variants for inference serving. INFaaS (Romero
et al., 2021) and Proteus (Ahmad et al., 2024a) perform
accuracy scaling to choose model variants to serve infer-
ence requests for individual models. Loki (Ahmad et al.,
2024b) and IPA (Ghafouri et al., 2024) are serving sys-
tems for compound inference workloads that select model
variants for each task in the system. Loki was designed
and evaluated for consumer-grade GPUs, and will result
in GPU under-utilization when it runs on datacenter GPUs
since it allocates an entire GPU to each model instance.


--- Page 11 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
JIGSAWSERVE focuses on serving compound inference sys-
tems on datacenter GPUs, and co-locates models and share
the GPU to improve utilization of the GPUs unlike Loki.
IPA runs the individual models of the compound inference
system on CPU cores and does not use GPUs to accelerate
the inference. DREAM (Kim et al., 2024) is a scheduler
that dynamically chooses the best accelerator to run each
model in an XR-based compound inference for a system
with multiple heterogeneous accelerators for a single user.
LLMSelector (Chen et al., 2025) selects the large-language
models (LLMs) to use in a compound inference system with
multiple LLMs interacting as agents with an objective to
maximize the end-to-end system accuracy, but does not ad-
dress the hardware cost, latency, or throughput of serving
their workload unlike JIGSAWSERVE.
Serving systems with GPU sharing. GPUlet (Choi et al.,
2022) and GSLICE (Dhakal et al., 2020) serve compound
inference systems and share GPUs by using MPS. INFaaS
shares GPUs by co-locating models with an interference-
prone mechanism, and constantly probes the models to iden-
tify when the interference is too high. Clover (Li et al.,
2023) is a framework that hosts multiple model variants on
different MIG instances to minimize the carbon emissions
of serving inference for individual ML models, but does not
consider compound inference systems. MIG-serving (Tan
et al., 2021) finds deployments of MIG instances to serve
inference workloads of multiple individual models when
given the throughput and latency requirements. ParvaGPU
(Lee et al., 2024) uses MPS-enabled MIG instance to serve
individual models while maintaining a high GPU utilization.
7
FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION
We plan to explore JIGSAWSERVE’s efficacy when serving
real applications, where relaxing the accuracy threshold re-
sults in a measurable and quantifiable decrease in the quality
of experience. It would also be interesting to explore how
the core ideas of JIGSAWSERVE can be applied to more com-
pound inference systems, beyond those whose task-graphs
can be described as a DAG. Exploring more compound in-
ference systems could involve considering large ML models
that need more than 1 GPU for a single instance. Designing
a serving system for such systems would require better un-
derstanding of the communication overheads and memory
bottlenecks to satisfy the data dependencies.
JIGSAWSERVE uses spatial partitioning mechanisms on
NVIDIA GPUs, but the core ideas of JIGSAWSERVE are
applicable even to GPUs from other vendors that provide
spatial partitioning mechanisms such as the Modular Chiplet
Platform on AMD GPUs. Techniques like dynamic rerout-
ing (Ahmad et al., 2024b) of individual requests to model
instances with unutilized capacities are complementary to
our work, and will further improve the runtime performance
of JIGSAWSERVE. JIGSAWSERVE uses a rudimentary work-
load prediction to predict the future demand. Using better
workload prediction methods to predict the demand well
ahead of time can help hide the GPU repartitioning time
during real deployment on a cluster of datacenter GPUs.
JIGSAWSERVE’s MILP formulation allows for any opti-
mization objective when exploring the configuration space
of choosing model variants and MIG instance sizes for a
compound inference system. For example, it can be used
to minimize the carbon intensity of serving compound in-
ference systems, similar to (Li et al., 2023). JIGSAWSERVE
currently uses a bin-packing algorithm for MIG instance
placement, which can lead to GPU fragmentation. Future
work can optimize for ideal MIG packing and placement
as a part of the objective. Alternatively, a multi-level re-
source allocator can allocate pools of resources, and model
instances can flexibly make real-time decisions at runtime
to use from the resource pools.
JIGSAWSERVE is the first serving system that jointly op-
timizes model variant selection and GPU spatial partition-
ing for compound inference systems on datacenter GPUs.
By allocating resources and accuracy budgets in a task-
graph–informed manner, it meets end-to-end latency and
accuracy SLOs while using only 43.3% of available GPU
capacity on average. Our results demonstrate that joint opti-
mization across accuracy scaling, spatial partitioning, and
task graph structure is key to efficient serving of compound
inference systems. JIGSAWSERVE makes a case for two
critical advances: (1) The ML community should continue
to release multiple model variants per architecture to al-
low accuracy-performance flexibility, and (2) GPU vendors
must embrace and prioritize developing spatial partitioning
mechanisms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported in part by U.S. National Science
Foundation grant #2217144, the AMD Center of Excellence
at UIUC, and the IBM-Illinois Discovery Accelerator In-
stitute. This work used JetStream2 (Hancock et al., 2021)
at Indiana University through allocation CIS250170 from
the Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Coordination Ecosystem:
Services & Support (ACCESS) program (Boerner et al.,
2023), which is supported by U.S. National Science Foun-
dation grants #2138259, #2138286, #2138307, #2137603,
and #2138296.
REFERENCES
Pytorch model hub,
resnet,
2017.
URL https:
//pytorch.org/hub/pytorch_vision_
resnet/.


--- Page 12 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
Pytorch model hub, vgg-nets, 2017.
URL https://
pytorch.org/hub/pytorch_vision_vgg/.
Twitter
streaming
traces,
2022.
URL
https://archive.org/details/
archiveteam-twitter-stream-2022-11.
Yolov5 vs. yolov8: A detailed comparison, 2024. URL
https://docs.ultralytics.com/compare/
yolov5-vs-yolov8/.
Nvidia multi-instance gpu user guide,
release r575,
2025a.
URL
https://docs.nvidia.com/
datacenter/tesla/mig-user-guide/.
Nvidia multi-process service, release r575, 2025b. URL
https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/mps/
index.html.
Sohaib Ahmad, Hui Guan, Brian D. Friedman, Thomas
Williams, Ramesh K. Sitaraman, and Thomas Woo.
Proteus: A high-throughput inference-serving system
with accuracy scaling.
In Proceedings of the 29th
ACM International Conference on Architectural Sup-
port for Programming Languages and Operating Sys-
tems, Volume 1, ASPLOS ’24, page 318–334, New
York, NY, USA, 2024a. Association for Computing
Machinery.
ISBN 9798400703720.
doi: 10.1145/
3617232.3624849.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3617232.3624849.
Sohaib Ahmad, Hui Guan, and Ramesh K. Sitaraman. Loki:
A system for serving ml inference pipelines with hard-
ware and accuracy scaling. In Proceedings of the 33rd
International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel
and Distributed Computing, HPDC ’24, page 267–280,
New York, NY, USA, 2024b. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
ISBN 9798400704130.
doi: 10.
1145/3625549.3658688. URL https://doi.org/
10.1145/3625549.3658688.
Timothy J. Boerner, Stephen Deems, Thomas R. Furlani,
Shelley L. Knuth, and John Towns. Access: Advanc-
ing innovation: Nsf’s advanced cyberinfrastructure co-
ordination ecosystem: Services & support.
In Prac-
tice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing
2023: Computing for the Common Good, PEARC ’23,
page 173–176, New York, NY, USA, 2023. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450399852.
doi: 10.1145/3569951.3597559. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3569951.3597559.
Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy Davis, Boris Hanin, Peter
Bailis, Matei Zaharia, James Zou, and Ion Stoica. Opti-
mizing model selection for compound ai systems, 2025.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14815.
Seungbeom Choi, Sunho Lee, Yeonjae Kim, Jongse
Park, Youngjin Kwon, and Jaehyuk Huh.
Serv-
ing heterogeneous machine learning models on Multi-
GPU servers with Spatio-Temporal sharing.
In
2022 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX
ATC 22), pages 199–216, Carlsbad, CA, July 2022.
USENIX Association.
ISBN 978-1-939133-29-53.
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc22/presentation/choi-seungbeom.
City of Bellevue.
Bellevue Traffic Video Dataset.
https://github.com/City-of-Bellevue/
TrafficVideoDataset, 2017. Accessed: August 4,
2025.
Aditya Dhakal, Sameer G Kulkarni, and K. K. Ramakr-
ishnan. Gslice: controlled spatial sharing of gpus for
a scalable inference platform.
In Proceedings of the
11th ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, SoCC ’20,
page 492–506, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450381376.
doi: 10.1145/3419111.3421284. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3419111.3421284.
Frank Donnelly.
Parsing the inter archive’s twitter
stream grab with python,
2023.
URL https:
//atcoordinates.info/2023/04/30/
parsing-the-internet-archives-twitter-stream-grab
Saeid Ghafouri, Kamran Razavi, Mehran Salmani, Alireza
Sanaee, Tania Lorido Botran, Lin Wang, Joseph Doyle,
and Pooyan Jamshidi. [solution] ipa: Inference pipeline
adaptation to achieve high accuracy and cost-efficiency.
Journal of Systems Research, 4(1), April 2024. ISSN
2770-5501. doi: 10.5070/sr34163500. URL http://
dx.doi.org/10.5070/SR34163500.
Gurobi Optimization, LLC. Gurobi Optimizer Reference
Manual, 2024. URL https://www.gurobi.com.
David Y. Hancock, Jeremy Fischer, John Michael Lowe,
Winona Snapp-Childs, Marlon Pierce, Suresh Marru,
J. Eric Coulter, Matthew Vaughn, Brian Beck, Nirav
Merchant, Edwin Skidmore, and Gwen Jacobs.
Jet-
stream2: Accelerating cloud computing via jetstream.
In Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Com-
puting 2021: Evolution Across All Dimensions, PEARC
’21, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
ISBN 9781450382922.
doi: 10.
1145/3437359.3465565. URL https://doi.org/
10.1145/3437359.3465565.
Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385.


--- Page 13 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
HPC
Wire.
Aws
to
offer
nvidia’s
t4
gpus
for
ai
inferencing,
2019.
URL
https:
//www.hpcwire.com/2019/03/19/
aws-upgrades-its-gpu-backed-ai-inference-platform/.
Xinning Hui, Yuanchao Xu, Zhishan Guo, and Xipeng Shen.
Esg: Pipeline-conscious efficient scheduling of dnn work-
flows on serverless platforms with shareable gpus. In Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd International Symposium on High-
Performance Parallel and Distributed Computing, HPDC
’24, page 42–55, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400704130.
doi: 10.1145/3625549.3658657. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3625549.3658657.
Xinning Hui, Yuanchao Xu, and Xipeng Shen. Fluidfaas:
A dynamic pipelined solution for serverless comput-
ing with strong isolation-based gpu sharing.
In The
34th International Symposium on High-Performance
Parallel and Distributed Computing (HPDC ’25),
Notre Dame, IN, USA, july 2025. ACM.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3731545.3731580. URL https:
//research.csc.ncsu.edu/picture/
publications/papers/hpdc2025.pdf.
Jaehyeon Kim, Sungwon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Sungroh
Yoon. Glow-tts: A generative flow for text-to-speech
via monotonic alignment search, 2020. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2005.11129.
Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son. Conditional
variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-
to-end text-to-speech, 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2106.06103.
Seah Kim, Hyoukjun Kwon, Jinook Song, Jihyuck Jo, Yu-
Hsin Chen, Liangzhen Lai, and Vikas Chandra. Dream: A
dynamic scheduler for dynamic real-time multi-model ml
workloads. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 4, ASPLOS
’23, page 73–86, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400703942.
doi: 10.1145/3623278.3624753. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3623278.3624753.
Hyoukjun Kwon, Krishnakumar Nair, Jamin Seo, Jason
Yik, Debabrata Mohapatra, Dongyuan Zhan, Jinook Song,
Peter Capak, Peizhao Zhang, Peter Vajda, et al. Xrbench:
An extended reality (xr) machine learning benchmark
suite for the metaverse. Proceedings of Machine Learning
and Systems, 5:1–20, 2023.
Munkyu Lee, Sihoon Seong, Minki Kang, Jihyuk Lee,
Gap-Joo Na, In-Geol Chun, Dimitrios Nikolopoulos, and
Cheol-Ho Hong. Parvagpu: Efficient spatial gpu sharing
for large-scale dnn inference in cloud environments. In
SC24: International Conference for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages
1–14. IEEE, 2024.
Baolin Li, Tirthak Patel, Siddharth Samsi, Vijay Gadepally,
and Devesh Tiwari. Miso: exploiting multi-instance gpu
capability on multi-tenant gpu clusters. In Proceedings of
the 13th Symposium on Cloud Computing, page 173–189.
ACM, November 2022. doi: 10.1145/3542929.3563510.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3542929.
3563510.
Baolin Li, Siddharth Samsi, Vijay Gadepally, and Devesh
Tiwari. Clover: Toward sustainable ai with carbon-aware
machine learning inference service. In Proceedings of
the International Conference for High Performance Com-
puting, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–15,
2023.
Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, Lubomir
Bourdev, Ross Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva
Ramanan, C. Lawrence Zitnick, and Piotr Doll´ar. Mi-
crosoft coco: Common objects in context, 2015. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1405.0312.
David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Urs H¨olzle, Quoc Le,
Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia, Daniel Rothchild,
David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean.
The carbon
footprint of machine learning training will plateau, then
shrink, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2204.05149.
Joseph Redmon, Santosh Divvala, Ross Girshick, and Ali
Farhadi. You only look once: Unified, real-time object
detection, 2016. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1506.02640.
Francisco Romero, Qian Li, Neeraja J. Yadwadkar, and
Christos Kozyrakis. INFaaS: Automated model-less in-
ference serving. In 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Con-
ference (USENIX ATC 21), pages 397–411. USENIX
Association, July 2021.
ISBN 978-1-939133-23-6.
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc21/presentation/romero.
Mohammad Shahrad, Rodrigo Fonseca, Inigo Goiri, Gohar
Chaudhry, Paul Batum, Jason Cooke, Eduardo Laure-
ano, Colby Tresness, Mark Russinovich, and Ricardo
Bianchini. Serverless in the wild: Characterizing and
optimizing the serverless workload at a large cloud
provider.
In 2020 USENIX Annual Technical Con-
ference (USENIX ATC 20), pages 205–218. USENIX
Association, July 2020.
ISBN 978-1-939133-14-4.
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc20/presentation/shahrad.


--- Page 14 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
Haichen Shen, Lequn Chen, Yuchen Jin, Liangyu Zhao,
Bingyu Kong, Matthai Philipose, Arvind Krishnamurthy,
and Ravi Sundaram.
Nexus: a gpu cluster engine
for accelerating dnn-based video analysis.
In Pro-
ceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles, SOSP ’19, page 322–337, New
York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing
Machinery.
ISBN 9781450368735.
doi: 10.1145/
3341301.3359658.
URL https://doi.org/10.
1145/3341301.3359658.
Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep convo-
lutional networks for large-scale image recognition, 2015.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556.
Cheng Tan, Zhichao Li, Jian Zhang, Yu Cao, Sikai Qi,
Zherui Liu, Yibo Zhu, and Chuanxiong Guo. Serving
dnn models with multi-instance gpus: A case of the re-
configurable machine scheduling problem, 2021. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.11067.
Mingxing Tan and Quoc V. Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking
model scaling for convolutional neural networks, 2020.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.11946.
Bekir Turkkan, Pavankumar Murali, Pavithra Harsha, Rohan
Arora, Gerard Vanloo, and Chandra Narayanaswami. Op-
timal workload placement on multi-instance gpus, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.06646.
Jianfeng Wang, Zhengyuan Yang, Xiaowei Hu, Linjie Li,
Kevin Lin, Zhe Gan, Zicheng Liu, Ce Liu, and Lijuan
Wang. Git: A generative image-to-text transformer for
vision and language, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2205.14100.
Carole-Jean Wu, Ramya Raghavendra, Udit Gupta, Bilge
Acun, Newsha Ardalani, Kiwan Maeng, Gloria Chang,
Fiona Aga Behram, James Huang, Charles Bai, Michael
Gschwind, Anurag Gupta, Myle Ott, Anastasia Melnikov,
Salvatore Candido, David Brooks, Geeta Chauhan, Ben-
jamin Lee, Hsien-Hsin S. Lee, Bugra Akyildiz, Maxi-
milian Balandat, Joe Spisak, Ravi Jain, Mike Rabbat,
and Kim Hazelwood.
Sustainable ai: Environmental
implications, challenges and opportunities, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.00364.
Matei Zaharia, Omar Khattab, Lingjiao Chen, Jared Quincy
Davis, Heather Miller, Chris Potts, James Zou, Michael
Carbin, Jonathan Frankle, Naveen Rao, and Ali Gh-
odsi.
The shift from models to compound ai sys-
tems.
https://bair.berkeley.edu/blog/
2024/02/18/compound-ai-systems/, 2024.
Bowen Zhang, Shuxin Li, and Zhuozhao Li. Miger: In-
tegrating multi-instance gpu and multi-process service
for deep learning clusters. In Proceedings of the 53rd
International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP
’24, page 504–513, New York, NY, USA, 2024. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400717932.
doi: 10.1145/3673038.3673089. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3673038.3673089.
Chengliang Zhang, Minchen Yu, Wei Wang, and Feng
Yan.
MArk:
Exploiting cloud services for Cost-
Effective, SLO-Aware machine learning inference serv-
ing.
In 2019 USENIX Annual Technical Conference
(USENIX ATC 19), pages 1049–1062, Renton, WA, July
2019. USENIX Association. ISBN 978-1-939133-03-8.
URL https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc19/presentation/zhang-chengliang.
Zhixin Zhao, Yitao Hu, Guotao Yang, Ziqi Gong, Chen
Shen, Laiping Zhao, Wenxin Li, Xiulong Liu, and Wenyu
Qu. Slopt: Serving real-time inference pipeline with strict
latency constraint. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 74
(4):1431–1445, 2025. doi: 10.1109/TC.2025.3528125.
Han Zhou, Xingchen Wan, Ruoxi Sun, Hamid Palangi,
Shariq Iqbal, Ivan Vuli´c, Anna Korhonen, and Sercan O.
Arik. Multi-agent design: Optimizing agents with better
prompts and topologies, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2502.02533.


--- Page 15 ---
Serving Compound Inference Systems on Datacenter GPUs
A
IMPLEMENTING COMPOUND
INFERENCE SYSTEMS
To implement the compound inference systems for empiri-
cal evalutation, we extend ideas proposed by FluidFaaS (Hui
et al., 2025) where each model instance performing a task
runs as a separate CPU process, with the model instances
satisfying data dependencies through Inter Process Commu-
nication (IPC) via shared memory on the host system. We
run each model instance as separate CPU processes since
the NVIDIA CUDA driver limits each CPU process to use
only one MIG instance. Using the host shared memory for
IPC instead of socket-based communication reduces com-
munication overheads between the CPU processes incurred
by (de)serialization, heavy OS system calls, and multiple
memory copies by the kernel.
This implementation does not restrict JIGSAWSERVE, and
is just a design choice suitable for our testbed. The ideas of
JIGSAWSERVE can scale and be used for other production-
ready implementations of compound inference systems
where all components of the serving system and the model
instances performing the tasks are containerized, hosted
on different nodes or datacenters, and communicate with
point-to-point socket-based protocols such as gRPC over
the network.
B
TASK-GRAPH-UNINFORMED BASELINES
For baselines that perform task-graph-uninformed resource
budgeting, we need to statically divide the end-to-end la-
tency SLO and the available resources among the tasks in a
task-graph-uninformed manner. We use the multiplicative
factors of the most accurate model variants to calculate the
expected demand for each task when a serving system is
task-graph-uninformed. We divide this expected demand by
the maximum throughput that a model instance described by
(t, v, s, b) can achieve for the most accurate model variant
performing task t, and them multiply it with the number
of GPU slices in s. This gives the expected amount of re-
sources required for task t. We assign task-wise resource
budgets by dividing the total resources available in the ratio
of the expected amount of resources required for each task.
For the task-wise latency SLO, we split the end-to-end la-
tency SLO for each path in the task graph in the ratio of the
highest inference latency that a model instance described
by (t, v, s, b) can incur for the most accurate model variant
performing task t. For a task t that belongs to multiple paths,
the task-wise latency SLO is the minimum latency along all
paths that t is present.
Once these task-level latency SLO and resource budgets
are allocated, each task is constrained to use the task-level
limits. In contrast, task-graph-informed resource budgeting
constrains the total end-to-end latency SLO and the total
resources across all tasks in the compound inference system.
The latency SLO and the resources can be flexibly appor-
tioned among the constituent tasks in task-graph-informed
resource budgeting.
We choose this approach to statically divide the end-to-end
latency SLO and resources instead of naively dividing them
equally among all the tasks to make strong baselines of
the task-graph-uninformed configuration search spaces. A
task-graph-uninformed serving system would not know the
end-to-end SLO, but only the SLO for each task that a user
would provide. The user is not aware of the MILP formu-
lation, and has to statically determine the latency SLO for
each task assuming the worst case latency that the serving
system could choose. For the task-wise resource budget, we
use this approach to find the ratio of resources for each task
assuming that the serving system would choose to serve the
demand with the configuration that can achieve the maxi-
mum throughput.
