--- Page 1 ---
1
A Learning Method with Gap-Aware Generation for
Heterogeneous DAG Scheduling
Ruisong Zhou∗, Haijun Zou∗, Li Zhou, Chumin Sun, Zaiwen Wen
Abstract—Efficient scheduling of directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)
in heterogeneous environments is challenging due to resource
capacities and dependencies. In practice, the need for adaptability
across environments with varying resource pools and task types,
alongside rapid schedule generation, complicates these challenges.
We propose WeCAN, an end-to-end reinforcement learning
framework for heterogeneous DAG scheduling that addresses task–
pool compatibility coefficients and generation-induced optimality
gaps. It adopts a two-stage single-pass design: a single forward
pass produces task–pool scores and global parameters, followed
by a generation map that constructs schedules without repeated
network calls. Its weighted cross-attention encoder models task–
pool interactions gated by compatibility coefficients, and is size-
agnostic to environment fluctuations. Moreover, widely used
list-scheduling maps can incur generation-induced optimality
gaps from restricted reachability. We introduce an order-space
analysis that characterizes the reachable set of generation maps
via feasible schedule orders, explains the mechanism behind
generation-induced gaps, and yields sufficient conditions for gap
elimination. Guided by these conditions, we design a skip-extended
realization with an analytically parameterized decreasing skip
rule, which enlarges the reachable order set while preserving
single-pass efficiency. Experiments on computation graphs and
real-world TPC-H DAGs demonstrate improved makespan over
strong baselines, with inference time comparable to classical
heuristics and faster than multi-round neural schedulers.
Index Terms—Combinatorial Optimization, Directed Acyclic
Graph, Heterogeneous Scheduling, Reinforcement Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
T
ASK scheduling problems are critical for optimizing
computational performance in domains such as data
centers [1], distributed systems, and large-scale cloud platforms
[2]. These problems are often modeled using directed acyclic
graphs (DAGs), where nodes represent tasks and edges specify
dependencies. The objective is typically to minimize the total
completion time subject to task dependencies and resource
constraints. It is well known that DAG scheduling is an NP-hard
This research was supported in part by National Key Research and
Development Program of China under the grant number 2024YFA1012900,
the National Natural Science Foundation of China under the grant numbers
12331010 and 12288101, and the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing, China
under the grant number Z230002. (Corresponding author: Zaiwen Wen.)
Ruisong Zhou is with the School of Mathematical Science, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China (email: ruisongzhou@stu.pku.edu.cn).
Haijun Zou is with the State Key Laboratory of Mathematical Sciences,
Institute of Computational Mathematics and Scientific/Engineering Computing,
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China (email: zouhaijun24@mails.ucas.ac.cn).
Li Zhou and Chumin Sun are with the Theory Lab, Central Re-
search Institute, 2012 Labs, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd, China (email:
zhouli107@huawei.com; sunchumin@huawei.com).
Zaiwen Wen is with the Beijing International Center for Mathematical Re-
search, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China (email: wenzw@pku.edu.cn).
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
problem even in homogeneous settings [3]. In heterogeneous
environments, tasks need to be assigned to suitable resource
pools possessing differing capacities and specific task-pool
compatibility coefficients. This heterogeneity adds significant
complexity to scheduling.
Traditional approaches often employ heuristics, such as list
scheduling [4] which assigns tasks to pools iteratively based
on priority scores. These scores are often calculated using
computationally inexpensive metrics, such as the critical-path
length or the number of remaining operations [5]. Variations
include Tetris [6] using dynamic scores that change during
scheduling, or HEFT [7] based on inserting tasks into an
existing timeline. However, the design of such heuristics often
relies heavily on human expertise and struggles to fully utilize
all available problem information effectively.
The application of machine learning (ML) to combinatorial
optimization (CO) problems [8]–[15] has gained significant
attention in recent years since the seminal work by Hopfield &
Tank [16]. Within this line of work, a prevalent paradigm is to
learn a constructive policy to generate solutions sequentially [8]–
[12]. This paradigm is particularly effective when the solution
admits a natural sequential representation, so that constructing
a solution reduces to generating an ordered selection, as in
routing and assignment problems.
Scheduling problems however differ fundamentally because
the solution is defined as a schedule with concrete start
times, which obstructs a natural one-to-one correspondence
with a decision sequence. As a result, neural constructive
schedulers instead learn dispatch priorities. Auto-regressive
policies successively select tasks for dispatch [17], [18]. But this
requires multi-round network processing and limits inference
speed. For rapid solution generation, a recent work [19]
advocates for a single-pass regime, where the whole priority list
is generated in a one-shot manner. Under the learned priorities,
schedules are generated by successively dispatching tasks to
resource pools through a generation map.
List scheduling serves as the dominant generation map for
neural constructive schedulers, yet it can introduce inherent
optimality gaps in DAG scheduling. This deficiency stems
from the structural complexity of DAG scheduling. Different
from the serial processing of linear chains in the canonical
job-shop scheduling problem (JSSP), DAG scheduling involves
cumulative resource constraints that permit parallel execution
and intricate non-linear dependencies. Such a complex structure
may render list scheduling unable to realize optimal schedules
regardless of the given dispatch priorities.
Heterogeneity further complicates the problem by introduc-
ing compatibility coefficients. Learning compatibility patterns
arXiv:2603.23249v1  [cs.LG]  24 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
while remaining agnostic to environment size poses signifi-
cant challenges. One common approach is explicit injection
[19]–[21], where the model receives the full compatibility
information as part of task features via one-hot task types or
per-pool compatibility vectors. However, this design couples the
network architecture to fixed input dimensions thereby limiting
adaptability to fluctuating environments. Another approach
is statistical compression [22]–[24], which summarizes each
task’s compatibility statistics across pools, such as the mean
or variance. Nevertheless, this approach may lose some fine-
grained information that matters for precise priority.
These observations motivate a need for constructive sched-
ulers that are simultaneously compatibility expressive, environ-
ment size-agnostic, and provably free from generation-induced
structural gaps, while remaining efficient in the single pass
regime. To this end, we develop a principled analysis of
schedule generation maps for DAG scheduling and develop a
reinforcement learning (RL) framework called WeCAN whose
modeling and generation components are explicitly aligned
with the requirements of heterogeneity and gap elimination.
Our contributions are threefold.
(1) An order-space analysis framework revealing the
generation-induced optimality gaps. We introduce an order-
space perspective to characterize the reachable set of existing
schedule generation maps, and formalize a corresponding
generation-induced optimality gap. We further propose the
order-covering optimal (OCO) criterion and prove that any
generator satisfying OCO eliminates this structural gap, thereby
explaining when and why common list-scheduling realizations
may be inherently suboptimal.
(2) A single-pass, compatibility and gap aware RL scheduler.
We propose an end-to-end single-pass RL framework that
jointly addresses heterogeneous compatibilities and the above
structural gap. On the modeling side, we design a size-agnostic
weighted cross-attention network (WeCAN) to encode task–
pool interactions with full compatibility information while
remaining scalable to varying numbers of tasks and pools. On
the generation side, we introduce a skip-extended realization
with a decreasing skip score, which enlarges the rollout space
to fix the generation-induced gap, while preserving single-pass
efficiency in inference.
(3) Empirical validation on synthetic and real-world bench-
marks. Experiments on computation graph and real-world TPC-
H DAGs demonstrate improved makespan over strong heuristic
and learning-based baselines, with inference time comparable
to classical heuristics and substantially faster than multi-round
neural schedulers.
A. Related Work
Several RL based approaches have been proposed for
scheduling problems [25]–[39]. Among constructive schedulers,
Zhang et al. [17] develop an approach to generate solutions
by using a graph neural network (GNN) to encode state and
select tasks sequentially. Jeon et al. [19] introduce an efficient
approach with only once network passing, which uses the
Gumbel-TopK trick to generate priorities that are subsequently
converted into feasible schedules by list scheduling. Beyond
constructive generation, alternative approaches include learning
policies to refine existing solutions [26], [36], [37] or simplify
problem instances [27], [34], [39]. In particular, Zhou et al. [26]
develop a method that learns a policy to iteratively refine
an existing solution. Wang et al. [27] introduce a bi-level
optimization approach applying RL to add auxiliary edges and
proposing heuristics on the modified graph.
Most previous works [19], [20], [22], [24], [27], [29], [34]
adopt list scheduling as the generation map but do not include
skip actions whenever ready tasks exist. These approaches thus
inherit the optimality gap of list scheduling. Although skip
actions have been considered in a few learning-based schedulers
[21], [23], [25], [28], [33], [38], [40], they are typically
motivated by problem features other than generation-map reach-
ability or list-scheduling optimality gaps. In particular, some
works introduce skip in online or dynamic environments to
wait for future task releases [21], [25], [38], [40], while others
use it to cope with partially observed execution constraints
[28], [33] or as a coordination placeholder in multi-agent
formulations [23]. Consequently, these methods do not analyze
when and why adding skip can restore order coverage of
the induced generation map, nor provide conditions under
which skip eliminates the optimality gap. In contrast, we study
the offline setting where all tasks are given upfront, and our
order-space analysis shows that under cumulative resource
constraints a list-scheduling map may fail to cover feasible
schedule orders, leading to a nonzero optimality gap. Moreover,
we show that closing this gap requires a carefully designed
skip mechanism. Existing skip-based designs often rely on
multi-round re-encoding or step-wise dynamic scoring, which
conflicts with the single-pass inference regime. We therefore
propose a decreasing skip rule that can be evaluated during
rollout without additional network calls, and we prove that this
design closes the gap while preserving single-pass efficiency.
Regarding task-pool compatibility, most heterogeneous DAG
scheduling approaches incorporate compatibility coefficients di-
rectly into task features through various encoding choices [19]–
[24]. Heterogeneous GNNs (HGNNs) offer another potential
avenue by extending graph learning to heterogeneous graphs
with multiple node and edge types, and they have been adopted
for many other scheduling problems [18], [41]–[44]. For multi-
robot scheduling, Wang et al. [41] propose ScheduleNet built
on a heterogeneous attention mechanism. For the flexible JSSP,
Song et al. [18] build an operation–machine heterogeneous
graph where processing times are attached to edges, and
use a staged embedding strategy to capture the coupled
operation-selection and machine-assignment structure. Beyond
these exemplars, a growing body of HGNN-based schedulers
tailor heterogeneous graph constructions and message-passing
modules to the particular modeling choices and constraints
of different problem variants [42]–[44]. However, empirically
adapting these HGNN methods to DAG scheduling often yields
limited gains Our WeCAN is complementary in that it targets
efficient compatibility extraction without committing to a
particular heterogeneous graph construction and it demonstrates
superior performance on DAG scheduling.


--- Page 3 ---
3
B. Organization
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Formula-
tions of the heterogeneous DAG scheduling problem and neural
constructive schedulers are provided in Section II. An order-
analysis framework for analyzing the inherent gap induced
by generation maps is established in Section III. We present
the proposed RL scheduler in Section IV, including the skip-
extended gap-free scheduling algorithm and the compatibility-
aware WeCAN architecture. Finally, numerical results on a
variety of datasets are presented in Section V to demonstrate
the effectiveness and robustness of the proposed method.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Heterogeneous Scheduling Problem
The task scheduling problem seeks a schedule that minimizes
the objective function among all schedules subject to given
constraints. We focus on heterogeneous scheduling problems
characterized by compatibility coefficients. A problem instance
P = (V, E, C, t, ρ, λ, Kacc) is specified by a DAG G = (V, E)
and a set of resource pools C. Each node v ∈V represents
a task with base processing time t(v) > 0 and resource
demand vector ρ(v), while each pool c ∈C has a capacity
vector λ(c). Each edge (v, w) ∈E represents a dependency
constraint: task v must complete before w starts. We model
heterogeneity via compatibility coefficients Kacc(v, c) ≥0
[7]. When Kacc(v, c) > 0, the actual processing time of task
v on pool c is defined as tact(v, c) := t(v)/Kacc(v, c), and
Kacc(v, c) = 0 indicates incompatibility.
A schedule is a map x : V →R≥0 × C, which maps each
task v ∈V to a pair (s(v), c(v)), representing its start time
and assigned resource pool respectively. In this paper, the
objective function is the makespan f, defined as the latest task
completion time. For τ ≥0 and c ∈C, let
F(τ, c) :=

v ∈V | c(v) = c, s(v) ≤τ < tact(v, c(v))
	
denote the set of tasks running on pool c at time τ. The problem
can be formulated as
min
x=(s(·),c(·))
f(x) = max
v∈V

s(v) + tact(v, c(v))

,
s.t.
s(v) + tact(v, c(v)) ≤s(w),
∀(v, w) ∈E,
X
v∈F (τ,c)
ρ(v) ≤λ(c),
∀τ ≥0, ∀c ∈C,
Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0,
∀v ∈V,
s(v) ≥0,
∀v ∈V.
(1)
The last constraint enforces nonnegative start times, while the
first three constraints correspond to: (1) dependency constraints,
requiring each task to start after all its predecessors complete;
(2) resource constraints, ensuring that at any time τ the total
demand of tasks running on pool c does not exceed λ(c); and
(3) compatibility constraints, requiring Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0. A
schedule x is called feasible if it satisfies all constraints above.
An optimal solution is a feasible schedule whose makespan is
no larger than that of any other feasible schedule.
In the homogeneous setting where Kacc ≡1 and |C| = 1,
the third constraint is naturally satisfied. In contrast, het-
erogeneous environments with compatibility constraints pose
additional challenges, requiring tasks to run on compatible
resource pools and schedulers to adapt to diverse resource
characteristics. These scheduling problems can be formulated
as mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problems, as
described in Appendix A.1. This formulation establishes a one-
to-one correspondence between feasible schedules and MILP
feasible solutions, enabling a unified framework for analyzing
scheduling scenarios. Compared to the homogeneous case,
these settings introduce additional constraints and significantly
increase MILP size (as detailed in Appendix C.3), posing
challenges for effective scheduling.
B. MDP Formulation for Constructive Scheduling
Most neural schedulers construct schedules by making a
sequence of dispatch decisions, rather than directly outputting
a complete schedule x : V →R≥0 × C. For a given instance
P, we model this constructive procedure as a Markov decision
process (MDP).
At decision step t, the state st summarizes the current
simulation time and the partial schedule built so far, including
(i) the set of unscheduled tasks, (ii) the dependency status
(which predecessors have completed), and (iii) the current
status of each pool (available resources and running tasks).
The action space is
A = {(v, c) ∈V × C | ρ(v) ≤λ(c), Kacc(v, c) > 0},
where (v, c) means assigning task v to pool c.
A neural scheduler implements a stochastic policy, sampling
at ∼pθ(· | st, P) at step t. A rollout (trajectory) is an action
sequence ω = (a1, . . . , aN) generated by the policy along the
constructive simulation. Its probability is
pθ(ω) =
N
Y
t=1
pθ(at | st, P).
(2)
Importantly, a rollout ω does not by itself specify concrete start
times: it must be interpreted by a realization rule to produce a
feasible schedule, from which the makespan is evaluated. The
overall reward is then defined as the negative of the makespan.
C. From Constructive Policies to Feasible Schedules
The constructive policy defines randomness on the decision
side, i.e., action sequences, whereas the scheduling objective
function is defined on the solution side, i.e., feasible schedules
with concrete start times. Bridging these two requires a
schedule realization rule (also called a generation map) that
translates constructive decisions into a feasible schedule. A
standard choice in both heuristic and neural schedulers is list
scheduling. Starting from tcur = 0, this scheme repeatedly: (i)
determines which task-pool actions are eligible at the current
time (respecting precedence, capacity, and compatibility);
(ii) selects one eligible action according to the constructive
decisions, starts the task at time tcur, and updates the pool
states; and (iii) when no further actions are eligible, advances
tcur to the next completion event and releases completed tasks.
Once the generation scheme is fixed, the rollout randomness
on the decision side induces a distribution over feasible


--- Page 4 ---
4
schedules. Specifically, the probability of obtaining a schedule
is the total probability of all rollouts that are realized into that
schedule. Therefore, learning a constructive policy amounts
to optimizing the expected objective value under this induced
schedule distribution. Different generation rules can lead to
different induced distributions. In particular, the set of feasible
schedules that can be realized with nonzero probability may
differ. We will formalize this dependence in the later analysis.
III. ORDER-SPACE GEOMETRY AND OPTIMALITY GAPS
In this section, we will introduce a framework to analyze the
limitation of current list-scheduling based approaches and reveal
the optimality gap inside them. This framework provides insight
for revealing the underlying mechanisms for the suboptimality
and guides us to find the best way to improve it.
A. Schedule Order Space
For any problem P, let X(P) denote the space of all feasible
schedules. When no confusion arises, we denote X(P) as
X. Although the optimization objective resides in X, the
probabilistic model is defined not directly over the schedule
space itself, but over the action sequence space Ωaction:
Ωaction := {(a1, ..., an) | ai = (vi, ¯ci) ∈A; vi ̸= vj, ∀i ̸= j}.
To facilitate a more compact representation for generating
schedules, we investigate the structural properties of Ωaction in
this subsection.
The action sequence exhibits inherent redundancy since
swapping two actions involving different pools yields the same
schedule. An equivalence relation ∼can be defined as follows:
(a1, ..., ai, ai+1, ...an) ∼(a1, ..., ai+1, ai, ...an) if ¯ci ̸= ¯ci+1.
The quotient space Ωaction/ ∼can be identified with an
order representation defined as follows. A schedule order
w = {d(v), c(v)}v∈V consists of a pool-assignment map
c(·) : V →C and a rank map d(·) : V →Z+. The pool-
assignment map is required to be consistent with the action
space, such that (v, c(v)) ∈A for all v ∈V . For each pool
c ∈C, let n(c) := #{v ∈V | c(v) = c} denote the number of
tasks assigned to that pool. The rank map is required to satisfy
{d(v) | c(v) = c} = {1, . . . , n(c)},
∀c ∈C.
Intuitively, w = {d(v), c(v)}v∈V specifies the pool allocation
c(v) for each task v and the execution order d(v) of v
within its assigned pool. The set of all such orders constitutes
the schedule order space, denoted by B. The following
proposition establishes the equivalence between the quotient
space Ωaction/ ∼and the schedule order space B.
Proposition 1 (Equivalence between action-quotient and order
space). There exists a bijection Φ : Ωaction/ ∼→B. In
particular, each equivalence class in Ωaction/∼corresponds
to a unique schedule order w = {d(v), c(v)}v∈V ∈B.
Proof. Fix a total order of pools C = {c1, . . . , cm}. For
any action sequence ω
= (a1, . . . , an) ∈Ωaction with
ai = (vi, ¯ci), define its canonical form can(ω) as follows.
For each j = 1, . . . , m, extract from ω the subsequence of
actions whose associated pool equals cj, keep their relative
order, and concatenate these m subsequences in the order
c1, . . . , cm. Equivalently,
can(ω) =
 ω|c1 ; ω|c2 ; · · · ; ω|cm

,
where ω|c denotes the subsequence of ω consisting of actions
involving pool c.
(a) ω ∼can(ω). Indeed, by repeatedly swapping adjacent
actions belonging to different pools (which is allowed by ∼),
we can bubble all actions involving pool c1 to the front without
changing their internal order; then do the same for c2, etc. Thus,
ω can be transformed into can(ω) using only ∼-swaps.
(b) ω ∼ω′ iff can(ω) = can(ω′). The “if” direction follows
from Claim 1: ω ∼can(ω) = can(ω′) ∼ω′. For the “only
if” direction, given that a ∼-swap exchanges two adjacent
actions involving different pools, it does not change, for any
fixed pool c, the relative order of actions involving pool c.
Therefore, each subsequence ω|c is invariant along the entire
∼-class, implying the canonical form is invariant. Consequently,
each equivalence class [ω] ∈Ωaction/∼contains exactly one
canonical representative.
(c) Canonical forms are in bijection with B. Given a canon-
ical form, within each block corresponding to pool c, the posi-
tion of a task v inside that block defines d(v) ∈{1, . . . , n(c)}
and the block identity defines c(v) = c, producing an element
w = {(d(v), c(v))}v∈V ∈B. Conversely, for any w ∈B, each
pool c has a unique ordered list of tasks with ranks 1, . . . , n(c).
Concatenating these lists in the fixed pool order yields a unique
canonical form. These two constructions are inverses, giving a
bijection between the set of canonical forms and B.
Combining the above, Ωaction/∼(identified with canonical
representatives) is in bijection with B.
Naturally, for a feasible schedule x ∈X, we can extract its
task orders and pool allocations and obtain a schedule order in
the schedule order space B. This induces a map T : X →B.
However, not every schedule order in B necessarily arises from
a feasible schedule via the map T, due to the presence of
dependency and resource constraints. We call the schedule
orders in the image of T the feasible schedule orders.
Definition 1. The feasible schedule order space Bf := T(X) ⊆
B is the image of T. Each element w in Bf is called a feasible
schedule order.
The feasibility of a schedule order can be character-
ized by augmenting the precedence constraints with the
within-pool ordering constraints induced by w. Given w =
{(d(v), c(v))}v∈V ∈B, define
Epool
w
:= {(u, v) ∈V × V | c(u) = c(v), d(u) < d(v)},
Gw := (V, E ∪Epool
w
).
(3)
Proposition 2 (Feasibility of schedule orders). A schedule
order w = {(d(v), c(v))}v∈V ∈B belongs to Bf = T(X) if
and only if (i) Gw is acyclic, and (ii) Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0 and
ρ(v) ≤λ(c(v)) for all v ∈V .
Proof. (Necessity) If w ∈Bf, there exists a feasible schedule
x = (s(·), c(·)) with T(x) = w. Given that Epool
w
has no


--- Page 5 ---
5
directed cycle, every directed cycle in Gw has at least an
edge from E. For any edge (u, v) ∈E, feasibility implies
s(u) + t(u)/Kacc(u, c(u)) ≤s(v), and s(u) < s(v). For any
(u, v) ∈Epool
w
, T(x) = w means u is scheduled no later than
v on the same pool, which leads to s(u) ≤s(v). Consequently,
Gw cannot contain a directed cycle. Moreover, feasibility of x
implies Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0 and ρ(v) ≤λ(c(v)) for all v.
(Sufficiency) Assume (i) and (ii). Since Gw is acyclic, fix any
topological ordering π of Gw. Define a schedule x = (s, c) as
follows. Set c(v) := c(v) for all v. Then define s(·) recursively
along order π: for each v processed in the order of π, let
s(v) := max

s(u) + tact(u, c(u)) | (u, v) ∈E ∪Epool
w
	
.
Then all precedence constraints and within-pool order con-
straints are satisfied by construction. Moreover, tasks on the
same pool never overlap in time. Hence, at any τ each pool runs
at most one task, and the resource constraint holds because
ρ(v) ≤λ(c(v)) for every task. Compatibility holds by (ii).
Thus x is feasible and satisfies T(x) = w, and w ∈Bf.
B. Generation Maps
To bridge the gap between decision and solution spaces, we
require a realization rule that converts an action sequence into
a schedule. In light of Proposition 1, which identifies action
sequences with canonical schedule orders up to redundancy, it
suffices to formulate this realization primarily over schedule
orders. Hence, we use the term generation map to refer to any
map S : W →X that constructs a fully specified schedule
from an abstract order representation. The domain W serves as
a generalized priority space, which, depending on the context,
may represent the raw action sequence space Ωaction, the
schedule order space B or its feasible subset Bf etc.
A standard example is the list-scheduling map Slist
:
Ωaction →X, widely used in schedulers. Given an action
sequence, Slist follows the time-advance procedure described
in Section II-C and schedules tasks according to the prescribed
within-pool ordering.
We next introduce another generation map, the serial sched-
ule generation scheme (SGS), denoted by SSGS, as specified
in Algorithm 1. Given a feasible schedule order w ∈Bf,
the map SSGS constructs a schedule by combining (i) the
augmented precedence graph Gw (cf. (3)) and its ready set R
(zero-indegree tasks), and (ii) an event-based time-advance on
each pool that schedules a selected ready task at its earliest
feasible start time under dependency and resource constraints.
The next proposition shows that SSGS is well defined on Bf.
Proposition 3 (Well-definedness of SSGS). For any feasible
schedule order w = {(d(v), c(v))}v∈V ∈Bf, Algorithm 1
terminates after |V | iterations and outputs a feasible schedule
x = SSGS(w) = (s(·), c(·)) ∈X that preserves the order, i.e.,
T(x) = w.
Proof. Fix w ∈Bf. By Proposition 2, the augmented graph
Gw = (V, E ∪Epool
w
) is acyclic, and the assignment satisfies
Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0 and ρ(v) ≤λ(c(v)) for all v ∈V .
a) Termination. Algorithm 1 maintains the indegrees deg(·)
with respect to the remaining subgraph induced by the
Algorithm 1 Serial schedule generation scheme SSGS
1: Input: (V, E, C, ρ, t, λ, Kacc) and a feasible order w =
{(d(v), c(v))}v∈V ∈Bf.
2: Let tact(v, c) = t(v)/Kacc(v, c) and build Gw as (3).
3: Initialize deg(·) in Gw, R ←{v | deg(v) = 0}, tdep(v) ←
0, and for each c ∈C: tcur(c) ←0, λcur(c) ←λ(c).
4: while R ̸= ∅do
5:
Pick any v ∈R; set c ←c(v).
6:
Set τ ←max{tcur(c), tdep(v)}.
7:
Advance time on pool c until v is feasible at τ (release
completed tasks on c and update λcur(c)); update τ
accordingly.
8:
Start v at s(v) ←τ on pool c; set tend(v) ←s(v) +
tact(v, c) and update the pool state (tcur, λcur).
9:
Remove v from R; for each successor u of v in Gw:
decrease deg(u) and add u to R if deg(u) = 0.
10:
for each (v, u) ∈E do
11:
update tdep(u) ←max{tdep(u), tend(v)}.
12:
end for
13: end while
14: Output: schedule x = (s(·), c(·)) ∈X.
unscheduled tasks. Since Gw is acyclic, any nonempty induced
subgraph has at least one node with indegree 0. The ready
set R = {v : deg(v) = 0} will be nonempty whenever tasks
remain. Since each iteration selects one v ∈R and permanently
removes it (updating indegrees of its successors), exactly one
task is scheduled per iteration. The algorithm terminates after
|V | iterations.
b) Feasibility. Consider an iteration that schedules task v on
pool c = c(v). The algorithm sets τ ←max{tcur(c), tdep(v)}
and then advances time on pool c until v becomes feasible
at time τ, meaning that (i) all tasks on pool c completed by
time τ have been released and λcur(c) equals the available
capacity at τ, and (ii) ρ(v) ≤λcur(c) holds at τ. Moreover,
by construction τ ≥tdep(v), and tdep(v) is maintained as a
lower bound on the completion times of all predecessors of v
in E, since after scheduling any edge (u, v) ∈E the update
tdep(v) ←max{tdep(v), tend(u)} is performed. Hence, starting
v at s(v) = τ satisfies the dependency constraints. The resource
constraint holds by the pool-wise event update and the check
ρ(v) ≤λcur(c) at the start time. Compatibility holds since
Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0 for all v. Therefore, the schedule lies in X.
c) Order preservation. Pool allocations are preserved because
the algorithm always schedules each task v on its prescribed
pool c(v). For within-pool order, note that Epool
w
encodes
the rank order within each pool (as in (3)); in particular, if
c(u) = c(v) and d(u) < d(v), then there is a directed path
from u to v in Gw. Thus, v cannot enter the ready set before
all such predecessors have been scheduled, implying that tasks
on each pool are scheduled in increasing d(·). Consequently,
extracting the within-pool order from the produced schedule
yields exactly w, i.e., T(x) = w.
Proposition 3 justifies viewing SSGS as a generation map
from feasible orders to feasible schedules.


--- Page 6 ---
6
Fig. 1. The illustration for spaces and maps. (a) The schedule space, divided into disjoint fibers for feasible schedule orders. (b) The serial schedule generation
scheme SSGS embeds the feasible schedule order space Bf as a subset of the schedule space X, which is “orthogonal” to each fiber T −1(w) as only intersect
at one point SSGS(w). SSGS maps each schedule order to a best schedule (with minimal objective value) in the corresponding fiber. This relationship fix the
optimality gaps. (c) The list scheduling map Slist maps each schedule order to a best schedule in some fiber, but the fiber may not be the corresponding fiber.
Therefore, the fiber containing the optimal solution may be missed since the optimal schedule order may be mapped to the schedule with other schedule orders.
This mismatch leads to an optimality gap. (d) The skip action map Sd is defined on a larger space Ωaction ⊃Ωaction, where the extended part Sd(Ωaction\Ωaction)
covers the missed part SSGS(Bf)\Slist(Ωaction), making TSd a surjection to Bf. The extended part closes the optimality gap.
C. Optimality Gap of List Scheduling
A generation map S does not necessarily realize all feasible
schedules. Instead it induces a restricted reachable set
X(P; S) := { S(w) | w ∈W(P) } ⊆X(P),
where W(P) is the valid domain of S for instance P.
Accordingly, we define the optimality gap of S on P by
δ(P, S) :=
min
x∈X(P;S) f(x) −
min
x∈X(P) f(x) ≥0.
(4)
When X(P; S) ⊊X(P), this gap can be strictly positive.
Notably, list scheduling Slist can exhibit a nonzero optimality
gap, i.e., there exists an instance P0 such that δ(P0, Slist) > 0.
Consider an instance P0 with V = {1, 2, . . . , 8}, C = {c1}
and E = {(1, 4), (1, 6), (4, 7), (2, 5), (5, 8)}. Task processing
times are t(2)
=
1.1, t(3)
=
1.2 and t(i)
=
1 for
i ̸= 2, 3. Resource demands are ρ(4) = 2 and ρ(i) = 1 for
i ̸= 4. The pool capacity is λ(c1) = 3 and Kacc ≡1. Let
x⋆= (s⋆, c⋆) be the feasible schedule defined by c⋆(v) ≡c1
and s⋆(1) = s⋆(2) = s⋆(3) = 0,
s⋆(4) = 1.1,
s⋆(5) =
1.2,
s⋆(6) = s⋆(7) = 2.1,
s⋆(8) = 2.2, which yields
f(x⋆) = 3.2. Now consider list scheduling Slist as a map from
B(P0) to X(P0). For this specific instance, one can verify that
for every action sequence ω ∈Ωaction(P0), list scheduling
produces the same schedule x0 = (s0, c0), where c0(v) ≡c1
and s0(1) = s0(2) = s0(3) = 0,
s0(6) = 1,
s0(5) =
1.1,
s0(4) = 2,
s0(8) = 2.1,
s0(7) = 3, resulting in
f(x0) = 4 (see Fig. 2). Therefore, X(P0; Slist) = {x0}, and
δ(P0, Slist) = f(x0) −f(x⋆) = 4 −3.2 = 0.8 > 0,
indicating the nonzero optimality gap of list scheduling on P0.
The existence of optimality gap admits a geometric interpre-
tation. To see this, we consider the disjoint decomposition of
the schedule space X(P) through the map T
X(P) =
G
w∈Bf (P)
T −1(w).
(5)
Here each preimage T −1(w) is called a fiber, consisting of
all schedules sharing the same feasible order w (cf. Fig. 1(a)).
Since Slist only explores its image Slist(Ωaction(P)) ⊊X(P),
it may fail to intersect some fibers. Equivalently, the composed
map T ◦Slist : Ωaction(P) →Bf(P) is not necessarily
surjective. This surjectivity failure arises from the non-injective
nature of T ◦Slist. Specifically, different inputs ω1 ̸= ω2 may
lead to schedules that induce the same schedule order, i.e.,
T(Slist(ω1)) = T(Slist(ω2)). In such a case, multiple order
fibers are effectively folded onto the same output fiber, reducing
the set of fibers hit by Slist and potentially leaving other
fibers uncovered. When all the optimal solutions lie in missed
fibers, the best achievable objective value within X(P; Slist)
is necessarily larger than the global optimum, resulting in a
positive optimality gap (cf. Fig. 1(c)).
D. Order-Covering Optimal Generation Maps
A generation map may incur a positive optimality gap by
missing the fiber that contains an optimal schedule. We now
introduce a criterion that rules out this issue by requiring that
the map both (i) covers all feasible fibers and (ii) selects a
fiber-wise optimal representative.
Definition 2 (Order-covering optimal (OCO) generation map).
A generation map S : W →X is said to satisfy order-covering
optimal (OCO) condition if the following hold:


--- Page 7 ---
7
Fig. 2. A counterexample showing list scheduling excludes the optimal solution
for the DAG scheduling problem with heavy tasks. (a) Problem instance P0
with only one pool offering one type of resource with capacity 3. The resource
demand and processing time is shown and the compatibility coefficients K ≡1.
Each arrow v →w corresponds to an edge (v, w) ∈E. (b) The only solution
x0 in the image of list scheduling Slist(Ωaction) = {x0}. The horizontal axis
represents the time while the vertical axis represents the resource usage. (c)
Optimal solution x∗of the problem. (d) Worse solution for unrestricted waiting,
leading to a significantly large objective value (makespan).
(O1) (Order covering) The composition T ◦S : W →Bf is
surjective.
(O2) (Fiber optimality) For every w ∈W, the schedule S(w)
attains the minimal objective value among all schedules
in the fiber of its induced order:
f(x) ≥f(S(w)), ∀x ∈X such that T(x) = T(S(w)).
Under the fiber decomposition (5), condition (O1) ensures
that for every feasible order ˆw ∈Bf there exists some input
w such that S(w) ∈T −1( ˆw), i.e., the image S(W) intersects
every feasible fiber. Condition (O2) further requires that, within
each intersected fiber, the chosen point is a minimizer of f
over that fiber. Hence, an OCO map cannot miss the global
optimum due to incomplete fiber coverage.
Proposition 4 (OCO maps eliminate optimality gaps). If S :
W →X satisfies the OCO condition, then
δ(P, S) = 0,
for any instance P.
Moreover, for any optimal solution x⋆∈X(P), there exists
an optimal solution ˆx ∈S(W(P)) such that T(ˆx) = T(x⋆).
Proof. Since TS is a surjection to Bf and T(x) ∈Bf, there
exists w ∈W such that TS(w) = T(x). By the condition O2
we have f(x) ≥f(S(w)). Consequently, S(w) ∈X(P; S) is
also an optimal solution. This finishes the proof.
As shown in Proposition 3, the serial schedule generation
scheme SSGS enjoys a stronger property than (O1), namely
T ◦SSGS = IdBf . This means that SSGS is an order-preserving
section of T on Bf. Consequently, SSGS establishes a one-to-
one correspondence between the feasible order space Bf and
the subset SSGS(Bf) ⊆X. Moreover, each fiber intersects this
subset at exactly one point:
T −1(w) ∩SSGS(Bf) = {SSGS(w)},
∀w ∈Bf,
as illustrated in Fig. 1(b). The next proposition further shows
that SSGS satisfies (O2). Therefore, SSGS selects a fiber-wise
optimal schedule over T −1(w) for each feasible schedule w.
Proposition 5. SSGS satisfies the OCO condition. Moreover,
T ◦SSGS = IdBf .
Proof. Given that the identity T ◦SSGS = IdBf follows from
Proposition 3, (O1) holds. It remains to prove (O2). Fix w ∈Bf
and let x = SSGS(w). Take any feasible schedule ˜x ∈X
such that T(˜x) = T(x). We show that f(x) ≤f(˜x). Write
x = (s(·), c(·)) and ˜x = (˜s(·), c(·)) (the pool assignment
coincides because T(x) = T(˜x)). We claim that for every task
v ∈V ,
s(v) ≤˜s(v),
(6)
which implies tend(v) ≤˜tend(v) and then f(x) ≤f(˜x). To
prove (6), consider the iteration of Algorithm 1 when v is
scheduled on pool c = c(v). Let ˜τ := ˜s(v). Since T(˜x) =
T(x), every task u on pool c with smaller within-pool rank
than v must satisfy ˜s(u) ≤˜τ. As such tasks are scheduled
before v by SSGS, and (by induction over the algorithm order)
their start times satisfy s(u) ≤˜s(u), their completion times
satisfy tend(u) ≤˜tend(u).
Now compare the resource usage on pool c at time ˜τ. If
a previously scheduled task u is running at time ˜τ in x (i.e.,
s(u) ≤˜τ < tend(u)), it holds that ˜s(u) ≤˜τ and ˜tend(u) ≥
tend(u) > ˜τ. u is then also running at time ˜τ in ˜x. Therefore,
the set of tasks running on pool c at time ˜τ under x is a
subset of that under ˜x, and thus the available resource under
x at ˜τ is component-wise no smaller than under ˜x. Since ˜x
is feasible and starts v at ˜τ, we have ρ(v) ≤λcur(c) at time
˜τ in the algorithmic state as well. Moreover, feasibility of ˜x
implies ˜τ ≥tdep(v) (all E-predecessors of v complete before
˜τ), and by construction ˜τ is no earlier than the current pool
time maintained by the algorithm. Hence, ˜τ is a feasible start
time for v when the algorithm schedules it. Since Algorithm 1
assigns v the earliest feasible start time on pool c, it follows
that s(v) ≤˜τ = ˜s(v), proving (6). Thus f(SSGS(w)) ≤f(˜x)
for all ˜x with T(˜x) = T(SSGS(w)), which is exactly (O2).
By combining Proposition 4 with Proposition 5, it follows
that SSGS consistently removes the optimality gap for any
instance. This provides a concrete reference principle for gap
elimination. In particular, any generation map whose reachable
schedules include the image of SSGS will inherently retain the
global optimum. This principle directly informs our subsequent
algorithm development.
IV. COMPATIBILITY AND GAP AWARE NEURAL
SCHEDULING
A. Overview: Two-Stage Single-Pass Scheduling
Guided by the order-space view, we design an optimality gap-
free scheduling algorithm suitable for learning. The analysis
therein reveals that the inherent gap of standard list scheduling
Slist stems from an order-covering failure where the realized
schedules miss feasible fibers containing optimal solutions. The
serial SGS SSGS eliminates this gap by allowing waiting to
ensure full fiber coverage. However, its strict order preservation


--- Page 8 ---
8
often introduces excessive delays that slow down the conver-
gence of learning. Our scheduling algorithm introduces waiting
in list scheduling by augmenting the action space with an
active skip action. The resulting generation map is essentially
an extension of Slist to the extended action sequence space. It
effectively enlarges the image of Slist to include the image of
SSGS, thus eliminating the optimality gap. Moreover, it allows
waiting in a controlled way so that learning with this generation
map will not be hampered.
In our constructive MDP view, the action selection is
governed by a parameterized policy. This policy is formulated
through task-pool scores and the skip score. Crucially, these
quantities are generated in a single-pass regime, where the
neural network is executed once per instance and is not re-
invoked during rollout. The single-pass design significantly
boosts the efficiency and scalability of our framework.
To capture the environmental heterogeneity, we propose a
weighted cross-attention network (WeCAN) to generate the
quantities required by the scheduling algorithm. This network is
compatibility aware through a weighted cross-attention (WeCA)
mechanism to explicitly model task-pool interactions. Notably,
this mechanism is size-agnostic, enabling a single trained
network to effectively tackle fluctuating environments with
a varying number of task types and resource pools.
Putting the above together yields a two-stage process. Stage I
performs a single-pass compatibility-aware network processing
for scoring, and Stage II applies a score-driven skip-extended
scheduling algorithm to obtain feasible schedules without
generation-induced optimality gaps. The overall framework
of our two-stage scheduling process is illustrated in Fig. 3.
B. Score-Driven Skip-Extended Scheduling Algorithm
Stage II turns the scores and skip parameters into a concrete
feasible schedule via Algorithm 2, which extends the classic
list-scheduling paradigm by allowing active skips. Algorithm 2
takes as input an instance P = (V, E, C, ρ, t, λ, Kacc), task-
pool action scores {u(v,c)}(v,c)∈A, and a skip-parameter vector
ψ from which a step-dependent skip score uskip(k; ψ) is com-
puted on the fly, and outputs a feasible schedule x = (s(·), c(·)).
In GREEDY mode, the output is deterministic for fixed (u, ψ);
in SAMPLING mode, the same inputs induce a distribution over
feasible schedules through randomized action selection. Under
the hood, Algorithm 2 implicitly induces a generation map Sd
defined on the extended action sequence space Ωaction, whose
formal definition is available in Appendix A.
Active skip and decreasing skip score. The key extension
beyond vanilla list scheduling is an active skip action askip
that advances the current time to the next completion event
even when ready tasks exist. Accordingly, we assign askip a
step-dependent score so that it can be selected together with
task-pool actions under the same score-to-policy rule:
qskip(k) = α exp

−γk/(2n)

+ β,
uskip(k) = log(qskip(k)),
(7)
where n = |V |, k is the number of decisions taken so far and
α, β, γ > 0 are positive skip parameters. For conciseness,
Algorithm 2 Score-driven skip-extended scheduling algorithm
1: Input: Instance P = (V, E, C, ρ, t, λ, Kacc); action scores
{u(v,c)}(v,c)∈A; skip-parameter set ψ; mode GREEDY /
SAMPLING.
2: Output: A feasible schedule x = (s(·), c(·)).
3: Initialize current time tcur ←0, unscheduled tasks U ←V ,
and pool states (available resources and running tasks).
4: while U ̸= ∅do
5:
Compute the ready set R at time tcur.
6:
Apply feasibility masks to scores {u(v,c)} according to
dependency/resource/compatibility constraints at tcur.
7:
Set the skip score uskip by the rule (7); mask askip iff
no task is currently running.
8:
Form the policy over ¯
A = A∪{askip} by (8), and select
an action at by the specified mode.
9:
if at = (v, c) ∈A then
10:
Start task v on pool c at time tcur: set s(v) ←tcur,
c(v) ←c.
11:
Update pool state and remove v from U.
12:
else
13:
Advance time to the next completion event and release
all tasks completing at the new tcur.
14:
end if
15:
Update dependency status and pool states.
16: end while
we write ψ := (α, β, γ). This decreasing functional form
serves to mitigate over-prioritization of the skip action and
thus eliminates the structural optimality gap without hampering
the learning process. A constant skip score is insufficient to
achieve this since the resulting reachable set may fail to contain
the image of SSGS for gap elimination. This issue is analyzed
in Section V-C. Re-evaluating the skip action via the neural
network at every decision step to obtain dynamic scores would
necessitate multiple forward passes. To reconcile with the
single-pass regime, we instead predict ψ once and compute
uskip(k; ψ) analytically during rollout.
Feasibility masking and action selection. At each decision
step, Algorithm 2 masks task-pool actions that are infeasible
under the current partial schedule, including violations of
(i) precedence constraints, (ii) pool capacity constraints, and
(iii) compatibility constraints. Incompatibility corresponds to
Kacc(v, c) = 0. The skip action is masked only when no task
is currently running (so that no completion event exists). Given
scores and masks Ma, we form a distribution over the extended
action set ¯
A = A ∪{askip} via
pθ(at = a) =
exp(ua + Ma)
P
˜a∈¯
A exp(u˜a + M˜a),
for all a ∈¯
A.
(8)
In GREEDY mode we select at ∈arg maxa∈¯
A(ua + Ma) to
obtain a deterministic schedule, whereas in SAMPLING mode
we sample actions for exploration during training.
Theorem 1. Let n = |V |. Algorithm 2 satisfies:
1) The rollout terminates in at most 2n decisions and outputs
a feasible schedule.


--- Page 9 ---
9
2) In SAMPLING mode, for any real-valued scores {u(v,c)}
and parameters ψ, the induced distribution assigns
strictly positive probability to every schedule in the image
X(P; SSGS) of the serial schedule generation scheme. In
particular, it assigns positive probability to (i) at least
one schedule realizing any given feasible order in Bf(P),
and (ii) at least one optimal schedule of P.
3) In GREEDY mode, for each instance P there exist scores
{u(v,c)} and parameters ψ such that Algorithm 2 outputs
an optimal schedule.
4) For the counterexample instance P0, statements (2)–(3)
fail if askip is removed.
Proof. We prove the four statements in order.
(1) Termination and feasibility. Feasibility follows from
the masking rule: at any time tcur, only actions that respect
precedence constraints in E, pool-capacity constraints, and
compatibility constraints are unmasked. Hence, any dispatched
action produces a feasible partial schedule. For termination,
since each dispatch action schedules exactly one previously
unscheduled task, at most n = |V | dispatches can occur. Given
that each skip action advances tcur to the next completion event
and at least one running task completes at that event, the total
number of skips is at most the number of task completions,
which is at most n. Therefore, the rollout terminates in at most
2n decisions and outputs a feasible schedule.
(2) Strictly positive probability for every schedule in
X(P; SSGS). Under the sampling policy in (8), for any step t,
every unmasked action has strictly positive probability since
exp(·) > 0 and the denominator is finite and positive. Therefore,
it suffices to show that for any schedule x ∈X(P; SSGS), there
exists a step-by-step feasible action sequence that realizes x
under Algorithm 2.
Fix any x ∈X(P; SSGS). By definition of the image, there
exists a feasible order ˆw ∈Bf(P) such that x = SSGS( ˆw).
Consider the SGS procedure (Algorithm 1) on ˆw that produces
x. This run induces an SGS trace: an ordered list of dispatched
tasks (v1, . . . , vn) with pool assignments c(vi) and start times
τi := sx(vi) (the start time of vi in x). A key property of SGS
is that each τi is an event time of the partial schedule built so
far: τi = 0 for the first dispatch(es), and whenever τi > 0 it
equals the completion time of at least one previously started
task (since SGS sets the start time as tdep or tcur(c), while both
being task completion time).
We now construct an action sequence for Algorithm 2 that
realizes x. Maintain an index i pointing to the next unscheduled
task in the trace. At any decision time tcur:
• If tcur = τi, dispatch (vi, c(vi)) and increment i. (If
multiple consecutive tasks in the trace share the same
start time τi = tcur, dispatch them in that trace order
before taking any skip.)
• If tcur < τi, take askip.
We claim every chosen action above is unmasked, and the
resulting rollout reproduces x.
Dispatch steps are unmasked. When tcur = τi and we
dispatch (vi, c(vi)), all precedence constraints of vi are satisfied
because x is feasible and starts vi at τi. Moreover, by induction
the partial schedule constructed by Algorithm 2 matches x
on already dispatched tasks, then the set of running tasks on
each pool at time τi (also the remaining pool capacity and
compatibility status) coincides with that in x. Since x starts
vi at τi on pool c(vi), the resource/compatibility masks also
allow (vi, c(vi)). Thus, (vi, c(vi)) is unmasked.
Skip steps are unmasked and do not overshoot τi. When
tcur < τi, by the event-time property of SGS, the next start time
τi cannot be strictly after tcur while having no running task on
every pool; otherwise the system would be idle and SGS would
be able to start the next trace task at tcur, contradicting τi >
tcur. Hence, at least one task is running and askip is unmasked.
Furthermore, askip advances tcur to the next completion event
among currently running tasks, which is the next event time of
the (matching) partial schedule and cannot exceed the next SGS
dispatch time τi. Repeating skip finitely many times reaches
tcur = τi.
Combining the two cases, the above construction yields a
well-defined rollout that realizes x, and every chosen action
is unmasked. Since unmasked actions have strictly positive
sampling probability under (8), the probability of this rollout
(also for generating x) is strictly positive. This proves that,
in SAMPLING mode, the induced distribution assigns strictly
positive probability to every x ∈X(P; SSGS).
The two stated consequences follow immediately: (i) for
any feasible order ˆw ∈Bf(P), the schedule SSGS( ˆw) lies in
the image, then has positive probability; and (ii) by the OCO
property of SSGS there exists at least one optimal schedule in
X(P; SSGS), which also has positive probability.
(3) Existence of scores yielding an optimal schedule in
GREEDY mode. Fix the optimal schedule ˆx ∈Im(SSGS)
constructed above, and fix a feasible targeted rollout ω⋆=
(a1, . . . , aN) that realizes ˆx under Algorithm 2, where each
at is unmasked at its step. We construct static task–pool
scores {u(v,c)} and skip parameters ψ such that GREEDY
mode reproduces ω⋆and therefore outputs ˆx.
Choose ψ = (α, β, γ) with α > 0 and γ > 0 so that the
skip score uskip(t) defined in (7) is strictly decreasing for
t = 1, . . . , N. Set
∆:=
min
1≤t≤N−1
 uskip(t) −uskip(t + 1)

> 0,
ε := ∆/4.
Define static task–pool scores as follows. For every dispatch
step t with at = (vt, ct) ∈A, set u(vt,ct) := uskip(t)+2ε. For
every other task–pool pair (v, c) ∈A that does not appear as
a dispatch action in ω⋆, set u(v,c) := uskip(N) −2ε. We claim
that under these scores, GREEDY mode selects at at each step
t. Proceed by induction on t. Assume the first t −1 decisions
coincide with ω⋆; then the algorithm is in the same state as
the targeted rollout at step t. Hence, at is unmasked and the
set of unmasked actions is identical. Consider two cases.
If at = askip, then for any unmasked dispatch action (v, c),
either (v, c) appears as a dispatch action in ω⋆at some later
index j > t, in which case
u(v,c) = uskip(j)+2ε ≤uskip(t+1)+2ε < uskip(t) = uskip(t),
where the strict inequality follows from uskip(t) −uskip(t +
1) ≥∆> 2ε, or (v, c) never appears in ω⋆, in which case
u(v,c) = uskip(N)−2ε < uskip(t). Therefore, askip has strictly


--- Page 10 ---
10
Fig. 3. The two-stage framework of our architecture. The first stage involves once network processing by our efficient and adaptive weighted cross-attention
architecture. It embeds the problem attribution and provides scores and coefficients for the second stage. The second stage employs a generation map extended
from list scheduling. This extension restores surjectivity onto the schedule order space and ensures the inclusion of an optimal solution in the image of the
generation map, without significantly slowing down training convergence.
larger score than any other unmasked action and is selected
by GREEDY mode.
If at = (vt, ct) ∈A, then u(vt,ct) = uskip(t)+2ε > uskip(t),
so it beats askip. For any other unmasked dispatch action (v, c),
either it appears later in ω⋆at some j > t, in which case
u(v,c) = uskip(j) + 2ε < uskip(t) + 2ε = u(vt,ct), or it never
appears in ω⋆, in which case u(v,c) = uskip(N)−2ε < u(vt,ct).
Thus, (vt, ct) has strictly largest score among unmasked actions
and is selected by GREEDY mode.
In both cases, GREEDY selects at, completing the induction.
Hence, GREEDY reproduces the entire rollout ω⋆and outputs
ˆx, which is optimal.
(4) Failure without the skip action on P0. Removing askip
reduces Algorithm 2 to the standard list-scheduling realization
rule. For the counterexample instance P0, list scheduling cannot
reach any optimal schedule. Consequently, statements (2)–(3)
fail on P0 without skip.
This completes the proof.
C. Compatibility-Aware WeCAN Architecture
In Stage I, WeCAN generates the scores and skip parameters
required by Algorithm 2. This network adopts a standard
encoder-decoder architecture. The encoder encodes the schedul-
ing problem into embeddings, and the decoder converts these
embeddings into the scores and skip parameters that drive the
scheduling procedure. We now elaborate on the architecture
of the encoder and decoder, respectively.
The encoder is designed to extract expressive embeddings
from the heterogeneous scheduling problem, by processing
task-resource interactions and the DAG structure. Specifi-
cally, each task node v is characterized by a feature vector
(t(v), ρ(v)) representing its processing time and resource
demands, while each resource pool c is defined by its capacity
vector λ(c). These raw features are first turned into two
sets of initial embeddings, i.e., task embeddings {h(0)
v }v∈V
and pool embeddings {z(0)
c }c∈C, through two separate multi-
layer perceptrons (MLPs). The initial embeddings capture only
isolated characteristics of tasks and pools, failing to capture
complicated environmental heterogeneity and intricate task
dependencies inherent in the problem. To resolve the former,
we propose the WeCA mechanism to synthesize heterogeneous
environmental information, especially the varying task-resource
compatibilities. Notably, this mechanism remains adaptable
regarding the number of task types and resource pools, without
changing the network architecture. To address the latter, a
longest directed distance-based GNN is applied to encode
the intricate precedence dependencies encompassed within the
DAG structure. Below we present more details about these two
main components in our encoder.
WeCA. The WeCA layer executes weighted message passing
through a gating mechanism, enabling compatibility-aware
interactions between tasks and resource pools. We focus here
on the directional flow from resource pools to tasks. The
reverse direction is defined symmetrically using the transposed
compatibility matrix KT
acc. Let H ∈R|V |×d and Z ∈R|C|×d
denote the stacked embedding matrices for tasks and resource
pools, respectively. The WeCA operation is formalized as:
Q = HW Q, K = ZW K, V = ZW V ,
WeCA(H, Z, Kacc) :=

softmax
QKT
√
d

⊙Kacc

V .
In practice, the multi-head and skip-connection techniques are
also incorporated, as in the vanilla Transformer architecture
[45], to enhance the expressive power and training stability.
By integrating the compatibility coefficients directly into
the attention weights, the WeCA mechanism allows each
task to selectively attend to pools that are both feasible
and advantageous under heterogeneous execution conditions.
Specifically, this mechanism evaluates potential pools for each
task and aggregates their features, weighted by compatibility.
Recall that task v cannot run on pool c if and only if
Kacc(v, c) = 0. Thus, incompatible pool assignments are
inherently masked in the above attention calculation. Moreover,
a larger Kacc(v, c) indicates that task v runs faster on pool
c, indicating better compatibility. Therefore, for each task,
the WeCA layer effectively gathers and integrates information
primarily from its most compatible pools. Crucially, unlike
approaches relying on fixed-size embeddings, this mechanism
maintains adaptability without imposing fixed dimensionality
constraints on the network architecture. This enables the


--- Page 11 ---
11
framework to evaluate context-dependent resource capacity
for each task more realistically within the heterogeneous
environment.
A critical design choice in WeCA is applying the com-
patibility coefficient matrix as a multiplicative gating factor
outside the softmax normalization, rather than as an additive
logarithmic attention bias within it. For comparison, an inside
variant would be formulated as:
WeCAinside(H, Z, Kacc) = softmax
QKT
√
d
+ log Kacc

V ,
where log Kacc serves as the bias term. We opt for the
former specifically to preserve information regarding the overall
compatibility degree of tasks in the heterogeneous scheduling
scenario. Consider a scenario of two pools with identical
capacity and two tasks v1, v2 with the same attribute. Suppose
v1 is compatible with only one pool while v2 is compatible
with both pools. Despite the identical attribute, these tasks
differ significantly in their environmental compatibility. If
the inside placement were taken, the normalization effect
could lead to the same embeddings for both tasks, failing to
distinguish their different compatibility profiles. Conversely, the
outside placement better reflects a task’s overall compatibility
within the environment, resulting in a more accurate and
distinguishable embedding.
LDDGNN. To encode precedence information in DAGs,
we use an attention-based GNN, as standard message-passing
GNNs often struggle to capture long-range directed dependen-
cies. Our key design choice is to parameterize attention by
the longest directed distance (LDD) de(v, w). This metric is
positive when v reaches w and negative when w reaches v,
with the magnitude being the length of the longest directed
path. For the case without a directed path, the LDD is classified
as incomparable (+∞) or disconnected (−∞) according to
connectivity in the undirected graph. The motivation is that
|de(v, w)| provides a simple proxy for dependency depth in the
DAG. Among multiple directed connections, the longest path
best distinguishes the levels of precedence separation, which is
crucial for modeling delay propagation along critical paths. In
the spirit of Graphormer [46] and Topoformer [32], we inject
LDD into attention through an LDD-dependent bias and mask.
Concretely, in head j we modify the attention logit as
αj
v,w = ⟨qj
v, kj
w⟩
√
d
+ bde(v,w) + M j
v,w,
where bde(v,w) is a learnable scalar indexed by de(v, w) and
M j
v,w is an attention mask. Precise definitions of the LDD, the
bias term, and the attention mask are provided in Appendix
F.1. The remaining computations follow a standard multi-
head attention block. This formulation enables each head to
selectively attend to structurally relevant relations, such as
ancestors or descendants within a desired depth range.
In the full encoder, task embeddings are first updated by one
WeCA layer and a LDDGNN. The encoder then alternately
updates the task embeddings and the pool embeddings using
WeCA layers, so that information propagates back and forth
between tasks and pools.
Given the final task embeddings {h(L)
v
}v∈V
and pool
embeddings {z(L)
c
}c∈C from the encoder, the decoder then
generates task-pool action scores and skip parameters as follows.
The score of each task-pool pair (v, c) is calculated through a
weighted inner product:
u(v,c) = (W Q
s h(L)
v
)T(W K
s z(L)
c
) + log(Kacc(v, c)).
In addition, skip parameters ψ = MLP

1
|V |
P
v∈V hv

are
derived from the average task embedding with an MLP.
D. Learning with a parameterized probabilistic model
Our framework learns a parameterized probabilistic model
to minimize the expected makespan of realized schedules
over the distribution of problem instances. Specifically, the
probabilistic model pθ(ω|P) is defined in (2) with the action
policy pθ(at|st, P) specified in (8). Crucially, this action
policy is formulated through scores and skip parameters
that are computed once by the network from the instance
P without re-encoding the evolving state st. This single-
pass parameterization substantially improves efficiency and
scalability, without sacrificing the solution quality, which is
empirically demonstrated in Appendix B.
To learn the probabilistic model over action sequences, we
use a reinforcement learning formulation in which each sampled
sequence is evaluated by the makespan of its realized schedule.
Let ω denote an action sequence sampled from pθ(· | P) and
let Sd(ω) be the schedule realized by our generation map. The
sampling and realization processes are jointly accomplished by
Algorithm 2. By denoting ˆf(ω) := f
 Sd(ω)

, the optimization
problem for learning is formulated as:
min
θ
L(θ) = EP
h
Eω∼pθ(·|P)
 ˆf(ω)
i
.
The gradient of L(θ) is given by
∇L(θ) = EP
h
Eω∼pθ(·|P)
h
( ˆf(ω) −b(P)) ∇θ log pθ(ω | P)
ii
.
Here b(P) is a baseline, e.g., the instance-wise average
makespan, to reduce the variance. We then solve this problem
using the policy gradient algorithms in RL.
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
All experiments are conducted on an internal cluster with
NVIDIA Tesla A100 (80 GB), 4×Intel Xeon Silver 4310
2.10GHz (12 cores) and 192GB memory.
Datasets. i) TPC-H dataset: a dataset that comprises real-
world DAG tasks derived from industrial queries. We use the
version sorted by [27] and augment it with randomly generated
memory demands and additional task types, where each type is
associated with a set of compatibility coefficients. The problems
in TPC-H-30, TPC-H-50, and TPC-H-100 contain 275, 459,
and 918 tasks on average. ii) computation graph dataset:
a synthetic dataset generated using approaches from [19],
comprising computation graphs for neural networks arising in
ML compilers, including layer graphs, Erd˝os-Rényi graphs,
and stochastic block model graphs. Each problem contains


--- Page 12 ---
12
TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS WITH STANDARD DEVIATION AMONG RANDOM SEED.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
SFT
27404
0.23
49172
0.78
84986
3.08
MOPNR
25052
0.30
43545
0.99
77362
3.34
CP
23869
0.29
41597
0.90
74364
3.35
HEFT
23177
0.18
39315
0.54
70137
1.86
Tetris
23170
0.21
38654
0.62
71296
2.13
PEFT
22930
0.18
39881
0.46
69831
1.43
IPPTS
21389
0.11
37164
0.34
68387
1.33
PPO-BiHyb
19788
33.07
35085
59.48
66436
179.14
One-Shot-S(256)
20399 ± 181
2.26
35561 ± 108
4.16
66173 ± 180
9.85
ScheduleNet-S(256)
21474 ± 70
2.02
36607 ± 69
4.04
69644 ± 186
9.43
HGN-Two-Stage-S(256)
21068 ± 111
2.08
37068 ± 215
4.11
69670 ± 148
9.05
WeCAN-Greedy
19578
0.15
33428
0.50
62587
1.72
WeCAN-S(64)
19053 ± 28
1.54
32912 ± 40
2.86
61662 ± 118
5.26
WeCAN-S(256)
18964 ± 10
2.43
32814 ± 47
4.39
61373 ± 28
10.43
TABLE II
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON COMPUTATION GRAPH DATASETS WITH 500 TASKS.
Erd˝os-Rényi
Layer Graphs
Stochastic Block
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
SFT
13317
0.81
16158
0.34
14408
0.53
MOPNR
12771
1.07
14714
0.38
13148
0.68
Tetris
13084
0.52
14271
0.44
13666
0.64
CP
12457
1.08
14797
0.40
13388
0.74
PEFT
11311
0.45
12425
0.71
11438
0.56
IPPTS
11679
0.57
16710
0.64
12490
0.49
HEFT
11098
0.55
12428
0.75
11260
0.57
PPO-BiHyb
10795
65.51
11883
73.7
10885
73.7
One-Shot-S(256)
11071 ± 76
4.45
12277 ± 49
3.83
11377 ± 40
4.00
ScheduleNet-S(256)
11355 ± 32
4.16
11923 ± 41
4.04
11076 ± 38
4.06
HGN-Two-Stage-S(256)
11434 ± 39
4.05
12316 ± 62
3.91
11712 ± 55
3.95
WeCAN-Greedy
10270
0.57
11173
0.26
10539
0.41
WeCAN-S(64)
10115 ± 10
3.21
10862 ± 29
3.07
10074 ± 18
3.06
WeCAN-S(256)
10083 ± 13
4.94
10752 ± 27
4.30
10019 ± 12
4.58
500 tasks. For both datasets, tasks are scheduled on three
heterogeneous resource pools. The heterogeneity substantially
increases the problem size. Additional dataset details and size
statistics are provided in Appendix C.
Baselines. We compare our method with the following
baselines. i) Heuristic baselines: list scheduling algorithms,
including critical path (CP), shortest first task (SFT), and most
operations remaining (MOPNR); Tetris [6], a dynamic list
scheduling heuristic for multi-resource pool scheduling; HEFT
[7], PEFT [47] and IPPTS [48], heterogeneous scheduling
algorithms; For the first four list scheduling algorithms, we
apply three pool-selection rules and select the one with the
best makespan. ii) Neural baselines: PPO-BiHyb [27], a bi-
level neural scheduler with beam search, which involves multi-
round neural network processing; One-Shot [19], a one-shot
neural scheduler generating schedules sequentially based on list
scheduling; ScheduleNet [41] and HGN-Two-Stage [18], two
HGNN based methods for heterogeneous graph learning. Since
ScheduleNet and HGN-Two-Stage are not designed for DAG
scheduling, we adapt them to our setting. The implementation
details for these baselines are available in Appendix D.
Our method is evaluated in two modes: greedy, which
selects actions with the highest probability pθ and sampling
(S(n)), which generates n samples based on pθ within our
accelerated environment and selects the schedule with the
minimum makespan. We report the makespan, running time
or relative improvement over the best heuristic baseline, with
further experimental details provided in Appendix E.
B. Main Benchmark Results
On the TPC-H dataset, WeCAN demonstrates up to 11.7%
makespan improvement over the best heuristic and 7.3% over
the best neural baseline, with superior performance in instances
with 300∼500 nodes and robust results for 1,000 nodes (see
Table I). Additionally, our results show that WeCAN excels at
learning robust scheduling policies in complex heterogeneous
environments, as evidenced by its performance across diverse
TPC-H instances. Owing to single-pass neural processing,
WeCAN-greedy achieves lower running time than PPO-BiHyb
and comparable running time to One-Shot-greedy, ScheduleNet,
HGN-Two-Stage and heuristic baselines, while delivering
superior makespan. This similarity in running time arises
because, in heterogeneous environments, the generation map’s
runtime dominates for both WeCAN and One-Shot, approaching
the minimum time required to generate a schedule.


--- Page 13 ---
13
Fig. 4. Ablation study results of the skip action design. (a-b) Results of different skip action score formulations on TPC-H-30 and TPC-H-50 datasets
with heavy tasks, where the improvement rate and the error bars of standard variation are labeled. “NoSkip” corresponds to the variant without skip action.
“ConstSkip” corresponds to the variant with constant-score skip action. “DecrSkip” corresponds to results with our decreasing-score skip action. (c) Relative
improvement of enabling the skip action in single-pass settings across scenarios with varying percentages of heavy tasks.
TABLE III
FULL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS WITH HEAVY TASKS.
TPC-H-30-heavy
TPC-H-50-heavy
Makespan
Improvement
Makespan
Improvement
Tetris
29324
-14.11%
44296
-16.46%
CP
28144
-9.52%
41378
-8.79%
HEFT
26856
-4.51%
39825
-4.71%
PEFT
28260
-9.97%
39928
-4.98%
IPPTS
25697
0.00%
38034
0.00%
PPO-BiHyb
24383
5.11%
36958
2.83%
OneShot-S(256)
27425 ± 39
-6.72 ± 0.15%
39826 ± 33
-4.71 ± 0.09%
WeCAN-S(256)
24099 ± 49
6.22 ± 0.19%
35695 ± 32
6.15 ± 0.08%
In the computation graph dataset, WeCAN demonstrates up
to 13.5% makespan improvement over the best heuristic and
9.5% percent over the best neural baseline, with superior per-
formance across different types of graphs (see Table II). Given
the prevalence of heterogeneous resource environments in ML
compilers, our results demonstrate WeCAN’s applicability for
efficient scheduling in neural network compilation.
C. Ablation on Skip Design
We conduct experiments to evaluate the skip-action mech-
anism on TPC-H with “heavy tasks” characterized by high
resource demand and long processing time. This scenario is
prevalent in contemporary cloud computing platforms that
provide heterogeneous resources for diverse user requirements.
In such environments, a portion of resource-intensive tasks,
such as the training of large language models, coexist with
standard computational workloads. These heavy tasks can
dominate contention and amplify scheduling suboptimality.
To emulate this setting, we modify the TPC-H benchmark
by identifying tasks with substantial execution durations and
increasing their resource demands. The results are presented
in Table III and Fig. 4 (a-b). It can be seen that the SGS-
like heuristics HEFT and IPPTS achieve smaller makespan
than the best list scheduling approach (CP). This validates the
inherent optimality gap of list scheduling. Moreover, WeCAN
with a decreasing skip score achieves lower makespan than its
non-skip variant, its constant-skip variant, and all competing
baselines. These findings verify the effectiveness of the skip
action and the necessity of its decreasing formulation.
A non-decreasing skip score does not guarantee order
coverage. When uskip(k) is non-decreasing, once some ready
task has a score below uskip(k), it can remain suppressed
until the skip action is masked, which systematically induces
unnecessary idling and may exclude desirable orders. The
counterexample instance P0 (Fig. 2(a)) illustrates this failure
mode. Even though a skip is introduced to enable the optimal
schedule, a non-decreasing skip score can still force additional
idle periods and yield a worse schedule (Fig. 5), showing that
the extended image may still miss the optimum and thus the
optimality gap is not consistently eliminated.
To further validate the skip design across varying workload
intensities, we construct an additional benchmark by randomly
increasing the resource demands and extending the processing
times of a specified fraction of tasks. The results in Fig. 4 (c)
reveal that the skip action benefits more as the percentage
of heavy tasks increases. This correlation reveals that the
optimality gap is positively correlated with the ratio of heavy
tasks. Consequently, skip-extended scheduling is especially
important when the ratio of heavy tasks is notably large.
Fig. 5. The extension by introducing skip action with a constant score does
not include optimal solution in its image for P0. It can not consistently close
the optimality gap.
D. Ablation on WeCAN Architecture
We conduct ablation experiments to assess the contributions
of the WeCA layers and the LDDGNN module in WeCAN.
For WeCA layers, we test the inside variant (WeCA-inside),
removing the initial task-only WeCA layer while keeping the


--- Page 14 ---
14
TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS WITH DIFFERENT ARCHITECTURES.
TPC-H-30
TPC-H-50
Makespan
Improvement
Makespan
Improvement
IPPTS
21389
0.0%
37164
0.0%
WeCA + LDDGNN
19908 ± 48
6.92 ± 0.22%
34260 ± 52
7.81 ± 0.14%
WeCA-inside + LDDGNN
20729 ± 55
3.09 ± 0.26%
34980 ± 30
5.88 ± 0.08%
WeCA-alt + LDDGNN
20234 ± 41
5.40 ± 0.19%
34815 ± 156
6.32 ± 0.42%
WeCA-inside-alt + LDDGNN
21981 ± 195
-2.77 ± 0.91%
36984 ± 72
0.48 ± 0.19%
No-WeCA + LDDGNN
23066 ± 97
-7.84 ± 0.45%
40308 ± 358
-8.46 ± 0.96%
WeCA + GAT (forward)
20747 ± 21
3.00 ± 0.10%
35224 ± 14
5.22 ± 0.04%
WeCA + GAT (bidirection)
20873 ± 7
2.41 ± 0.03%
35177 ± 20
5.35 ± 0.05%
Fig. 6. Training results with different generation maps and their explanation by toy illustration. (a) Training loss on the TPC-H-30 dataset, serial schedule
generation scheme SSGS exhibits significantly slower convergence and inferior performance compared to our generation map Sd. (b) The toy illustration for
landscape by SSGS. The flat basins inside black lines represent the image of list scheduling. The extension introduces extra regions containing the optimal
solution and the numerous extra mountains corresponding to worse solutions. This irregular mixed structure slows down the convergence. (c) The toy illustration
for landscape by Sd. The extended spaces brings worse solutions but the worst solutions are mostly far away in the axis of α while the optimal solutions are
usually near the boarder line. This regular structure stabilizes and accelerates the convergence.
alternating updates (WeCA-alt), its inside counterpart (WeCA-
inside-alt), and removing all WeCA layers (No-WeCA). For
LDDGNN, we compare a standard GAT (GAT forward) and
a bidirectional GAT (GAT bidirection). All network variants
share the same layer count and hidden dimensions, with fewer
WeCA layers offset by additional LDDGNN layers. We train
and test each model on TPC-H-30 and TPC-H-50. For each of
10 test problems, we generate 256 samples, computing mean
makespan and relative improvement to the best heuristic, IPPTS.
Results in Table IV show that modifying or removing either
component increases the makespan. In particular, removing
WeCA layers leads to a clear performance degradation, which
highlights the important role of WeCA in modeling task and
pool interactions. Both GAT variants yield higher makespan
than LDDGNN, demonstrating the superiority of LDDGNN.
E. Learning under Different Generation Maps
Training curves under the serial SGS SSGS and our generation
map Sd on the TPC-H-30 benchmark are depicted in Fig. 6
(a). It can be seen that SSGS converges noticeably slower and
reaches a worse final loss level.
Why SSGS slows down learning. Replacing list scheduling
Slist with SSGS enlarges the image by admitting more feasible
schedules, but this expansion is too unconstrained for learning.
To preserve the schedule order, SSGS permits arbitrary idle
time before launching the next task when resources are not yet
sufficient. As a result, many inferior schedules are introduced
across fibers in an irregular manner (Fig. 6 (b)), which makes
policy optimization more difficult and slows down convergence.
Why Sd is a milder extension. In contrast, the poor schedules
introduced by Sd predominantly arise from excessive skips,
which correspond to large (α, β) in the skip-score formula.
Hence, the undesirable region is more structured and concen-
trated, rather than being scattered throughout the feasible order
space as in SSGS. The toy landscape illustration in Fig. 6 (c)
visualizes this distinction. Sd enlarges the image while keeping
the worst solutions far away along the skip-parameter axes, so
learning can focus on the reachable set of Slist and its nearby
boundary where performance improvements are most likely
to occur. This design retains the ability to include optimal
schedules while avoiding a substantial slowdown in training.
F. Generalization results
To evaluate the cross-size generalization ability of WeCAN
to large-scale problems, we present the experimental results on
TPC-H-150 (≈1500 tasks) and TPC-H-200 (≈2000 tasks) in
Table V. The model is trained on TPC-H-30 with the original
3 pool environment. Our results show that our WeCAN still
outperforms the best heuristics by about 7%−10% and the best
learning methods by about 5%, while remaining comparable
running time in greedy mode. These results indicate that
WeCAN scales favorably to large scale problems.
Furthermore, we conduct experiments in varying resource
environments to evaluate generalization from a fixed training
environment. Fig. 7 shows that our WeCAN remains robust
under varying fluctuations in the number and capacities of
resource pools as well as the pool and task types that dictate
the compatibility coefficients. WeCAN consistently outperforms
OneShot and heuristic baselines across all evaluation scenarios.
This validates that WeCAN effectively utilizes the environment
feature while remaining robust and scalable for environment
sizes. Details of the result can be found in Appendix E.


--- Page 15 ---
15
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
0
5
10
15
WeCAN-S(256)
OneShot-S(256)
Fig. 7. Evaluations of models on TPC-H with different environment fluctuations under fixed training conditions. The percent of improvement over best
heuristics are labeled.
TABLE V
FULL GENERALIZATION RESULTS ON LARGE-SCALE TPC-H DATASETS
3 pools
12 pools
TPC-H-150
TPC-H-200
TPC-H-150
TPC-H-200
Makespan
Improvement
Time
Makespan
Improvement
Time
Makespan
Improvement
Time
Makespan
Improvement
Time
Tetris
109079
-2.54%
3.65
140438
-2.52%
6.09
30552
-16.54%
4.80
37737
-11.18%
8.51
HEFT
108285
-1.80%
3.26
139094
-1.53%
4.98
27415
-4.58%
3.11
34834
-2.63%
5.21
PEFT
108490
-1.99%
3.05
140154
-2.31%
5.04
27943
-6.59%
3.60
35539
-4.71%
4.98
IPPTS
106372
0.00%
2.74
136992
0.00%
4.80
26215
0.00%
5.75
33942
0.00%
4.88
PPO-BiHyb
102770
3.39%
447.15
134341
1.94%
740.21
25607
2.32%
465.01
33358
1.72%
700.26
One-Shot-S(256) 101690 ± 408
4.40 ± 0.38%
15.10
131941 ± 255 3.69 ± 0.19%
23.50
25679 ± 46 2.04 ± 0.18%
16.83
33016 ± 71 2.73 ± 0.21%
26.15
WeCAN-Greedy
96225
9.54%
2.65
124345
9.23%
4.97
24761
5.55%
3.48
31864
6.12%
6.09
WeCAN-S(256)
95491 ± 36
10.23 ± 0.03%
19.10
124140 ± 54
9.38 ± 0.04%
29.70
24338 ± 12 7.16 ± 0.05%
18.36
31422 ± 21 7.42 ± 0.06%
30.40
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented WeCAN, an end-to-end reinforce-
ment learning framework for heterogeneous DAG scheduling
with task–pool compatibility coefficients under the single-
pass inference regime. We also developed an order-space
analysis that characterizes the restricted reachable set induced
by a generation map and formalizes the resulting generation-
induced optimality gap. The analysis further provides ex-
plicit sufficient conditions for gap elimination. Guided by
this principle, WeCAN combines a size-agnostic weighted
cross-attention encoder modeling compatibility-gated task–pool
interactions, and a skip-extended generation map using an
analytically parameterized decreasing skip rule. The generation
map improves order reachability while preserving single-pass
efficiency without repeated network calls. Empirical results on
computation graphs and real-world TPC-H DAGs demonstrate
that WeCAN improves makespan over baselines with inference
time comparable to classical heuristics. An interesting direction
for future work is to extend the same order-space analysis and
single-pass realization principles to more complex scenarios,
such as stochastic processing times or communication-aware
heterogeneous scheduling.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Mao, M. Schwarzkopf, S. B. Venkatakrishnan, Z. Meng, and
M. Alizadeh, “Learning scheduling algorithms for data processing
clusters,” in Proceedings of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data
Communication, ser. SIGCOMM ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 270–288.
[2] L. Lin, L. Pan, and S. Liu, “SpotDAG: An RL-based algorithm for
DAG workflow scheduling in heterogeneous cloud environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 2904–2917,
2024.
[3] J. Hartmanis, “Computers and intractability: A guide to the theory of
NP-Completeness (Michael R. Garey and David S. Johnson),” SIAM
Review, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 90–91, 1982.
[4] R. L. Graham, “Bounds on multiprocessing timing anomalies,” SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 416–429, 1969.
[5] R. Haupt, “A survey of priority rule-based scheduling,” Operations-
Research-Spektrum, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 3–16, Mar 1989.
[6] R. Grandl, G. Ananthanarayanan, S. Kandula, S. Rao, and A. Akella,
“Multi-resource packing for cluster schedulers,” in Proceedings of the
2014 ACM Conference on SIGCOMM, ser. SIGCOMM ’14.
New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2014, p. 455–466.
[7] H. Topcuoglu, S. Hariri, and M.-Y. Wu, “Performance-effective and
low-complexity task scheduling for heterogeneous computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp.
260–274, 2002.
[8] W. Kool, H. van Hoof, and M. Welling, “Attention, learn to solve routing
problems!” in International Conference on Learning Representations,
2019.
[9] Y.-D. Kwon, J. Choo, B. Kim, I. Yoon, Y. Gwon, and S. Min, “POMO:
Policy optimization with multiple optima for reinforcement learning,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 21 188–
21 198, 2020.
[10] T. Li, H. Zou, J. Wu, and Z. Wen, “LMask: Learn to solve constrained
routing problems with lazy masking,” in The Fourteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[11] J. Zhou, Z. Cao, Y. Wu, W. Song, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, and C. Xu,


--- Page 16 ---
16
“MVMoE: Multi-task vehicle routing solver with mixture-of-experts,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[12] C. Liu, Z. Jiang, R. Wang, L. Huang, P. Lu, and J. Yan, “Revocable
deep reinforcement learning with affinity regularization for outlier-robust
graph matching,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[13] Y. Ma, Z. Cao, and Y. M. Chee, “Learning to search feasible and infeasible
regions of routing problems with flexible neural k-opt,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[14] Q. Hou, J. Yang, Y. Su, X. Wang, and Y. Deng, “Generalize learned
heuristics to solve large-scale vehicle routing problems in real-time,”
in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023.
[15] H. Ye, J. Wang, H. Liang, Z. Cao, Y. Li, and F. Li, “GLOP: Learning
global partition and local construction for solving large-scale routing
problems in real-time,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38, no. 18, 2024, pp. 20 284–20 292.
[16] J. J. Hopfield and D. W. Tank, “"Neural" computation of decisions in
optimization problems,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 52, no. 3, p. 141–152, Jul.
1985.
[17] C. Zhang, W. Song, Z. Cao, J. Zhang, P. S. Tan, and X. Chi, “Learning
to dispatch for job shop scheduling via deep reinforcement learning,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle,
M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33.
Curran
Associates, Inc., 2020, pp. 1621–1632.
[18] W. Song, X. Chen, Q. Li, and Z. Cao, “Flexible job-shop scheduling
via graph neural network and deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1600–1610,
2023.
[19] W. Jeon, M. Gagrani, B. Bartan, W. W. Zeng, H. Teague, P. Zappi, and
C. Lott, “Neural DAG scheduling via one-shot priority sampling,” in The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[20] Q. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, and Y. Cheng, “Adaptive DAG tasks scheduling
with deep reinforcement learning,” in Algorithms and Architectures
for Parallel Processing, J. Vaidya and J. Li, Eds.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 477–490.
[21] N. Grinsztajn, O. Beaumont, E. Jeannot, and P. Preux, “READYS: A
reinforcement learning based strategy for heterogeneous dynamic schedul-
ing,” in 2021 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing
(CLUSTER), 2021, pp. 70–81.
[22] Y. Zhou, X. Li, J. Luo, M. Yuan, J. Zeng, and J. Yao, “Learning to
optimize DAG scheduling in heterogeneous environment,” in 2022 23rd
IEEE International Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM),
2022, pp. 137–146.
[23] A. Zhadan, A. Allahverdyan, I. Kondratov, V. Mikheev, O. Petrosian,
A. Romanovskii, and V. Kharin, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning-
based adaptive heterogeneous DAG scheduling,” ACM Trans. Intell. Syst.
Technol., vol. 14, no. 5, Oct. 2023.
[24] Z. Wang, W. Zhan, H. Duan, G. Min, and H. Huang, “Deep reinforce-
ment learning-based continuous workflows scheduling in heterogeneous
environments,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, pp. 1–1, 2025.
[25] H. Mao, M. Alizadeh, I. Menache, and S. Kandula, “Resource manage-
ment with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM
Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, ser. HotNets ’16.
New York, NY,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2016, p. 50–56.
[26] Y. Zhou, S. Roy, A. Abdolrashidi, D. Wong, P. Ma, Q. Xu, H. Liu,
P. Phothilimtha, S. Wang, A. Goldie, A. Mirhoseini, and J. Laudon,
“Transferable graph optimizers for ML compilers,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M. Ranzato, R. Hadsell,
M. Balcan, and H. Lin, Eds., vol. 33.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2020,
pp. 13 844–13 855.
[27] R. Wang, Z. Hua, G. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Yan, F. Qi, S. Yang, J. Zhou,
and X. Yang, “A bi-level framework for learning to solve combinatorial
optimization on graphs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W.
Vaughan, Eds., vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 21 453–21 466.
[28] S. S. Banerjee, S. Jha, Z. T. Kalbarczyk, and R. K. Iyer, “Inductive-bias-
driven reinforcement learning for efficient schedules in heterogeneous
clusters,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ser. ICML’20.
JMLR.org, 2020.
[29] J. Park, J. Chun, S. H. Kim, Y. Kim, and J. P. and, “Learning to schedule
job-shop problems: representation and policy learning using graph neural
network and reinforcement learning,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 3360–3377, 2021.
[30] A. Paliwal, F. Gimeno, V. Nair, Y. Li, M. Lubin, P. Kohli, and O. Vinyals,
“Reinforced genetic algorithm learning for optimizing computation graphs,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.
[31] P. Sun, Z. Guo, J. Wang, J. Li, J. Lan, and Y. Hu, “DeepWeave:
accelerating job completion time with deep reinforcement learning-based
coflow scheduling,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, ser. IJCAI’20, 2021.
[32] M. Gagrani, C. Rainone, Y. Yang, H. Teague, W. Jeon, R. Bondesan,
H. van Hoof, C. Lott, W. Zeng, and P. Zappi, “Neural topological ordering
for computation graphs,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 35.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2022, pp. 17 327–17 339.
[33] M. T. Islam, S. Karunasekera, and R. Buyya, “Performance and cost-
efficient spark job scheduling based on deep reinforcement learning
in cloud computing environments,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems, vol. 33, no. 7, pp. 1695–1710, 2022.
[34] B. Sun, M. Theile, Z. Qin, D. Bernardini, D. Roy, A. Bastoni, and
M. Caccamo, “Edge generation scheduling for DAG tasks using deep
reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 73, no. 4,
pp. 1034–1047, 2024.
[35] T. Li, S. Ying, Y. Zhao, and J. Shang, “Batch jobs load balancing schedul-
ing in cloud computing using distributional reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 35, no. 1, pp.
169–185, 2024.
[36] F. Ni, J. Hao, J. Lu, X. Tong, M. Yuan, J. Duan, Y. Ma, and K. He,
“A multi-graph attributed reinforcement learning based optimization
algorithm for large-scale hybrid flow shop scheduling problem,” in
Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining, 2021, p. 3441–3451.
[37] C. Zhang, Z. Cao, W. Song, Y. Wu, and J. Zhang, “Deep reinforcement
learning guided improvement heuristic for job shop scheduling,” in
International Conference on Learning Representations, B. Kim, Y. Yue,
S. Chaudhuri, K. Fragkiadaki, M. Khan, and Y. Sun, Eds., vol. 2024,
2024, pp. 45 696–45 716.
[38] A. Debner, M. Krahn, and V. Hirvisalo, “Scheduling conditional task
graphs with deep reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 5th
Northern Lights Deep Learning Conference (NLDL), vol. 233.
PMLR,
2024, pp. 46–52.
[39] S. Li, W. Ouyang, Y. Ma, and C. Wu, “Learning-guided rolling horizon
optimization for long-horizon flexible job-shop scheduling,” in The
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[40] N. Grinsztajn, O. Beaumont, E. Jeannot, and P. Preux, “Geometric deep
reinforcement learning for dynamic dag scheduling,” in 2020 IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), 2020, pp. 258–
265.
[41] Z. Wang, C. Liu, and M. Gombolay, “Heterogeneous graph attention net-
works for scalable multi-robot scheduling with temporospatial constraints,”
Autonomous Robots, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 249–268, Jan 2022.
[42] B. Altundas, Z. Wang, J. Bishop, and M. Gombolay, “Learning coordi-
nation policies over heterogeneous graphs for human-robot teams via
recurrent neural schedule propagation,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2022, pp. 11 679–
11 686.
[43] R. Wang, G. Wang, J. Sun, F. Deng, and J. Chen, “Flexible job shop
scheduling via dual attention network-based reinforcement learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 35,
no. 3, pp. 3091–3102, 2023.
[44] C. Zhang, Z. Cao, Y. Wu, W. Song, and J. Sun, “Learning topological
representations with bidirectional graph attention network for solving job
shop scheduling problem,” in Proceedings of the Fortieth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, ser. UAI ’24.
JMLR.org, 2024.
[45] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, Eds.,
vol. 30.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[46] C. Ying, T. Cai, S. Luo, S. Zheng, G. Ke, D. He, Y. Shen, and T.-Y.
Liu, “Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation?”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, M. Ranzato,
A. Beygelzimer, Y. Dauphin, P. Liang, and J. W. Vaughan, Eds., vol. 34.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp. 28 877–28 888.
[47] H. Arabnejad and J. G. Barbosa, “List scheduling algorithm for
heterogeneous systems by an optimistic cost table,” IEEE transactions
on parallel and distributed systems, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 682–694, 2013.
[48] H. Djigal, J. Feng, J. Lu, and J. Ge, “IPPTS: An efficient algorithm
for scientific workflow scheduling in heterogeneous computing systems,”
IEEE transactions on parallel and distributed systems, vol. 32, no. 5,
pp. 1057–1071, 2020.


--- Page 17 ---
17
APPENDIX A
SUPPLEMENT THEORETICAL RESULTS
A.1 MILP formulations of the scheduling problem
A heterogeneous scheduling problem P = (V, E, C, t, ρ, λ, Kacc) can be formulated as
min
x=(s(·),c(·))
f(x) = max
v∈V

s(v) + tact(v, c(v))

,
s.t.
s(v) + tact(v, c(v)) ≤s(w),
∀(v, w) ∈E,
X
v∈F (τ,c)
ρ(v) ≤λ(c),
∀τ ≥0, ∀c ∈C,
Kacc(v, c(v)) > 0,
∀v ∈V,
s(v) ≥0,
∀v ∈V.
(9)
Here, F(τ, c) is defined as
F(τ, c) :=

v ∈V | c(v) = c, s(v) ≤τ < tact(v, c(v))
	
.
For the homogeneous scheduling problem (V, E, t, ρ, λ) with r types of resources, where K ≡1 and |C| = 1, the third
constraint is naturally satisfied. V is the task set with |V | = n and E is the edge set. Let constant ti be the processing time of
task i, ρi
l be the l-th type resource demand of task i, and λl be the capacity of the l-th type resource. Let constant Cup
1 be a
sufficiently large number and can be set to P
i∈V ti. Let variable si denote the start time of task i, variable tmax denote the
makespan. Let variable uij equal 0 if and only if task i starts before task j starts, variable wij equal 0 if and only if task i
starts after or at the same time as task j finishes, variable xij equal 1 if and only if task j is running when task i starts. The
corresponding mixed integer linear programming (MILP) formulation is given by (10).
min tmax
s.t. si + ti ≤tmax, ∀i ∈V,
si + ti ≤sj, ∀(i, j) ∈E,
si < sj + Cup
1 uij, ∀i, j ∈V,
sj ≤si + Cup
1 (1 −uij), ∀i, j ∈V,
si < sj + tj + Cup
1 (1 −wij), ∀i, j ∈V,
sj + tj ≤si + Cup
1 wij, ∀i, j ∈V,
uij + wij ≤1 + xij, ∀i, j ∈V,
uij + wij ≥2xij, ∀i, j ∈V,
ρi
l +
X
j̸=i
xijρj
l ≤λl, ∀i ∈V, l ∈{1, ..., r},
si ≥0, tmax ≥0, uij, wij, xij ∈{0, 1}, ∀i, j ∈V.
(10)
For the heterogeneous scheduling problem P = (V, E, C, t, ρ, λ, Kacc) with r types of resources, where C is the pool set and
Kacc is the compatibility coefficient matrix. Let variables si, tmax, uij, wij, xij and constants ti, ρi
l share the same meaning
as in the homogeneous case. Let variable vk
i equal 1 if and only if task i is assigned to pool k, variable yijk equal 1 if
and only if task j is running on pool k when task i starts. Let constant Cup
0 be a sufficiently large bound and can be set to
2 max{1/Kacc(i, k) : Kacc(i, k) ̸= 0, ∀i, k}. Let constant aik = min{1/Kacc(i, k), Cup
0 }, constant Cup
1 be a sufficiently large
number and can be set to P
i∈V,k∈C tiaik + P
i∈V,l=1...,r ρi
l. Let constant λk
l be the l-th type resource capacity of pool k. The
MILP formulation of the heterogeneous scheduling problem is formulated by (11). The MILP formulation for heterogeneous
scheduling involves substantially more intricate constraints and a greater number of variables and constraints compared to the


--- Page 18 ---
18
homogeneous case, significantly increasing the difficulty of solving the problem.
min tmax,
s.t. si + ti
X
k
vk
i aik ≤tmax, ∀i ∈V,
si + ti
X
k∈C
vk
i aik ≤sj, ∀(i, j) ∈E,
si < sj + Cup
1 uij, ∀i, j ∈V,
sj ≤si + Cup
1 (1 −uij), ∀i, j ∈V,
si < sj + tj
X
k∈C
vk
j ajk + Cup
1 (1 −wij), ∀i, j ∈V,
sj + tj
X
k∈C
vk
j ajk ≤si + Cup
1 wij, ∀i, j ∈V,
uij + wij ≤1 + xij, ∀i, j ∈V,
uij + wij ≥2xij, ∀i, j ∈V,
xij + vk
j ≥2yijk, ∀i, j ∈V, k ∈C,
xij + vk
j ≤1 + yijk, ∀i, j ∈V, k ∈C,
X
k
vk
i = 1, ∀i ∈V, k ∈C,
1 −vk
i + Cup
0 −aik > 0, ∀i ∈V, k ∈C,
ρi
l +
X
j̸=i
yijkρj
l ≤Cup
1 (1 −vk
i ) + λk
l , ∀i ∈V, k ∈C, l ∈{1, ..., r},
si ≥0, tmax ≥0, uij, wij, xij, yijk, vk
i ∈{0, 1}, ∀i, j ∈V, k ∈C.
(11)
For a given solution z = {si, tmax, uij, wij, xij, yijk, vk
i }i,j,k, we define
ϕ(z) = x, where x(i) = (s(i), c(i)) = (si, {k : vk
i = 1}).
By construction, the map ϕ takes any feasible MILP solution as input and outputs a schedule in the schedule space X (defined
in the main text). Due to the definition of the variables, we immediately have that ϕ builds a one-to-one correspondence
between the space of all feasible MILP solutions and X, which further reveals that the MILP formulation (11) is equivalent to
the problem (9).
Proposition 6. The map ϕ is a bijection from the space of all feasible MILP solutions to X.
Proof. Due to the definition of variables, the rest variables can be inferred from s(·) and c(·). Therefore, ϕ is bijection and
surjection.
Although the map ϕ theoretically establishes a one-to-one correspondence between the solution spaces, the MILP formulation
(11) exhibits significantly higher computational complexity than our formulation (9). The MILP approach necessitates the
explicit linearization of disjunctive constraints regarding resource capacities and task ordering, which requires introducing
numerous auxiliary binary variables. Consequently, the problem size scales quadratically (O(n2)) in terms of both variables and
constraints. In contrast, our formulation (9) naturally characterizes the scheduling problem using only start times and pool
assignments, maintaining a linear scale (O(n)) in the solution space. To quantitatively illustrate this advantage, we summarize the
problem size complexity in Table VI, which highlights the substantial reduction in dimensionality achieved by our formulation.
Problem sizes of these different formulations on specific benchmarks can be seen in Table VIII of Appendix C.3.
TABLE VI
COMPLEXITY COMPARISON OF PROBLEM FORMULATIONS
Setting
Formulation
Variables
Constraints
Homogeneous
Problem (9)
n
|E| + O(n)
MILP (10)
3n2
6n2
Heterogeneous
Problem (9)
2n
|E| + O(n)
MILP (11)
(3 + nc)n2
(6 + 2nc)n2


--- Page 19 ---
19
A.2 Details of generation map Sd
As mentioned in Section IV of the main text, Algorithm 2 induces a skip-extended generation map Sd, whose domain is first
extended from Ωaction by the extended action set ¯
A. The domain is defined as follows:
Ωaction =





(a1, . . . , aN)

ai ∈¯
A, ∀i ∈{1, . . . , N},
#{i : ai ∈A} = n,
(ai = (vi, ci), aj = (vj, cj)) ⇒vi ̸= vj, ∀i ̸= j





.
(12)
The induced map Sd : Ωaction →X is formulated as Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Induced skip-extended generation map Sd
1: Input: Instance P = (V, E, C, ρ, t, λ, Kacc); extended action sequence (a1, ..., aN) ∈Ωaction.
2: Output: A feasible schedule x = (s(·), c(·)).
3: Initialize current time tcur ←0, unscheduled tasks U ←V , unselected action indices I ←{1, ..., N} and pool states
(available resources and running tasks).
4: while U ̸= ∅do
5:
Compute feasibility masks for A according to dependency/resource/compatibility constraints at tcur.
6:
if All action in A are masked then
7:
Advance time to the next completion event and release all tasks completing at the new tcur.
8:
Update dependency status and pool states.
9:
continue
10:
end if
11:
Find the smallest unmasked action indices t in I.
12:
if at = (v, c) ∈A then
13:
Start task v on pool c at time tcur: set s(v) ←tcur, c(v) ←c.
14:
Update pool state and remove v from U.
15:
else
16:
Advance time to the next completion event and release all tasks completing at the new tcur.
17:
end if
18:
Update dependency status and pool states.
19:
Remove t from I.
20: end while
A.3 Trials of local search
Although the serial schedule generation scheme SSGS cannot be used directly for learning due to it slowing down the training,
it enables an alternative two-step approach: sampling and refinement, with the latter realized by local search. In the first step, a
sampler generates suboptimal feasible schedules, and in the second step, local search identifies potential optimal schedules in
their neighborhoods. This approach mitigates optimality gaps in Slist by leveraging SSGS in local search, aligning with WeCAN’s
goal of effectively and gap-aware scheduling.
To illustrate this process, we propose a local search strategy using the serial schedule generation scheme SSGS. For a
feasible schedule x ∈X from the sampler, the natural projection T yields its schedule order T(x) ∈Bf. The neighborhood
N(T(x)) ⊂Bf comprises feasible schedule orders obtained by inserting a task into another position in a pool. The local search
algorithm selects the optimal schedule in SSGS(N(T(x))), completing one search step. Theorem 2 guarantees the connectivity
of Bf, ensuring any feasible schedule can reach an optimal schedule through finite task insertions.
Theorem 2. For any feasible schedule x ∈X, there exists an optimal schedule x⋆∈X and a finite sequence of feasible
schedules x(0), x(1), . . . , x(m) ∈X with x(0) = x and x(m) = x⋆such that
T

x(i+1)
∈N

T

x(i)
,
i = 0, . . . , m −1.
Proof. It suffices to prove that the feasible order space Bf := T(X) is connected under insertion moves, and then lift an order
path to schedules via SSGS.
Step 1 (connectivity of Bf). We prove by induction on n = |V | that any two orders w, w′ ∈Bf are connected by finitely
many insertions. The case n = 1 is immediate.
Assume the claim holds for n −1 tasks. Fix any w, w′ ∈Bf on V . Since (V, E) is a DAG, there exists a sink task v0 with
no successors, i.e., no edge (v0, u) ∈E. From w (resp. w′), perform one insertion that moves v0 to the end of its current pool,


--- Page 20 ---
20
Fig. 8.
Local search with projection. (a) The optimal schedule is excluded by the list scheduling map Slist due to a different schedule order. (b) Local search
LS on the schedule order T(Slist(ω)), followed by the serial schedule generation scheme SSGS, recovers the optimal schedule Sn(LS(T(Slist(ω)))).
obtaining ˜w ∈N(w) (resp. ˜w′ ∈N(w′)). This move keeps all pool assignments unchanged, preserving compatibility/capacity
feasibility; moreover, moving a sink task later in its pool cannot create a directed cycle in the augmented graph, so ˜w, ˜w′ ∈Bf.
Remove v0 from ˜w, ˜w′ and relabel ranks within each pool, yielding ¯w, ¯w′ ∈B(n−1)
f
for the reduced instance on V \ {v0}.
By the induction hypothesis, there exists a sequence
¯w = ¯w(0), ¯w(1), . . . , ¯w(L) = ¯w′,
¯w(ℓ+1) ∈N( ¯w(ℓ)).
For each ℓ, add v0 back to the end of the same pool as in ˜w, producing w(ℓ) ∈Bf. Then w(ℓ+1) ∈N(w(ℓ)) holds because the
insertion acts only on tasks in V \ {v0}. Concatenating w →˜w = w(0) →· · · →w(L) = ˜w′ →w′ gives a finite insertion path
in Bf.
Step 2 (lift to schedules). Let w(0), . . . , w(M) be an insertion path in Bf from T(x) to T(x⋆). Define x(i) := SSGS(w(i)).
By Proposition 3 each x(i) is feasible and
T

x(i)
= w(i).
Hence T(x(i+1)) ∈N(T(x(i))) for all i, and x(M) is optimal, completing the proof.
This local search approach with projection iteratively improves schedules by exploring the original space piece by piece,
with Theorem 2 guaranteeing its feasibility in approaching an optimal solution. Figure 8 illustrates how local search with
the serial schedule generation scheme SSGS also fixes the inherent optimality gap in list scheduling. Panel (a) shows that the
optimum is excluded by the list scheduling map Slist through mapping it to a schedule with a different order. Panel (b) shows
that although Slist excludes the optimal solution, applying the local search process on T(Slist(ω)) and then performing the serial
schedule generation scheme map SSGS may also helps to obtain the optimal solution SSGS(LS(T(Slist(ω)))). This provides an
alternative way for overcoming the optimality gaps. Experimental results validating the effectiveness of local search are shown
in Appendix E.2.
APPENDIX B
BENEFIT FROM SINGLE-PASS NETWORK FRAMEWORK
Instead of utilizing auto-regressive models, we employ a single-pass (non-auto-regressive) model because it takes the following
two benefits and does not bring noticeable performance loss.
• Computation-speed gains from non-auto-regressive decoding: The single-pass architecture rapidly generates solutions
with just one neural network forward, enabling rapid schedule generation even on CPU-only servers. As shown in Appendix
E.3 and Table XIX, over 90 % of inference time is spent in the generation-map step (which any scheduler must perform),
so our total runtime approaches the theoretical lower bound. By contrast, an auto-regressive decoder would rerun the
network for each of the n tasks, on TPC-H-30 this inflates total cost by ≈10× on GPU, and on TPC-H-100 by ≈100×
on CPU, making it orders of magnitude slower.
• Reduced training GPU memory with non-autoregressive decoding: During training, backpropagation must keep all
forward-pass activations in memory which dominates the GPU memory costs of DAG scheduling. In evaluation process,
activations can be immediately freed. But in training process, they must be kept after the solution generated and reward
calculated. An auto-regressive decoder runs the full network at each of the n scheduling steps, retaining n sets of activations,
so you quickly run out of GPU memory and must use tiny batch sizes (e.g. on TPC-H-30/50) and cannot scale to larger


--- Page 21 ---
21
DAG scheduling problem. In contrast, our single-pass design invokes the network exactly once per problem, storing only
one set of activations. This lets us train on much larger problems (up to ≈1000 tasks) with practical batch sizes.
Unlike combinatorial problems such as TSP where each decision reshapes the remaining solution, in DAG scheduling each
choice mainly affects which tasks are running (and which masks are active). Once a task finishes, it no longer influences later
decisions beyond updating the dependency mask. Because any selectable task already has all its parents completed, available
tasks are independent except for shared resource contention. Intuitively, this matches real-world practice: you plan your next
jobs based on currently running workloads, not on jobs that have already finished. Moreover, the following two experiments
results shows that non-auto-regressive model does not lead to noticeable performance loss.
Evidence from local search: If early decisions had a strong ripple effect, perturbing the action order would yield substantial
improvements. We implemented a local search that reinserts any action at any position and keeps the best reorder. As shown in
Table XVIII of Appendix E, 100 local search steps improve makespan by only 2% on TPC-H-30 and 1% on TPC-H-50,
demonstrating that early scheduling choices exert only limited long-range influence on final performance.
Minimal gains from auto-regressive models in DAG scheduling: Before adopting the non-auto-regressive (NAR) model, we
start our work by implementing an auto-regressive (AR) version that encodes both current and future resource availability (i.e.,
running tasks) for each pool. Since pools may have variable numbers of running tasks but embeddings must be fixed-size,
we represent each pool’s state with quantile information. Let K be a integer-value hyper-parameters. For pool c, tcur denotes
the current time, rcur the current resource capacity vector, and rf the full capacity. At each step, pool c is embedded into
(r + 1) · (K + 1)-dimensional dynamical feature vector (t1, r1, ..., tK+1, rK+1), where r is the number of resource types. Here,
ti is the earliest time the resource type 1 will be released to reach r(1)
cur + i−1
K (r(1)
f
−r(1)
cur) if no more task is coming, and ri
is the corresponding resource vector at ti. Notably, we have t1 = tcur, r1 = rcur, tK+1 is the maximal finish time for tasks
running on pool c, and rK+1 = rful, so this embedding captures the current resource state, the full resource capacity, and
critical resource states over time.
The AR model is identical to the NAR model except at the decoder: at each step, the decoder extracts these dynamic features
for every pool, processes them with an MLP for pool embeddings, then applies the WCA layer to update both task embeddings
and pool–task scores. By taking K = 5, we evaluated the AR model on the TPC-H dataset, taking the maximal batch size (20
for TPC-H-30 and 8 for TPC-H-50) not out of GPU-memory.
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON TPC-H DATASET.
TPC-H-30
TPC-H-30
TPC-H-100
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
Makespan
Time
WeCAN-Greedy(NAR)
19578
0.15
33428
0.50
62587
1.72
WeCAN-S(256)(NAR)
18964±10
2.43
32814±47
2.86
61373±28
10.43
WeCAN-AR-Greedy
19386
1.96
33786
3.39
(out of GPU-memory)
*
WeCAN-AR-S(256)
18910±26
3.57
33201±75
7.05
(out of GPU-memory)
*
From the results, the AR model achieves only less than 1% better makespan on TPC-H-30 and even 1% worse performance on
TPC-H-50 (this may due to the small batch size due to larger GPU memory costs), but requires substantially more inference time
(more than 10 times of NAR) and training GPU memory. This trade-off is the main reason we adopted the non-auto-regressive
model, single-pass design.
APPENDIX C
DATASET
C.1 TPC-H dataset
In the TPC-H dataset1, each DAG contains between 2 and 18 nodes, with 9.18 nodes on average to be scheduled. The
dataset used by Wang et. al. [27]2 only includes one type of resource demand, with an average value of 125.8, a minimum
of 1, and a maximum of 593. To better reflect heterogeneous real-world scenarios, we extend this dataset by introducing a
second resource dimension (representing memory usage) and assigning a random type to each task to indicate its primary
computational load (e.g., CPU, IO, etc.). The second resource demand is sampled uniformly from {30, 40, 50}, and task types
are sampled uniformly from {0, 1, 2}.
We construct training and test datasets under three different problem-size settings, denoted as TPC-H-30, TPC-H-50, and
TPC-H-100. Under each setting, a problem instance consists of 30, 50, or 100 DAGs, respectively. The training datasets under
these three settings contain 2,464, 3,850, and 7,700 DAGs in total. The corresponding test datasets consist of 10 problem
instances built from unseen DAGs. For the test datasets under the TPC-H-50 and TPC-H-100, TPC-H-150 settings, the DAG
1http://tpc.org/tpch/default5.asp
2https://github.com/Thinklab-SJTU/PPO-BiHyb/tree/main/dag_data/tpch


--- Page 22 ---
22
structures and the first-type resource demands are identical to those used by Wang et. al. [27]; we augment them by introducing
a second resource dimension and task-type annotations. Since the TPC-H-30 and TPC-H-200 setting was not considered in the
prior work, we generate both the DAGs and the associated resource demands from scratch, following the same generation
protocol used by Wang et. al. [27].
We schedule tasks on 3 pools: pool 1 is of type 0, and pools 2 and 3 are of type 1. The first resource capacities of the three
pools are 600, 800, and 500, respectively, and the second resource capacities are 260, 240, and 240. We define the compatibility
coefficients as follows: for pool type 0, the coefficients are (1.0, 1/0.8, 1/0.7) for task types 0, 1, and 2, respectively; for pool
type 1, the coefficients are (0, 1/1.0, 1/1.1).
To study scenarios involving heavy tasks (Table III and Figure 4 (a-b) in the main text), we modify the features of certain
tasks. Specifically, we identify non-root tasks with durations exceeding 1000 seconds, randomly select half of them, and assign
them a resource demand of (300, 210) and task type 0. Approximately 1.6% of all tasks are replaced in this manner, resulting
in an average of 4.8 and 8.0 heavy tasks per problem instance in the TPC-H-30 and TPC-H-50 settings, respectively. To
accommodate these heavy tasks, the first resource capacities of the three pools are increased to 1200, 3000, and 800, while the
second resource capacities are set to 260, 260, and 240. The compatibility coefficients are kept unchanged.
To evaluate the ability of algorithms to address optimality gaps, we construct a new benchmark (Figure 4 (c)) based on
TPC-H-30 and TPC-H-50. Specifically, we identify all non-root DAG tasks and replace 0.4%, 0.8%, 1.6% and 3.2% of them
with tasks that have high resource demands (300, 210), are of type 0, and require long processing times 2000. The environment
settings and compatibility coefficients remain the same as those described in the previous paragraph.
To evaluate the generalization ability of our model, we train it on the original environment and then test its performance
across the following eight distinct fluctuating environmental settings.
• More pools: (a) adding an extra pool with capacity (500, 240) and type 1; (b) adding an extra pool with capacity
(200, 100) and type 0; (i) adding three copies for each pool.
• More pool types: (c) modifying the type of pool 3 to a different new pool type with compatibility coefficients
(1/2.0, 1/1.0, 1/1.1); (d) modifying the type of pool 3 to a different new pool type with compatibility coefficients
(0, 1/1.2, 1/0.8).
• More task types: (e) reclassifying half of the type 2 tasks as a new task type, which has a compatibility coefficient of
1/1.4 with pool type 0 and 1/0.8 with pool type 1; (f) reclassifying half of the type 2 tasks as another new task type,
which has a compatibility coefficient of 1/1.0 with pool type 0 and 1/2.0 with pool type 1, and reclassifying the rest half
as the new type in (e).
• Different pool capacity: (g) increasing the first resource capacities for the three pools to 800, 1100, 500 and second
capacities to 340, 320, 240; (h) decreasing the first resource capacities for the three pools to 600, 800, 500 and second
capacities to 180, 180, 240.
The fluctuation scenarios in Figure 7 correspond to the environments described above.
C.2 Computation graphs
We use the three types of computation graphs introduced by Jeon et. al. [19]. The first type, the layered graph, is a synthetic
structure designed to resemble the computational graphs commonly found in certain classes of neural networks. The other two
types are established families of random undirected graphs, which we convert into DAGs following the same transformation
procedure described by Jeon et. al. [19]. We generate graphs with specific configurations based on Jeon et al.’s methodology.
For the layered graph, we use the parameters σN = 0.75, ρE = 0.2, ρS = 0.14. For the Erd˝os-Rényi graph, the edge probability
is set to p = 0.05. For the stochastic block model, we use the parameters pin = 0.3 and pout = 0.005. For each instance, we
generate 10 graphs of size 50, resulting in a total of 500 task nodes per problem.
Task durations are generated following the approach of Jeon et. al. [19]. The duration t(v) for task v is calculated as:
t(v) = round(100 × m(v)) + 1,
(13)
where m(v) is sampled from a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) and projected onto the non-negative domain. The GMM
consists of four Gaussian components, each with equal mixture weight. The means of the components are (0.5, 1, 3, 5), and
their corresponding standard deviations are (0.5, 1, 1, 1). For resource requirements, each task’s processor demand is uniformly
sampled from the set {2, 4, 8, 16}, and memory demand is selected from {1, 2, 3}, also with uniform probability. Task types
are sampled from {0, 1, 2} with probability 1/6, 1/6, 2/3, respectively. Task scheduling is performed with three resource pools:
pool 1 is of type 0, while pools 2 and 3 are of type 1.The first resource capacities of the three pools are 16, 12, 64, respectively,
and the second resource capacities are 15, 20, 50. The compatibility coefficients of pools with type 0 are (1.0, 1/0.8, 1/1.2)
and those for pools with type 1 are (0, 1/1.2, 1/0.8).
C.3 Problem size of benchmarks
We summarize the key statistics regarding the average problem size of the benchmarks. Table VIII reports the size of the
action set, the number of MILP variables, the number of MILP constraints, and the number of nonzero elements in the MILP


--- Page 23 ---
23
constraints. The two homogeneous lines with a single pool correspond to the largest benchmark instances tested in prior
works [19], [27]. The heterogeneous cases correspond to the benchmarks evaluated in our study. As shown in the table, the
heterogeneous settings substantially enlarge the problem size, making the benchmarks we test considerably more challenging
than those in previous works.
TABLE VIII
PROBLEM SIZE OF BENCHMARKS
Action set
Variables
Constraints
Nonzeros
Homogeneous
n
3n2
6n2
19n2
TPC-H-150, 1 pool
1500
6.8 × 106
1.4 × 107
4.3 × 107
TPC-H-300, 1 pool
3000
2.7 × 107
5.4 × 107
1.7 × 108
Heterogeneous
nnc
(3 + nc)n2
(6 + 2nc)n2
(18 + 8nc + rnc)n2
Computation-Graph, 3 pool
1500
1.5 × 106
3 × 106
1.2 × 107
TPC-H-100, 3 pool
3000
6.0 × 106
1.2 × 107
4.8 × 107
TPC-H-200, 3 pool
6000
2.4 × 107
4.8 × 107
2 × 108
TPC-H-200, 12 pool
24000
6.0 × 107
1.2 × 108
5.5 × 108
APPENDIX D
BASELINE ALGORITHMS
D.1 Heuristic baselines
We here provide implementation details of heuristic baselines. For clarity, we denote the average processing time ¯t(v) for
task v as the average of its actual processing times across all compatible resource pools c where Kacc(v, c) > 0.
• Shortest first task scheduling (SFT). The scheduler calculates the average processing time for each task and selects the
unmasked task with the smallest value.
• Most operations remaining (MOPNR). For each task v, we define the number of remaining operations as the number of
tasks that directly or indirectly depend on v. At each step, the scheduler selects the unmasked task with the largest number
of remaining operations.
• Critical path scheduling (CP). A directed path originating from task v is any path leading from v to one of its descendants
w in the DAG, i.e., a sequence v = v0, v1, . . . , vk = w in which (vi, vi+1) ∈E for all i = 0, . . . , k −1. The length of a
path is defined as the sum of the average processing times of all tasks along it. The critical path of a task v refers to the
longest directed path originating from v. The scheduler selects the unmasked task with the largest critical path length.
• Tetris [6]. A heuristic method for multi-pool cases where jobs are arranged as a Tetris game on the two-dimension space of
makespan and resource. The Tetris score between task v and pool c is defined to be the normalized inner product between
their resource feature. Let ρ(v) be the resource demand vector of task v and λ(c), λcur(c) be the full resource vector
and the current resource vector of pool c. The Tetris score is defined to be stetris(v, c) = (ρ(v)/λ(c)) · (λcur(c)/λ(c)) =
Pr
k=1(ρk(v)/λk(c)) · (λk
cur(c)/λk(c)). The scheduler keeps choosing the unmasked task with the highest Tetris score.
• HEFT [7]. A dependency-aware scheduling algorithm designed for heterogeneous DAG scheduling. It maintains a timeline
for each pool and inserts the unmasked task with the highest critical path length into the timeline gap where it can complete
at the earliest possible time among all feasible pools.
• PEFT [47]. A dependency-aware scheduling algorithm designed for heterogeneous DAG scheduling. It is similar to HEFT
but takes the average optimal cost table value as the priority.
• IPPTS [48]. A dependency-aware scheduling algorithm designed for heterogeneous DAG scheduling. It is similar to HEFT
but takes the multiplication of the average on “predict cost matrix” and out degree as the priority.
For each list scheduling based heuristic algorithm (i.e., all except HEFT, PEFT, IPPTS), the pool assignment throughout the
scheduling process is determined by one of the following three rules:
• Earliest finishing time (EFT). For a given task v, the scheduler selects the pool c that allows the earliest feasible
completion, which, in the context of resource compatibility, corresponds to the pool with the largest Kacc(v, c) value.
• Tetris score. For a given task v, the scheduler selects the compatible pool c such that the Tetris score between v and c is
the highest.
• Balance choosing. For a given task v, the scheduler selects the pool c that achieves a balance between fast execution and
good resource fit. Specifically, it selects the pool with the largest combined score defined as stetris(v, c) · Kacc(v, c).
Each list scheduling based heuristic (SFT, MOPNR, CP, Tetris) is evaluated under all three pool assignment rules, resulting in
three complete schedules. The smallest makespan is reported as the final result, and run time is the sum obtained across the
three runs.


--- Page 24 ---
24
D.2 Neural baselines
We provide the implementation details of two neural baselines. PPO-BiHyb and One-Shot employ the earliest finishing time
as the rule for pool selection.
• PPO-BiHyb [27]. The network architecture, as well as the training and inference settings, remain consistent with the
original source code, except for the node features and the underlying heuristic algorithm. Specifically, the node features
include the average processing time (averaged over all pool types) and the real processing times for each individual pool
type. We observe that IPPTS (in TPC-H) and HEFT (in Computation graphs) achieve the best performance among all
heuristic baselines. Therefore, we adopt them as the underlying heuristic algorithm in the bilevel framework of PPO-BiHyb.
• OneShot [19]. As the source code of Topoformer is unavailable, Graphormer with additional attention masks is used as
the encoder instead. Each task has a feature vector (¯t, ρ1, ρ2) of dimension 3, where ¯t is the average processing time. This
design enables OneShot to handle varying environment structures, facilitating the comparison of its generalization ability
with that of our WeCAN. The training settings align with those of our WeCAN, except for an additional ℓ2 regularization
term in the loss function mentioned in their paper [19].
• ScheduleNet [41]. We adapt the ScheduleNet-style heterogeneous GAT encoder to our task–pool DAG scheduling by
constructing a two-type heterogeneous graph (task nodes and pool nodes) and using four directed relations: (i) task→pool
edges, (ii) pool→task reverse edges, (iii) precedence edges task→task, and (iv) reverse precedence edges (treating the DAG
direction explicitly). The encoder performs relation-specific attention/message passing and type-aware updates (task/pool
have separate transformations) and the actual processing time tact(v, c) := t(v)/Kacc(v, c) is embedded into edge features,
producing embeddings {hv} and {hc} in a single forward pass. We then score feasible task–pool pairs by a shared decoder
u(v, c) = Dec
 [hv∥hc]

.
The resulting logits are plugged into the same feasibility-masked generator used in our framework.
• HGN-Two-Stage [18]. The original method targets FJSP with a two-stage heterogeneous encoder. We adapt its two-stage
update pattern to the task–pool DAG setting (operations7→tasks, machines7→pools) while replacing the FJSP neighborhoods
with (a) task–pool edges and (b) directed precedence edges. Each layer performs: Stage-I (pool update): update pool
embeddings by attending over incident task→pool edges, augmented with pool self-loops (neighbor edges and self-loops
are normalized together, but use distinct projections); Stage-II (task update): update task embeddings by fusing three
streams: forward-precedence attention, backward-precedence attention, and a pool→task aggregation (implemented as a
mean aggregator followed by a small MLP), concatenated with the task residual and passed through an MLP. After the
final layer, we use the same pairwise decoding u(v, c) and the same feasibility-masked generator as above.
Implementation alignment.
For OneShot, ScheduleNet and HGN-Two-Stage, we match the main embedding dimension and depth to our WeCAN to
control parameter budget. For ScheduleNet and HGN-Two-Stage, we keep only the heterogeneous encoders and replace the
original step-wise decision heads by the same single-pass decoding and generation interface used in our framework. Moreover,
the hidden dimension, layer number, and attention-head configuration are set identical to our WeCAN, ensuring matched
parameter budgets across neural methods.
APPENDIX E
ADDITIONAL RESULTS
E.1 Additional results on generalization ability
We present full experimental results evaluating the generalization ability of WeCAN. In Tables IX to XVI, we report the
performance of models trained in a fixed TPC-H environment and evaluated under eight environment fluctuations (a)-(h), as
defined in Appendix C. Additionally, in Table XVII we report the performance of models trained on TPC-H-30 while tested on
TPC-H-50 and TPC-H-100, which contain more tasks. In this table, WeCAN-Train30 and OneShot-Train30 indicate the models
trained on TPC-H-30 while WeCAN and OneShot denote models trained and tested under the same task setting. The TPC-H-30
results in Tables IX- XVI correspond to the fluctuations in Figure 7.
The results show that our WeCAN consistently outperforms OneShot and heuristic baselines across all evaluation scenarios.
Moreover, it maintains stable performance under both fluctuating environments and varying task numbers, demonstrating strong
generalization ability.


--- Page 25 ---
25
TABLE IX
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (A), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE RESOURCE POOL (A)” IN
FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
25556
-26.15%
43289
-19.12%
77494
-18.64%
MOPNR
23080
-13.93%
40724
-12.06%
71166
-8.95%
Tetris
21889
-8.05%
37682
-3.69%
67923
-3.99%
CP
22431
-10.73%
39041
-7.43%
68278
-4.53%
HEFT
22622
-11.67%
38643
-6.34%
67872
-3.91%
PEFT
22012
-8.66%
38111
-4.87%
67872
-1.44
IPPTS
20258
0.00%
36340
0.00%
65318
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
19830
2.11%
62744
5.75%
62744
3.94%
WeCAN-Greedy
18167
10.32%
32244
11.27%
58764
10.03%
WeCAN-S(64)
17496
13.64%
31416
13.55%
57732
11.61%
WeCAN-S(256)
17430
13.96%
31157
14.26%
57404
12.12%
TABLE X
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (B), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE RESOURCE POOL (B)” IN
FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
23741
-29.89%
41476
-33.97%
74061
-27.30%
MOPNR
21869
-19.65%
38129
-23.16%
67597
-16.19%
Tetris
20000
-9.42%
32237
-4.13%
58796
-1.06%
CP
21089
-15.38%
34598
-11.75%
62874
-8.07%
HEFT
18624
-1.89%
31866
-2.93%
58531
-0.60%
PEFT
19834
-8.51%
32719
-5.68%
59118
-1.61%
IPPTS
18278
0.00%
30960
0.00%
58180
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
17330
5.19%
29807
3.72%
55739
4.20%
WeCAN-Greedy
17119
6.34%
29251
5.52%
55314
4.93%
WeCAN-S(64)
16578
9.30%
28580
7.69%
53891
7.37%
WeCAN-S(256)
16059
9.68%
28476
8.02%
53401
8.21%
TABLE XI
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (C), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE POOL TYPES (A)” IN FIGURE
7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
26626
-28.43%
44708
-25.14%
80460
-17.13%
MOPNR
24792
-19.58%
41589
-16.41%
75168
-9.43%
Tetris
22829
-10.12%
36691
-2.70%
68863
-0.25%
CP
22519
-8.58%
38745
-8.45%
72774
-5.94%
HEFT
20732
0.00%
35727
0.00%
68996
-0.44%
PEFT
21848
-5.38%
36572
-2.37%
68692
0.00%
IPPTS
20977
-1.18%
35871
-0.40%
69374
-0.99%
OneShot-S(256)
20545
0.90%
36091
-1.02%
69410
-1.04%
WeCAN-Greedy
19816
4.42%
32893
7.93%
65760
4.27%
WeCAN-S(64)
19449
6.19%
32696
8.48%
65326
4.90%
WeCAN-S(256)
19340
6.71%
32675
8.54%
65199
5.09%


--- Page 26 ---
26
TABLE XII
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (D), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE POOL TYPES (B)” IN FIGURE
7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
27303
-27.61%
47400
-27.93%
84195
-24.71%
MOPNR
24964
-16.68%
43010
-16.08%
77059
-14.14%
Tetris
23203
-8.45%
38885
-4.95%
71034
-5.21%
CP
23129
-8.10%
41465
-11.91%
73481
-8.84%
HEFT
22416
-4.77%
38648
-4.31%
69443
-2.86%
PEFT
22658
-5.90%
39257
-5.95%
68984
-2.18%
IPPTS
21396
0.00%
37052
0.00%
67515
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
19938
6.81%
35018
5.49%
65561
2.89%
WeCAN-Greedy
19146
10.51%
33282
10.18%
61271
9.25%
WeCAN-S(64)
18716
12.52%
32526
12.22%
60285
10.71%
WeCAN-S(256)
18569
13.21%
32417
12.51%
60051
11.06%
TABLE XIII
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (E), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE TASK TYPES (A)” IN FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
27254
-26.86%
49040
-27.47%
83922
-24.88%
MOPNR
24809
-15.47%
43135
-12.12%
77623
-15.51%
Tetris
23629
-9.98%
38484
-0.03%
71358
-6.19%
CP
23488
-9.33%
41564
-8.04%
72609
-8.05%
HEFT
22768
-5.97%
40136
-4.33%
68243
-1.55%
PEFT
22521
-4.82%
39917
-3.76%
68598
-2.08%
IPPTS
21484
0.00%
38471
0.00%
67201
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
20435
4.88%
35093
8.78%
64709
3.71%
WeCAN-Greedy
18908
11.99%
33950
11.75%
61759
8.10%
WeCAN-S(64)
18456
14.10%
33179
13.75%
60752
9.60%
WeCAN-S(256)
18365
14.52%
32994
14.24%
60278
10.3%
TABLE XIV
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (F), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “MORE TASK TYPES (B)” IN FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
29738
-18.8%
50118
-27.54%
94002
-21.59%
MOPNR
28402
-13.46%
45473
-15.72%
86306
-11.63%
Tetris
25983
-3.80%
40322
-2.61%
78031
-0.93%
CP
26427
-5.57%
43760
-11.36%
85981
-11.21%
HEFT
26707
-6.69%
41042
-4.44%
83114
-7.50%
PEFT
25812
-3.11%
39556
-0.66%
77313
0.00%
IPPTS
25032
0.00%
39296
0.00%
77989
-0.87%
OneShot-S(256)
22573
9.82%
36077
8.19%
69004
8.18%
WeCAN-Greedy
22864
8.66%
36088
8.16%
68934
10.84%
WeCAN-S(64)
21847
12.73%
34539
12.11%
68299
11.66%
WeCAN-S(256)
21801
12.91%
34378
12.52%
67722
12.41%


--- Page 27 ---
27
TABLE XV
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (G), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “LARGER RESOURCE-POOL
CAPACITY” IN FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
20842
-29.98%
36076
-29.92%
63677
-21.21%
MOPNR
18417
-17.58%
32614
-17.45%
57660
-9.75%
Tetris
18417
-14.86%
30438
-9.62%
54054
-2.89%
CP
17790
-10.95%
29502
-6.24%
53009
-0.90%
HEFT
17360
-8.26%
29010
-4.47%
52935
-0.76%
PEFT
17799
-11.01%
30286
-9.07%
53773
-2.35%
IPPTS
16035
0.00%
27768
0.00%
52536
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
15592
2.76%
27420
1.25%
50939
3.04%
WeCAN-Greedy
15982
0.33%
27050
2.58%
50361
4.14%
WeCAN-S(64)
15013
6.37%
26159
5.80%
48882
6.96%
WeCAN-S(256)
13498
6.70%
25990
6.40%
48711
7.28%
TABLE XVI
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS ON FLUCTUATING ENVIRONMENT (H), WHICH CORRESPONDS TO THE “SMALLER RESOURCE-POOL
CAPACITY” IN FIGURE 7.
TPC-H-30, 3 pools
TPC-H-50, 3 pools
TPC-H-100, 3 pools
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
33138
-28.00%
54852
-18.54%
100653
-17.54%
MOPNR
29829
-15.22%
50931
-10.07%
92989
-8.59%
Tetris
29179
-12.71%
48891
-5.66%
91940
-7.36%
CP
27760
-7.23%
46985
-1.54%
86498
-1.01%
HEFT
28119
-8.61%
47602
-2.87%
88638
-3.50%
PEFT
28012
-8.20%
48255
-4.29%
89048
-3.98%
IPPTS
25889
0.00%
46272
0.00%
85636
0.00%
OneShot-S(256)
25349
2.08%
44122
4.65%
82797
3.32%
WeCAN-Greedy
24525
5.27%
41563
10.18%
79378
7.31%
WeCAN-S(64)
23791
8.10%
40778
11.87%
78293
8.57%
WeCAN-S(256)
23628
8.73%
40705
12.03%
78009
8.91%
TABLE XVII
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H DATASETS. ONESHOT-TRAIN30 AND WECAN-TRAIN30 REFER TO MODELS TRAINED IN TPC-H-30 WHILE ONESHOT
AND WECAN REFER TO MODEL TRAINED IN PROBLEMS WITH CORRESPONDING SIZE (TPC-H-50 OR TPC-H-100)
TPC-H-50
TPC-H-100
Makespan
Imporvement
Makespan
Imporvement
SFT
49172
-27.2%
84986
-21.2%
MOPNR
43545
-12.7%
74364
-10.3%
CP
41597
-7.62%
74364
-6.03%
Tetris
38654
0.00%
71269
-1.65%
HEFT
36326
-1.71%
70137
0.00%
OneShot-Train30-S(256)
36326
6.02%
66777
4.79%
OneShot-S(256)
35561
8.00%
66173
5.65%
WeCAN-Train30-Greedy
33654
12.9%
63034
10.1%
WeCAN-Greedy
33428
13.5%
62587
10.8%
WeCAN-Train30-S(64)
33265
13.9%
61894
11.8%
WeCAN-S(64)
32927
14.8%
61706
12.0%
WeCAN-Train30-S(256)
33137
14.3%
61812
11.9%
WeCAN-S(256)
32885
14.9%
61364
12.5%


--- Page 28 ---
28
E.2 Results on local search
In Appendix A.3, we mentioned that local search with the serial schedule generation scheme map SSGS can serve as an
alternative approach to close the optimality gap, as illustrated in Figure 8. Here we present the corresponding experimental
results on the TPC-H dataset with heavy tasks. The experimental setup is the same as in Table III and Figure 4 (a-b) of the
main text, with details provided in Appendix C, except that we use only one random seed due to the high computational cost of
local search. The local search approach is described in Appendix A.3. We evaluate its performance on two versions of WeCAN:
one that incorporates the decreasing score skip action, and one that does not. For both settings, we report local search results
using 50 and 100 search steps.
As shown in Table XVIII, local search yields substantially greater improvements when applied to WeCAN without the skip
action. This is because WeCAN with the skip action has already addressed the optimality gap inherent in list scheduling, thereby
leaving limited room for further enhancement through local search. In contrast, applying local search to the configuration without
the skip action helps reduce the remaining sub-optimality and achieve robust performance under heavy-task conditions. However,
these gains come at the cost of significantly increased runtime, which is primarily due to repeated calls to the generation map
that dominate the computational cost. In summary, although local search with the serial schedule generation scheme map SSGS
is a viable method for mitigating the optimality gap, incorporating the skip action offers a more computationally efficient
alternative and achieves comparable robustness in heavy-task scenarios.
TABLE XVIII
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ON TPC-H-HEAVY DATASETS.
TPC-H-30
TPC-H-50
Makespan
Imporvement
Time
Makespan
Imporvement
Time
IPPTS
25697
0.00%
0.21
38034
0.51
0.00%
WeCAN-NoSkip-Greedy
27138
-5.61%
0.17
39457
-3.74%
0.47
WeCAN-NoSkip-S(256)
26175
-1.86%
2.38
38450
-1.09%
5.37
WeCAN-NoSkip-S(256)+LocalSearch(50)
24946
2.92%
92.80
37726
0.81%
275.57
WeCAN-NoSkip-S(256)+LocalSearch(100)
24793
3.52%
192.56
37519
1.35%
526.22
WeCAN-Greedy
25176
2.03%
0.13
37652
1.00%
0.36
WeCAN-S(256)
24035
6.47%
2.43
35726
6.07%
6.12
WeCAN-S(256)+LocalSearch(50)
23490
8.59%
87.87
35321
7.13%
240.68
WeCAN-S(256)+LocalSearch(100)
23482
8.62%
181.34
35300
7.19%
465.11
E.3 Details on inference time
In Table XIX we provide a detailed breakdown of the inference time. We observe that network computation accounts for less
than 10% of the total inference time, while the generation map dominates the overall runtime. This explains why the total
inference time cannot be significantly lower than heuristic baselines, despite using a fast network. Prior methods that rely on
multi-round network inference scaling with the number of tasks incur substantially higher inference times than those dictated by
the generation map alone. In contrast, our approach requires only a single forward pass of the network, enabling substantially
faster inference overall. Additionally, we report inference time when using only CPU (i.e., without GPU acceleration). As
shown in Table XIX, WeCAN-Greedy on CPU achieves evaluation times only slightly higher than on GPU, demonstrating that
our method remains practical and efficient in scheduling scenarios where only CPU resources are available.
TABLE XIX
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ABOUT INFERENCE TIME (S).
GPU-inference
CPU-inference
Experiment
Total
Generation map
Network
Total
Generation map
Network
TPC-H-30
0.154
0.140
0.014
0.201
0.116
0.085
TPC-H-50
0.480
0.461
0.019
0.587
0.442
0.145
TPC-H-100
1.72
1.71
0.017
1.92
1.53
0.391
Erd˝os-Rényi graph
0.533
0.512
0.020
0.548
0.393
0.155
Layer Graphs
0.256
0.238
0.018
0.372
0.214
0.158
Stochastic Block
0.361
0.342
0.019
0.527
0.367
0.160
APPENDIX F
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
F.1 Model architecture Details of LDDGNN
In DAG scheduling, edges e = (v1, v2) ∈E coexisting with another directed path from l from v1 to v2 are redundant;
removing them preserves scheduling constraints. This equivalence allows us to focus on the eliminated graph formed by


--- Page 29 ---
29
removing all these redundant edges. We defined the lognest directed distance (LDD) de(v, w) as the signed length of the longest
directed path between v and w. The edges of the eliminated graph can be identified through LDD de(v, w) = ±1, enabling
using LDD to implicitly represent this structure without explicit construction. Furthermore, to capture broader connectivity,
we extend LDD to de(v, w) = +∞for undirected connected but not directed connected node pairs and de(v, w) = −∞
for disconnected node pairs. The LDD is leveraged to define both the attention masks and attention biases within the MHA
sub-layer. Eight distinct types of attention mask selectively perform attention between node pairs based on LDD values.
The LDDGNN leverages the longest directed distances (LDD) within the DAG. Its node embedding update is defined as:
ql,j
v
= W Q
l,jhl−1
v
,
Kl,j = W K
l,j[hl−1
v1 , . . . , hl−1
vn ],
V l,j = W V
l,j[hl−1
v1 , . . . , hl−1
vn ],
bhl
v = hl−1
v
+ concatj
h
softmax
(ql,j
v )TKl,j
√
d
+ [bde(v,v1), . . . , bde(v,vn)] + [M j
v,v1, . . . , M j
v,vn]

V l,ji
,
hl
v = bhl
v + MLP(l)(bhl
v).
where V = {v1, ..., vn} is the set of nodes.
The LDDGNN incorporates attention masks M j
v,w and bias terms bde(v,w) both derived from the LDD. Let N1 = Z ∪
{−∞, +∞}, N2 = {1}, N3 = {−1}, N4 = {2}, N5 = {−2}, N6 = [3, +∞)∩Z, N7 = (−∞, −3]∩Z, N8 = {+∞}. Given the
number of attention heads, nhead (a multiple of 8), the mask M j
v,w (j = 0, ..., nhead −1) for each attention head is calculated
by
M j
v,w =
(
0
if de(v, w) ∈N⌊8j/nhead⌋+1
−∞
otherwise
.
(14)
For the bias calculation, a hyperparameter Dmax = 500 is employed. First, the folded longest directed distance df(v, w) is
calculated:
df(v, w) =















de(v, w)
if de(v, w) ∈[−Dmax + 1, Dmax −1]
Dmax −1
if de(v, w) ∈[Dmax, +∞)
−Dmax + 1
if de(v, w) ∈(−∞, −Dmax]
Dmax
if de(v, w) = +∞
−Dmax
if de(v, w) = −∞
.
(15)
Then the bias bde(v,w) is obtained by selecting the (df(v, w) + Dmax + 1)-th parameter from a learnable embedding table
of size 2Dmax + 1. This mechanism is equivalent to applying a one-hot encoding to the folded distance and then passing it
through a linear layer.
F.2 Model hyperparameters
The hyperparameter configuration for our WeCAN architecture is detailed below. An MLP is used to embed the initial
features of tasks, and a separate MLP is used for resource pools. Specifically, each MLP consists of a linear layer that maps
from 3-dimensional (for tasks) or 2-dimensional (for pools) input features to the shared embedding dimension dhigh = 512,
followed by a GELU activation. The first weighted cross attention layer and the longest directed distance graph neural network
operate within the dhigh = 512 dimension. Subsequent alternating update layers in the encoder and the entire decoder are
projected into the dlow = 128 dimension to enhance computational efficiency. All weighted cross attention layers employ 8
attention heads. The longest directed distance graph neural network utilizes 8 layers and 16 attention heads where each mask
type corresponds to 2 heads. The skip parameters α, β, and γ are computed by an MLP consisting of two hidden layers with a
hidden dimension of 64, using GELU and Sigmoid as activation functions.
F.3 Training details
We train our model using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 10−4. The training batch size is set to 64 by default.
For TPC-H-100, a smaller batch size of 32 is adopted due to GPU memory limitations. The model is trained for 800 batches.
The training process does not include any information about the test dataset. Training durations for different configurations are
summarized in Table XX.
We consider two baseline strategies for REINFORCE: (1) the average reward of all samples; (2) the reward of a greedy
rollout obtained using a separate model that is periodically synchronized with the current policy. In practice, we find that the
average reward baseline leads to faster and smoother convergence. Based on this observation, we adopt it as the default baseline
for training.
As detailed in Appendix E.3, the generation map module is the primary computational bottleneck during both training and
inference. To improve efficiency, we implement a PyTorch-based version of the generation map. This GPU-based implementation
is used during training and also in sample-based inference, where large batch sizes or many samples are processed. For greedy
inference, however, we use a CPU-based version of the generation map, as GPU acceleration provides no runtime benefit in
this setting.


--- Page 30 ---
30
TABLE XX
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS ABOUT TRAINING TIME OF WECAN-GREEDY.
Experiment
Total time
Time per batch
TPC-H-30
6.6h
0.5min
TPC-H-50
14.5h
1.1min
TPC-H-100
26h
2min
Erd˝os-Rényi graph
19h
1.4 min
Layer Graphs
15.5h
1.2 min
Stochastic Block
13.3h
1 min
TPC-H-30-heavy
6.5h
0.5min
TPC-H-50-heavy
14h
1.1min
F.4 Inference details
Since the skip action has a limited impact in regular TPC-H instances (i.e., those without heavy tasks) and tends to increase the
variance of makespan, we disable the skip action across all experiments on regular TPC-H datasets. This allows for more stable
and reliable evaluation of model performance and component contributions. Five random seeds: 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004
are used for calculating the mean and standard deviation of results in Tables I to VI. A single fixed random seed of 2000 is
used for the results in Tables IX to XVIII.
