--- Page 1 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming
System–Accelerator Co-Design
QUNYOU LIU, Embedded Systems Laboratory (ESL), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Switzerland
MARINA ZAPATER, Institute of Reconfigurable & Embedded Digital Systems (REDS), School of En-
gineering and Management Vaud, HES-SO University of Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland,
Switzerland
DAVID ATIENZA, Embedded Systems Laboratory (ESL), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Switzerland
Transformers have revolutionized AI in natural language processing and computer vision, but their enormous
computation and memory demands pose significant challenges for hardware acceleration. In practice, end-
to-end throughput is often limited by paged data movement and interconnect bandwidth, not just raw
MAC count. This work proposes a unified system–accelerator co-design approach to efficiently accelerate
transformer inference by jointly optimizing a novel hardware matrix accelerator and its system integration with
paged, streaming dataflows and explicit overlap of compute and transfer. On the hardware side, we introduce
MatrixFlow, a loosely-coupled 16×16 systolic-array accelerator featuring a block-based matrix multiplication
method that is page-aligned (4 KB tiles), uses only a small (≈20 KB) on-chip buffer, and runs a pipelined schedule
of DMA, compute, and DMA-out to fully utilize interconnect bandwidth, emphasizing standard DMA-driven
streaming rather than large on-chip reuse. On the system side, we develop Gem5-AcceSys, an extension of
the gem5 full system simulator allowing exploration of standard interconnects (PCIe) and configurable
memory hierarchies including Direct-Memory (DM), Direct-Cache (DC), and Device-Memory (DevMem)
modes with SMMU/TLB effects. Through co-design, MatrixFlow’s novel dataflow and the Gem5-AcceSys
platform are tuned in tandem to alleviate data-movement bottlenecks without requiring specialized CPU-
instruction-set modifications. We validate our approach with gem5 simulations on representative transformer
models (BERT and ViT) across multiple data types and system setups. Results demonstrate up to 22× speed-
up in end-to-end inference over a CPU-only baseline and performance gains of 5×–8× over state-of-the-art
loosely- and tightly-coupled accelerators. Furthermore, we show that a standard PCIe-based host memory
design can achieve ∼80% of the performance of on-device HBM memory. Overall, paged streaming and
pipeline overlap, not large local SRAMs, emerge as the most effective knobs for efficient transformer inference
under realistic system constraints.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Simulation tools; • Software and its engineering →Data
flow architectures; • Computer systems organization →Multicore architectures; Interconnection
architectures; • Hardware →Hardware accelerators.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Computer Architecture, Design Framework, Memory Architecture, Accel-
erator
1
Introduction
Transformer models [37] have become ubiquitous in modern AI, powering breakthroughs in natural
language processing (NLP) and computer vision [12, 13]. Their success comes at the cost of massive
computation and memory footprints [17, 20], such as billions of parameters and operations [12, 13],
leading to significant data movement during inference [17]. As transformers find their way into
real-time applications [32], there is an urgent need for efficient and scalable hardware to meet
these increasing computational and memory demands [19, 23]. However, designing accelerators for
Authors’ Contact Information: Qunyou Liu, qunyou.liu@epfl.ch, Embedded Systems Laboratory (ESL), École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland; Marina Zapater, marina.zapater@heig-vd.ch, Institute of
Reconfigurable & Embedded Digital Systems (REDS), School of Engineering and Management Vaud, HES-SO University of
Applied Sciences and Arts Western Switzerland, Yverdon-les-Bains, Switzerland; David Atienza, david.atienza@epfl.ch,
Embedded Systems Laboratory (ESL), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Vaud, Switzerland.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.
arXiv:2603.19057v1  [cs.AR]  19 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
111:2
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
transformers is challenging because these models are both compute-intensive [20] and memory-
intensive [17], often pushing the limits of existing processing and memory architectures.
A key observation is that matrix multiplication dominates transformer workloads [20, 37].
General matrix multiply (GEMM) operations, which underlie attention mechanisms and feed-
forward network layers, account for the vast majority of transformer inference time [20]. This
has made GEMM the prime target for optimization in both software and hardware. In fact, almost
all high-performance deep learning accelerators feature specialized matrix engines, for example,
Google’s TPU uses a 256×256 systolic array [19, 22]. Systolic arrays offer massive parallelism and
high compute density perfectly suited to GEMM, and they have shown tremendous promise in
accelerating ML workloads. The challenge, however, is that maximizing raw compute throughput
is not enough—the surrounding system must efficiently supply data to keep the matrix units busy.
Previous studies have found that data movement, memory access, and interconnect delays can
become critical limiting factors [2, 17]. For example, a discrete accelerator connected via PCIe (a
loosely-coupled device) relies on the host CPU and software for data transfer. The overhead of
DMA setup, PCIe latency, and explicit cache management can be substantial, often accounting
for more than 40% of the total inference runtime in typical offload scenarios [2, 36]. On the other
hand, tightly-coupled accelerators integrated on the system-on-chip (SoC) can avoid PCIe overhead
by sharing memory with the host, potentially via coherent caches. This integration eases data
sharing and programmability, but introduces its own challenges: hardware-managed caches incur
area/power overheads and added design complexity, so many accelerators forego full coherence [29].
Even with coherence, on-chip accelerators contend with shared memory bandwidth and may still
be starved for data if the memory hierarchy is not designed to feed them. In short, focusing solely
on the accelerator’s datapath while neglecting the interconnect and memory system can lead to
unbalanced designs, for example, powerful matrix engines that idle cycles waiting for data [34, 39].
This gap between accelerator microarchitecture and system architecture has become a fundamental
performance hurdle.
Our work addresses this need through system-accelerator co-design for transformer inference.
We jointly consider the accelerator’s internal architecture and its integration with a standard
system platform to eliminate bottlenecks. In particular, we target the dominant GEMM operations
in transformers with a specialized systolic-array accelerator, and we co-design the surrounding
system (interconnect, memory hierarchy, and software stack) to keep the accelerator utilization
high. This paper makes the following contributions:
• MatrixFlow Accelerator: We introduce MatrixFlow, a custom 16 × 16 systolic array acceler-
ator optimized for transformer inference. Unlike prior arrays that rely on large scratchpads or
idealized data feeds, MatrixFlow deliberately uses minimal on-chip buffering and streams
page-aligned 4 KB matrix tiles directly from host memory. Its dataflow reformulates
GEMM as a continuous stream of matrix blocks, enabling long, contiguous DMA bursts and
reducing fragmentation. This co-optimized architecture sustains high utilization with a small
silicon footprint by depending on a well-orchestrated system pipeline rather than excessive
local storage.
• Gem5-AcceSys Full-System Simulator: We develop Gem5-AcceSys, an extension of the
gem5 full-system simulator, to allow for detailed system-level evaluation of accelerators using
standard interconnects. Gem5-AcceSys models a complete platform with support for PCIe
communication, direct memory access (DMA) engines, an I/O memory management unit
(SMMU) for address translation, and realistic DRAM timing models. This framework allows us
to explore how different system configurations (e.g., PCIe bandwidth, memory technologies,
NUMA effects) impact accelerator performance. By integrating the MatrixFlow accelerator
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 3 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:3
model into Gem5-AcceSys, we can simulate end-to-end transformer inference scenarios with
cycle-level fidelity, uncovering bottlenecks in data movement and interplay between the
accelerator and system resources.
• Co-Optimized Software Runtime: A lightweight driver/runtime partitions matrices into
page-aligned 4 KB tiles that map cleanly to the 16×16 array, issues long contiguous DMA
bursts, and double-buffers transfers to overlap PCIe/DRAM access with compute. The runtime
amortizes DMA descriptors, improves SMMU/TLB locality, and avoids strided accesses,
keeping the array fed in near-streaming fashion and maximizing effective bandwidth.
• High Performance and Comparison: Through full-system experiments on representative
transformer models (BERT and Vision Transformer variants), we demonstrate up to 22×
speedup in end-to-end inference latency compared to a CPU-only baseline. MatrixFlow’s co-
designed approach also achieves superior performance against state-of-the-art alternatives: it
outperforms a comparable loosely-coupled accelerator by more than 5× and a tightly coupled
accelerator by more than 8× in delivered throughput. These gains stem from our balanced
design: the combination of a right-sized matrix engine with an optimized interconnect and
memory subsystem allows us to approach ideal accelerator utilization. Importantly, our
evaluation spans different system setups (varying PCIe lane counts, memory types, etc.), and
we find that the co-design approach consistently provides robust gains across these scenarios.
In summary, this work illustrates that system-accelerator co-design, grounded in full-system
simulation, is essential for unlocking the performance and energy efficiency needed in next-
generation intelligent systems.
2
Background and Motivation
2.1
Accelerators for AI Workloads and Integration Challenges
Modern artificial intelligence (AI) and deep learning workloads (e.g., CNNs and Transformers) have
spurred a proliferation of specialized hardware accelerators. GPUs were among the first broadly
adopted AI accelerators, offering massive parallelism for general-purpose computation [40, 41].
Systolic arrays (SAs) have since emerged as a crucial architecture for matrix-intensive computations
in deep learning, exemplified by Google’s Tensor Processing Unit (TPU) [19] and academic designs
like Eyeriss [9]. These accelerators exploit data reuse and parallel data flow to achieve significantly
higher performance and energy efficiency than general-purpose CPUs for matrix multiplication, the
core operation in many ML models [26]. Broadly, accelerator integration falls into two categories —
tightly coupled (on-chip, integrated with the CPU) versus loosely coupled (off-chip via a standard
I/O interconnect) — each with its own trade-offs.
Tightly-Coupled Accelerators (TCAs): Tightly-coupled AI accelerators reside on the same
chip as the host CPU (e.g., as co-processors or functional units sharing system memory), affording
low-latency data access and often hardware-managed cache coherence. This close integration comes
at the cost of extra CPU instruction and synchronization overhead, and performance can be limited
by the host core’s memory bandwidth. For example, modern CPUs have SIMD extensions like
NEON [4]/AVX [16]/SSE [1, 15] that act as backend execution units to support vector processing,
enabling data-parallel speedups for numerically intensive workloads. From academic prototypes,
TiC-SAT [3] introduces a small systolic array as a tightly-coupled functional unit in the CPU
pipeline, using custom ISA extensions to accelerate transformer model inference. Gemmini [14]
attaches a RISC-V matrix multiplication accelerator as a RoCC co-processor, allowing in-order
cores to offload DNN kernels to a tightly integrated systolic array that shares the CPU’s memory
hierarchy. TCAs exemplify designs that minimize data movement, but require careful co-design to
avoid stalling the CPU and to balance pipeline and memory usage.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 4 ---
111:4
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
Loosely-Coupled Accelerators (LCAs): LCAs are implemented as separate chips or connected
modules that communicate with the CPU via standard I/O interconnects. They support highly
specialized, large-scale designs with dedicated memory (e.g., GDDR or HBM), but require explicit
data transfers and suffer from higher latency and potential under-utilization due to I/O bottlenecks.
Classic industrial LCAs include discrete GPUs, Google’s TPU [18], and AWS Trainium [7], all of
which prioritize matrix throughput at the cost of communication overhead. More recently, startups
like Tenstorrent [28] have adopted similar principles in custom datacenter accelerators. Academic
designs such as Eyeriss [9] and DianNao [8] demonstrate that even small-scale LCAs must carefully
manage data movement across host-device boundaries. These efforts underscore the need for
co-optimizing compute and communication when designing loosely-coupled AI accelerators.
Whether tightly or loosely coupled, the overarching challenge is feeding accelerators with data at
high speed and coordinating with the system software, without idle cycles or bottlenecks. Modern
AI workloads operate on massive models and datasets, so performance is often limited by data
movement and memory access rather than raw compute throughput. This imbalance motivates
a co-design approach: architects must jointly optimize the accelerator microarchitecture and its
integration (memory hierarchy, interconnect, coherence mechanism) to minimize transfer overhead
and latency. In practice, intermediate solutions such as coherent attachment (PCIe, CXL) are being
explored to blend low latency with device autonomy. Fully understanding these trade-offs and
devising balanced solutions requires full-system simulation and evaluation environments that
model both the accelerator and the surrounding system (CPU, memory, I/O) in tandem. This holistic
evaluation is necessary to guide the design of next-generation AI accelerators and their interfaces,
ensuring that integration challenges are addressed hand-in-hand with accelerator performance
goals.
2.2
State-of-the-Art Accelerator Simulation Frameworks
Simulating accelerators in a full-system context is vital to study these integration issues. To this end,
researchers have developed several accelerator simulation frameworks, each addressing system
integration to varying degrees. Various extensions to gem5 enable accelerator modeling in a full-
system context. Gem5-Aladdin couples gem5 with pre-RTL analytical models to rapidly estimate
accelerator performance and energy [34]. Gem5-SALAM uses an LLVM IR approach to model
custom accelerators for early-stage design evaluation [33]. In contrast, gem5-RTL integrates actual
RTL (via cosimulation) for accurate cycle information at the cost of simulation speed [5]. Gem5-X
targets many-core heterogeneous systems, supporting advanced memories and multiple accelerators
to explore system-level effects (e.g., near-memory computing) [30]. Other frameworks, beyond
gem5, full-stack simulators like SMAUG provide a deep learning workload environment on gem5
with links for accelerator models, to study end-to-end DNN performance, including data movement
and scheduling [39]. Meanwhile, Accel-Sim combines GPU modeling with CPU host simulation,
but lacks full-system detail [21].
Table 1. Comparison of Gem5-based frameworks for hardware accelerator simulation [25]
Feature
Gem5-Aladdin
Gem5-SALAM
Gem5-RTL
Gem5-X
Gem5-AcceSys
Accel. Design Level
C++
LLVM IR
RTL
C++
C++, RTL
Interconnect
Basic buses
Basic buses
Basic buses
Basic buses
Basic buses, PCIe
Accel. Address Translation
Yes
No
No
No
Yes (SMMU)
External Memory Simulator
No
No
No
No
Ramulator/DRAMsys
Kernel Driver Support
No
No
No
Limited
Yes
Multi-Channel DMA
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Device-Side Memory
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Full-System Simulation
Yes
Bare-metal
Yes
Yes
Yes
Accel. Process Model
Integrated
Integrated
Integrated
Integrated
Child process (Multi-threaded)
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 5 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:5
These frameworks (shown in Table 1) have propelled research by enabling early evaluation of
accelerator designs. However, all of them exhibit notable shortcomings in modeling realistic
system integration:
• Simplistic Interconnects: Most frameworks assume idealized or basic bus interconnects (e.g.,
a simple memory bus or direct host memory access) and lack support for standard I/O
interfaces like PCI Express [2]. As a result, they cannot accurately capture the latency,
bandwidth constraints, and packet-based behavior of real peripheral links.
• Limited Memory Hierarchy Modeling: Features such as Non-Uniform Memory Access (NUMA)
or hybrid memory (e.g., device HBM vs. host DDR) are typically absent [29, 35]. These
simulators often treat all memory as monolithic, without modeling multiple memory types
or the costs of crossing coherence domains and sockets.
• No DMA/Engine Support: Direct Memory Access engines, which are crucial for offloading bulk
data transfers from the CPU, are generally not modeled [11]. Accelerators in these simulators
often magically read/write host memory, whereas real systems require programmed DMA
operations or cache-coherent interfaces to move data.
• No Address Translation (IOMMU): Address translation can introduce heavy overhead even for
accelerators [24], yet these frameworks have not incorporated System Memory Management
Units (SMMUs/IOMMUs) to handle virtual-to-physical address translation for accelerators [29,
38]. Consequently, they ignore TLB miss overheads or driver-mediated pinning of pages,
which can be significant in practice.
• Limited OS Modeling and Poor Scalability: Many frameworks run in bare metal or user mode,
lacking kernel drivers, interrupts, and realistic job scheduling, limiting their ability to model
software overhead. Cycle-accurate or single-threaded models also scale poorly, making it
difficult to simulate large workloads or multi-accelerator systems [6].
These gaps are evident when comparing feature support between frameworks. For example,
Table 1 contrasts gem5-Aladdin, SALAM, gem5-RTL, gem5-X, and Gem5-AcceSys. None of the
pre-existing tools support a standard PCIe interconnect or accelerator address translation, and only
gem5-X included any notion of separate device memory [30], even without full IOMMU or DMA
support. Kernel-driver integration was virtually non-existent before Gem5-AcceSys [25].
2.3
Motivation for a Unified Simulator–Accelerator Co-Design Approach
The shortcomings of current frameworks motivate our unified solution: co-design the accelerator
alongside the simulator. Rather than developing accelerators in isolation and then grappling with
integration, we propose treating the system context as a first-class design concern.
Gem5-AcceSys extends gem5 with full-system support for accelerators. It models PCIe-based
accelerator attachment, a multi-channel DMA engine, and an I/O MMU (SMMU) for realistic
high-throughput data movement and address translation. The framework supports both host-
and device-side memory and integrates cycle-accurate DRAM models (Ramulator, DRAMsim3,
DRAMSys). It runs a full Linux OS, enabling evaluation of driver overhead, interrupts, and memory
mapping. Table 1 summarizes its key capabilities. Gem5-AcceSys also supports flexible accelerator
modeling: designers can integrate high-level C++ models or compiled RTL via a lightweight
“Accelerator Wrapper” that exchanges commands with gem5 through shared memory. This enables
rapid prototyping while preserving system-level accuracy.
Co-designing the accelerator with the simulator exposes architectural opportunities that isolated
development would miss. Our MatrixFlow accelerator (see Section 3.1) exemplifies this: it is a
buffer-minimal dataflow-driven systolic array designed to stream data directly from host memory
using PCIe and DMA. Unlike traditional designs that rely on large local scratchpads, MatrixFlow
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 6 ---
111:6
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
shifts storage and orchestration to the system, sustaining high throughput with minimal on-chip
buffering.
Fig. 1. Design Framework Architecture [25]
Fig. 2. End-to-End Latency Breakdown and Message Sequence chart
Figures 1 and 2 jointly present the system. Figure 1 gives the structural view and defines the
datapaths (1–6). Figure 2 complements it with a time-ordered message-sequence chart for a tile,
tying those datapaths to the control plane (driver doorbells, DMA descriptors, SMMU transla-
tions) and to the latency buckets used in our analysis. We use these figures to describe the three
modes—DM via paths (3,5), DC via (2,4,5), and DevMem via (6)—and to connect datapath activity
to control events. Section 3.2 walks through the step-by-step tile flow using Fig. 2, and §5 reports
mode-specific performance and latency breakdowns that map directly to the labeled arrows and
braces in these figures. The chart shows the end-to-end control/data flow: accelerator data fetch →
PCIe transaction →SMMU translation →LLC and the MemBus →DRAM. Braces on the right
indicate the latency components. The latency buckets defined in Fig. 2 explain where real-system
effects (PCIe bandwidth, memory latency, TLB misses) manifest in the end-to-end pipeline.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 7 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:7
Evaluating MatrixFlow within Gem5-AcceSys reveals how real-world factors (PCIe bandwidth,
memory latency, TLB misses) impact performance. With optimized interconnects, our loosely-
coupled design can rival or exceed tightly coupled and high-memory accelerators. MatrixFlow
achieves up to 400× speedup over a single-core baseline and outperforms state-of-the-art tightly
(e.g., TiC-SAT) and loosely coupled accelerators. These results highlight the value of simula-
tor–accelerator co-design. Consequently, we developed Gem5-AcceSys and MatrixFlow in tandem
to ensure a balanced architecture that unifies algorithm, hardware, and system considerations.
Section 3 details this co-designed platform.
MatrixFlow deliberately adopts a bandwidth-driven rather than scratchpad-driven design. Instead
of large local buffers to maximize in-place reuse, the accelerator uses a small set of page-sized
SRAMs and a page-aligned streaming dataflow co-designed with PCIe, multi-channel DMA, and
the SMMU. In our default implementation we provision A0/A1, B0/B1, and C—that is, 5×4 KB =
20 KB—to double-buffer the inputs while keeping one page-sized output tile (a minimal variant
uses 3×4 KB without double buffering). Sizing A and B tiles to one 4 KB page lets a single DMA
descriptor fetch a full tile with at most one TLB lookup, and enables a pipeline where DMA-in(A),
DMA-in(B), SA compute, DMA-out(C) overlap tile-by-tile. In practice, neither the link nor the array
runs at its peak continuously: the SA has fill/drain bubbles of 2(𝑊−1) cycles per tile; the I/O path
loses efficiency to descriptor/TLB overheads and PCIe packetization (e.g., non-optimal TLP sizes),
and the memory system sees bank/queueing effects. We capture sustained effects with utilization
factors 0 < 𝜂io,𝜂sa ≤1 for the link bandwidth and the array compute, respectively. The overlap
condition for a 𝑊×𝑊array at clock 𝑓and element size 𝑆bytes is
𝑆 2𝑊𝐿+𝑊2
𝜂io 𝐵𝑊peak
≤𝐿+ 2(𝑊−1)
𝜂sa 𝑓
=⇒
𝐵𝑊peak ≥𝑆𝑓 2𝑊𝐿+𝑊2
𝐿+ 2(𝑊−1)
· 𝜂sa
𝜂io
.
(1)
With 𝑊= 16 and 𝑓= 1 GHz, the ideal asymptotes are ≈32/64/128 GB/s for INT8/FP16/FP32,
and the effective requirement scales by 𝜂sa/𝜂io. Increasing the on-chip SRAM from 4 KB to 8 KB
only raises 𝐿and tightens the ideal bound by ≤1–3% at this design point, while doubling SRAM
area/leakage; it does not remove 𝜂io losses from TLB walks, DMA descriptors, or non-optimal
PCIe transactions, nor does it eliminate SA fill/drain bubbles. Consequently, we keep on-chip
storage small and invest in DMA/PCIe orchestration (page-aligned tiles, tuned TLP size, double
buffering) to maximize 𝜂io and 𝜂sa, naturally aligned with SMMU/OS page granularity. §3.3 details
the page-blocked mapping (including the row-striped layout of 𝐵); §5 quantifies these utilization
effects with a roofline view, a 256 B PCIe packet-size optimum, and measured TLB/translation
overheads. Under our target design point—a 16×16 INT8 systolic array at 1 GHz with 2–64 GB/s
host-memory bandwidth—using 4 kB tiles and three 4 kB on-chip SRAM buffers is sufficient to
approach the roofline. Doubling the on-chip SRAM capacity to 8 kB per buffer would tighten the
analytical bandwidth bound by only 1–3% on our evaluated workloads.
MatrixFlow’s design point differs from mainstream accelerators in where locality is created
and how data reaches the compute core. Table 2 contrasts three representative points: (i) Gem-
mini [14]—a tightly coupled RoCC systolic array with large on-chip scratchpads and accumulator
memories to maximize in-place reuse, support output-stationary (OS) and weights-stationary (WS);
(ii) an embedded GPU (eGPU) [27]—a SIMT core complex that relies on caches and warp sched-
uling for locality, trading deterministic dataflow for generality; and (iii) MatrixFlow (ours)—a
loosely coupled, page-aligned streaming systolic array that minimizes on-chip storage and uses
DMA+SMMU to overlap transfers and compute, supporting output-stationary, which has only
three sets of 4 kB local buffers (2 double-buffered SRAM and 1 normal SRAM component, with
20 kB physical SRAM but 12 kB logically). This comparison showcases that the novelty of this work
does not come from designing a new systolic array topology but rather from the page-aligned
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 8 ---
111:8
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
Table 2. Microarchitecture positioning and memory design logic.
Aspect
Gemmini (RoCC SA)
eGPU (SIMT)
MatrixFlow (ours)
Coupling to host
Tightly coupled (on-SoC,
RoCC)
Tightly/loosely (SoC GPU
or discrete)
Loosely coupled over PCIe
Compute core
Systolic
array
(WS/OS
dataflows)
SIMT cores + tensor intrin-
sics
16×16 systolic array (OS)
Local on-chip storage
Large scratchpads + accu-
mulator SRAMs (hundreds
of kB)
Caches (I/D/L1), shared L2
3×4 kB SRAM (A/B/C)
Locality strategy
In-place reuse in scratch-
pads; traffic shaped for SA
Cache/memory coalescing
via warps
Page-aligned streaming;
overlap DMA/compute
Interconnect & transla-
tion
SoC buses; no SMMU on de-
vice
SoC interconnect or PCIe;
MMU in GPU
PCIe
+
multi-channel
DMA + SMMU
Tiling unit
Accelerator tiles sized for
scratchpad
Kernel-dependent
(CTA/warp tiles)
One OS page (4 kB) per A/B
tile; row-striped B
Overlap mechanism
SW/ISA-managed
prefetch/reuse
Warp scheduling, async
copies
Double-buffered
DMA{A,B}/compute/DMA-
out C
streaming dataflow co-designed with PCIe, multi-channel DMA and SMMU, which makes a tiny
3×4 KB SRAM sufficient while sustaining utilization once bandwidth satisfies the overlap bound.
Table 3. Local on-chip storage for data reuse (SRAM/caches)
Design
Local storage (kB)
SRAM/cache area (mm2)
Dyn. power (mW)
Gemmini Scratchpad
320
0.731
86.59
eGPU caches (I$ 4 kB + D$ 16 kB)
20
0.0809
17.70
MatrixFlow buffer
20
0.100
55.79
Table 3 highlights the order-of-magnitude difference in local storage philosophy (hundreds of
kB scratchpads vs. page-sized 20 kB), while Table 4 shows that the compute macro in MatrixFlow
remains compact and competitive in area/power; all PPA figures are synthesized with the same
28 nm TSMC technology using our own synthesis flow. Together with the overlap bound in §3.1,
this supports a bandwidth-driven, page-aligned streaming design over scratchpad-centric reuse.
Table 4. Compute core footprint (matrix/tensor engine)
Design (dataflow)
Area (mm2)
Dyn. power (mW)
Peak (GOPS)
GOPS/W
GOPS/mm2
Gemmini SA (OS/WS)
0.230
102.47
512.0
4,996.58
2,226.09
eGPU SIMT tensor core
0.200
83.00
9.6
120
48
MatrixFlow SA (OS)
0.186
84.55
512.0
6,050.90
2,752.69
3
System-Accelerator Co-Design Architecture
Our accelerator is a loosely-coupled PCIe device that streams page-aligned tiles from the host via
a multi-channel DMA and an SMMU (IOMMU) for VA→PA translation. The accelerator keeps
only three 4 KB SRAM tiles (see Fig. 4) on chip and relies on the system interconnect + DRAM to
supply data at line rate. We evaluate three access modes that correspond to the numbered arrows
in Fig. 1: Direct-Memory (DM) uses path (3, 5) to go straight to DRAM; Direct-Cache (DC) uses (2,
4, 5) to enter the LLC and fall back to DRAM on misses; DevMem uses (6) to read/write device-side
memory. This labeling scheme is used throughout §3–§5 to tie microarchitecture, interconnect, and
software runtime together.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 9 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:9
3.1
MatrixFlow Accelerator Hardware Design
MatrixFlow is a loosely coupled matrix-multiplication accelerator built around a 16×16 systolic
array (SA) of Processing Elements (PEs) optimized for transformer workloads (Figure 3).
Fig. 3. Systolic Array Architecture [26]
The accelerator is equipped with PCIe and a DMA interface logic alongside the PE array (Figure 4)
to support direct data streaming between host memory and the array, enabling high-throughput
operation without CPU intervention.
Fig. 4. Hardware design for systolic array [26]
Unlike tightly coupled accelerators requiring ISA modifications, MatrixFlow attaches to the
system as a peer device, simplifying integration into full-system simulators like Gem5-AcceSys (see
Section 3.2). Notably, MatrixFlow’s emphasis on efficient DMA-driven data streaming and minimal
on-chip buffering echoes the design principles of Intel’s Data Streaming Accelerator (DSA), which
similarly couples high-throughput DMA engines with a lightweight accelerator architecture to
offload data movement from the CPU.
A key novel aspect of MatrixFlow’s hardware is its minimal on-chip buffering. The accelerator
includes only three small SRAM buffers (on the order of kilobytes each) for data staging, dramatically
less than typical AI accelerators that often employ buffers in the hundreds of KB. Specifically, as
shown in Figure 4, there are two 4KB input buffers (for matrix A and matrix B tiles) and one 4KB
output buffer. Notably, 4KB corresponds to the size of a standard memory page, and by sizing the
buffers to hold one page of data, the design aligns perfectly with the block-based data mapping
discussed in Section 3.3. The input tiles are streamed into the array, the partial results flow diagonally
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 10 ---
111:10
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
across the PEs, and the completed output tiles are flushed back to the host memory. A lightweight
controller manages double-buffered DMA transfers and triggers interrupts to the CPU. MatrixFlow
supports multiple data precisions (INT8/16/32, FP16/32) with configurable PE logic and buffer
size. Across configurations, the architecture maintains the same principle: minimal local storage,
efficient memory streaming, and alignment with system-level constraints, paving the way for the
integrated design discussed in Section 3.2.
3.2
System Integration and Gem5-AcceSys Framework
To evaluate MatrixFlow in a realistic system context, we integrate the accelerator into a full-
system gem5 simulation using our Gem5-AcceSys framework. The simulated host is an ARM-based
multicore CPU with private caches and a shared last-level cache (LLC) connected to DDR3 main
memory. The MatrixFlow accelerator attaches as a peripheral via a PCIe link on the system bus,
enabling it to issue memory requests and DMA transfers like a standard I/O device. This loosely
coupled approach at the interconnect level requires no modifications to the CPUs and leverages
standard interfaces (PCIe) for seamless integration. Gem5-AcceSys augments the simulator with
key SoC components to support the accelerator. Notably, it includes a system memory management
unit (SMMU) for the accelerator’s virtual-to-physical address translation and a multi-channel DMA
engine for streaming data between host memory and the accelerator’s local buffers. These features
allow the accelerator to share the host’s virtual address space and perform high-throughput data
transfers, closely emulating a real deployment. We introduced these enhancements in response
to MatrixFlow design requirements (e.g., virtual memory support and efficient data streaming),
underscoring the iterative codesign of the hardware and the system model. Gem5-AcceSys also
captures realistic interconnect and software behavior. For example, the PCIe 3.0x4 interface of
the accelerator is modeled with proper link latency, bandwidth limitations, and contention on
the host memory bus. The framework runs a full Linux OS with a lightweight kernel driver to
manage the accelerator, mirroring a real software stack. This driver sets up DMA buffers for I/O,
issues commands to the accelerator (by writing to its control registers) and handles interrupts on
completion, just as a real system driver would.
Our platform supports three modes for the accelerator’s memory access (Fig. 1):
DM (Direct-Memory)—arrows (3, 5): The accelerator’s DMA issues host virtual-address requests;
the SMMU performs translation; traffic traverses PCIe/host interconnect and reaches DRAM via (5).
DM maximizes streaming bandwidth for large transfers but bypasses the CPU LLC, so software
must explicitly flush/invalidate to ensure coherence.
DC (Direct-Cache)—arrows (2, 4, 5): Accelerator load/stores enter the coherent LLC; hits return
at cache latency, while misses traverse the on-chip MemBus (2) to the memory controller (4)
and DRAM (5). DC is favorable when tiled working sets exhibit LLC locality (e.g., reuse across
neighboring tiles or pipeline stages).
DevMem (Device-side)—arrow (6): The accelerator reads/writes its on-card SRAM/DRAM via
a local controller, avoiding PCIe for resident tiles. This eliminates host-memory traffic during
GEMM-heavy phases, but CPU-resident pre/post stages (e.g., packing, activation, or control) may
incur PCIe crossings.
We use these exact arrow sequences in Sect. 5 to interpret performance trends (e.g., Fig. 11:
host-memory with fast PCIe vs. DevMem residence) and to quantify when DC’s locality beats DM’s
raw bandwidth.
The runtime partitions matrices into 4 KB tiles (Int8 16×256, Fp16/Int16 16×128, Fp32/Int32 16×64).
The driver pins/maps the pages via the SMMU, enqueues read(A), read(B), and write(C) DMA
descriptors, and rings a doorbell (MMIO). The DMA then fetches A/B along the datapath of the
selected mode— DM (3, 5), DC (2, 4, 5), or DevMem (6)—to fill the input tile buffers. While the
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 11 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:11
16×16 systolic array (SA) consumes the current A/B tiles, the DMA prefetches the next A/B tiles
and drains the previous C tile. Upon completion, the accelerator raises an MSI interrupt; the driver
recycles descriptors and the runtime advances to the next tile. This control-plane sequence aligns
with the data pipeline in Fig. 6, and—by referencing the Fig. 1 arrows—makes the hardware–system
integration explicit (e.g., LLC hits on DC versus raw streaming on DM). We evaluate these three
paths in Sect. 5 to quantify how interconnect and memory placement shape end-to-end throughput.
In general, this integrated design ensures that data movement overlaps with computation. As one
tile of a matrix is processed in the accelerator systolic array, the next tile is fetched (from memory
or cache) and a previous output tile is written back, creating a pipeline that keeps communication
and computation in parallel. In effect, what would traditionally be a sequence of discrete transfers
becomes a continuous stream of data flowing from memory to the accelerator and back. This
holistic co-design of MatrixFlow and Gem5-AcceSys means every hardware decision is mirrored in
the system model and each system insight feeds into the hardware design, ensuring the accelerator
and its system context are optimized together rather than in isolation.
3.3
Dataflow Optimization and Software Mapping
We choose 4 KB tiles to align each DMA burst with a single page translation in the SMMU and to
match multiples of 16 for the 16×16 systolic array. This reduces PCIe packetization waste and TLB
pressure while keeping the SA fully occupied with minimal on-chip SRAM (two 4 KB inputs + one
4 KB output). Naïve GEMM implementations in accelerators often traverse matrix A in row-major
order and matrix B in column-major order. As shown in Figure 5 (top), this mismatch causes B’s data
to be accessed in non-contiguous, strided patterns: entire columns of B are scattered across many
pages, leading to poor cache locality, frequent TLB misses, and inefficient use of PCIe bandwidth
(many small transfers). In short, a straightforward mapping of the matrix multiplication would be
bottlenecked by memory access overheads rather than by the accelerator’s compute capabilities.
We address this issue by co-optimizing the data layout and the accelerator dataflow. The runtime
partitions each large matrix into page-aligned 4KB tiles (e.g., 64×64 INT8 elements per tile). Each
tile of matrix A is stored in a row-major format, and each tile of matrix B is stored contiguously in
a row-striped manner (i.e., by rows rather than true columns) to avoid strided accesses. Figure 5
(bottom) illustrates this block-based tiling scheme. With this organization, every tile can be fetched
with a single DMA burst spanning one full page, eliminating fragmented transfers and reducing
address-translation overhead.
In the software runtime, the GEMM is executed tile by tile using this blocked layout (Algorithm 1).
The nested loops iterate over tiles A and B, accumulating partial products into each output tile and
writing back each completed W×W result block before proceeding to the next. This tile-by-tile
processing effectively transforms the matrix multiplication into a series of streaming page-sized
data transfers and computations, instead of numerous fine-grained element-wise accesses.
The benefits of this co-designed dataflow are multi-fold. First, it maximizes contiguous data
transfers over the PCIe and memory system: by always requesting full-page chunks, we achieve
high payload utilization of each PCIe transaction and reduce per-transfer overhead. Second, it
greatly reduces address translation overhead – each 4KB block incurs at most one page translation
(TLB lookup), as opposed to many if the same amount of data were scattered across pages. Third,
blocking improves cache utilization and spatial locality. Even in DC mode (cache-coherent access),
the 4KB tiling means that once a block of B is brought into the LLC, the accelerator can reuse all
bytes in that block for many 16×16 computations before moving to the next, instead of thrashing on
uncached column accesses. Fourth, by matching the tile dimensions to the systolic array’s 16×16 PE
dimensions, we avoid internal fragmentation in the processing elements – the full 16×16 array can
be kept busy on one block at a time with minimal padding or wasted computation. And finally, this
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 12 ---
111:12
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
Fig. 5. Conventional matrix blocking and multiplication (top) and our method for GEMM (bottom) [26]
Algorithm 1 Optimized Block Matrix Multiplication
1: function BlockMatrixMultiply(𝐴, 𝐵, 𝑀, 𝑁, 𝐾)
2: 𝑅𝑒𝑠←InitializeMatrix(𝑀, 𝑁)
3: Divide 𝐴and 𝐵into blocks of size 𝑊× 𝐿
4: for 𝑖= 0 to 𝑀/𝑊−1 do
5:
for 𝑗= 0 to 𝑁/𝑊−1 do
6:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘←ZeroMatrix(𝑊,𝑊)
7:
for 𝑘= 0 to 𝐾/𝐿−1 do
8:
𝐴𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘←GetBlock(𝐴,𝑖,𝑘)
9:
𝐵𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘←GetBlock(𝐵, 𝑗,𝑘)
10:
𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘←MultiAcc(𝐴𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘, 𝐵𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘, 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘)
11:
end for
12:
SetBlock(𝑅𝑒𝑠,𝑖, 𝑗, 𝑅𝑒𝑠𝑏𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑘)
13:
end for
14: end for
15: return 𝑅𝑒𝑠
block-based scheme enables a pipelined execution: while one tile is being processed by the systolic
array, the next tile is prefetched into input buffers and the previous result tile is written back,
creating an overlapping producer–consumer pipeline across tiles. Figure 6 illustrates this matrix
multiplication pipeline, where reading A, reading B, calculating the systolic array, and writing back
C are all overlapped for successive blocks. As a result, the accelerator is rarely idle – computation
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 13 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:13
and data transfer proceed concurrently for different tiles, which sustains a high overall throughput.
This dataflow-driven software mapping is a pivotal factor in MatrixFlow’s performance gains: By
co-optimizing how data is laid out and fetched with the hardware capabilities, we free the host
CPU from managing fine-grained data movement and allow the accelerator to run at full speed
with minimal memory stall time.
Fig. 6. Matrix multiplication pipeline [26]
In summary, the system-accelerator co-design extends beyond hardware integration to the
algorithm level: the 4KB blocked matrix multiplication method ensures that MatrixFlow operates
on the transformer’s large matrices in a cache-friendly, stream-friendly manner, significantly
increasing end-to-end inference throughput. Each of these innovations – from block segmentation
and page-aligned tiling to horizontal reordering of data – contributes to an overall design that
bridges the gap between computational efficiency and system-level data movement, a balance that
is essential for high-performance transformer inference.
4
Experimental Setup and Methodology
All experiments are carried out on Gem5-AcceSys with full-system simulation based on Linux.
4.1
Host–Accelerator Platform
Table 5 summarizes the baseline system. Unless otherwise stated, the accelerator streams data from
host DDR3 over a Gen6 ×16 link (128 GB s−1 bidirectional peak). In Section 5 we sweep (i) link
width/speed and (ii) memory technology (DDR4/5, GDDR6, on-card HBM2).
Table 5. Baseline host–accelerator configuration.
Component
Parameter
Value
CPU (host)
core @ freq
ARMv8 OoO @ 1 GHz
L1 I/D cache
size
32 / 64 kB, 4-way
LLC
size
2 MB, 16-way, inclusive
Main memory (host)
tech / size
DDR3-1600, 4 GB
PCIe interconnect
spec
Gen6 ×16 (64 GT s−1/lane)
IOMMU (SMMU)
page size
4 kB (TLB 64 entries)
Accelerator (MatrixFlow)
array
16×16 MACs, 1 GHz
on-chip SRAM
3×4 kB tiles
DMA channels
read / write
2 / 2, 1024-B bursts
4.2
Benchmarks and Workloads
To evaluate the performance of our system–accelerator co-design, we use two main types of
workloads: Micro-kernels: Square GEMMs from 64×64 to 2048×2048 (INT8/16 and FP16/32) under
different configurations (e.g., compute- vs. I/O-bound). Transformer inference: For transformer-
based workloads, we run:
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 14 ---
111:14
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
• BERT-Base (12 layers, 110 M params, seq. length 128)
• BERT-Large (24 layers, 340 M params, seq. length 128)
• ViT-Base/16 (12 layers, 86 M params, 2242 image)
• ViT-Large/16 (24 layers, 307 M params, 2242 image)
These are full transformer encoder models rather than synthetic kernels. BERT-Base/Large
are widely-used backbones in deployed NLP services such as text classification and question
answering. ViT-Base/Large serve as standard vision transformer backbones not only for ImageNet
classification but also for dense prediction tasks (e.g., [10, 31]) and for industrial visual inspection and
defect-detection systems. Because these workloads share the same stack of multi-head self-attention
and feed-forward blocks as many other transformer models, the resulting GEMM/non-GEMM mix
and system-level behavior are representative of a broad class of transformer inference workloads.
All GEMM calls inside attention and feed-forward blocks are off-loaded to MatrixFlow; element-
wise and soft-max stages are executed on the host CPU.
4.3
Hardware Implementation, Power and Energy Modeling
We synthesized a family of MatrixFlow systolic arrays (SAs) to obtain post-synthesis PPA: {4×4,
16×16} arrays across {INT8/16/32, FP8/16/32}. Fixed-point designs target 1.0 GHz; floating-point
designs meet timing at 1.66 ns (≈0.60 GHz). Table 6 reports total cell area and dynamic power for
the Systolic-Array (compute only).
Table 6. Post-synthesis systolic-array PPA and derived compute-only efficiency (MAC = 2 ops).
Variant
Freq
Area (𝜇m2)
Power (mW)
Peak (GOPS)
GOPS/W (TOPS/W)
INT8 4×4
1.0 GHz
16,186
7.464
32.0
4,287 ( 4.29 )
INT8 16×16
1.0 GHz
186,875
84.550
512.0
6,056 ( 6.06 )
INT16 4×4
1.0 GHz
24,989
11.813
32.0
2,709 ( 2.71 )
INT16 16×16
1.0 GHz
397,558
149.419
512.0
3,427 ( 3.43 )
INT32 4×4
1.0 GHz
73,483
33.302
32.0
961 ( 0.96 )
INT32 16×16
1.0 GHz
1,163,841
392.978
512.0
1,303 ( 1.30 )
FP8 4×4
0.60 GHz
8,806
2.251
19.2
8,530 ( 8.53 )
FP8 16×16
0.60 GHz
142,816
34.557
307.2
8,890 ( 8.89 )
FP16 4×4
0.60 GHz
22,802
5.580
19.2
3,441 ( 3.44 )
FP16 16×16
0.60 GHz
363,805
83.655
307.2
3,672 ( 3.67 )
FP32 4×4
0.60 GHz
62,693
16.938
19.2
1,134 ( 1.13 )
FP32 16×16
0.60 GHz
1,032,820
258.173
307.2
1,190 ( 1.19 )
MatrixFlow uses only three 4 kB on-chip SRAM blocks (A/B/C tiles, 12 kB total logical capacity),
whereas many systolic-array designs provision hundreds of kB of local scratchpad. This small-SRAM
choice is deliberate: most model parameters reside in host or device DRAM, and the accelerator
relies on streaming to keep the array busy. Table 6 reports the synthesized area and power for our
4×4 and 16×16 SAs across INT/FP precisions, showing that INT8 offers the best energy efficiency.
Compared with a Gemmini-like tightly coupled SA and the e-GPU tensor core, MatrixFlow achieves
similar or better TOPS/W and compute density while using an order-of-magnitude less on-chip
SRAM.
Compared to Gemmini and the e-GPU: Gemmini is a tightly coupled RoCC co-processor that
shares the CPU memory hierarchy and uses software-managed local memories (scratchpad +
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 15 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:15
accumulator) to exploit on-chip reuse; typical designs provision hundreds of kB on-chip. By contrast,
MatrixFlow is loosely coupled and deliberately minimal-SRAM: only three page-sized SRAMs (A/B/C
= 3×4 KB) are used as staging FIFOs, with high-throughput DMA streaming aligned to 4 KB OS
pages (§3.1–§3.3). This co-design shifts storage/coordination into the system (PCIe + host DRAM
+ SMMU) rather than silicon area. In edge GPUs, high absolute throughput is achieved via large
on-die caches/register files and wide device memory, but sustaining efficiency often depends on
large on-chip state and kernel residency. MatrixFlow takes the opposite path: a small-footprint
SA fed by page-aligned DMA bursts, trading large scratchpads for sustained streaming to keep
utilization high.
Our post-synthesis results show that the 16×16 INT8 SA at 1 GHz reaches 512 GOPS and about
6.1 TOPS/W for the compute array alone; including the 12 kB SRAM dynamics still yields roughly
3.6 TOPS/W, reinforcing that the system is primarily bounded by memory bandwidth and PCIe
transaction efficiency rather than raw SA peak.
5
Results and Design Space Exploration for Transformer Accelerator
5.1
Performance Characterization of MatrixFlow Accelerator
This section evaluates the performance of MatrixFlow both at the computation kernel level (gemm
alone throughput) and at the full transformer inference level, to demonstrate the advantages of the
accelerator. We compare against a single-core CPU baseline and prior accelerator designs. Figures 7
(a) and (b) present the raw GEMM throughput of MatrixFlow across different data precisions and
matrix sizes, while Figure 8 provides a breakdown of the end-to-end inference run time by operation,
contrasting MatrixFlow with the CPU and other accelerators.
(a) Performance Comparison on Precision [26]
(b) Performance Comparison on Matrix Size [26]
Fig. 7. Matrix-multiplication performance comparison on (a) different precision; (b) different matrix size.
Figure 7(a) highlights the raw GEMM throughput across data precisions and matrix sizes, as well
as a breakdown of runtime for complete transformer models, contrasting MatrixFlow against CPU
and other accelerator baselines. It studies matrix multiplication performance for various data types
(512×512 matrix) on different platforms: single-thread CPU (baseline), 256-thread CPU (OMP), ARM
Neon (SIMD), and MatrixFlow accelerator (with direct-cache DC and direct-memory DM). Higher
bars indicate greater throughput or speed-up. The MatrixFlow accelerator achieves dramatically
higher GEMM throughput than the CPU on all precisions. MatrixFlow sees the greatest speedup
with FP16 data, because the baseline CPU lacks native FP16 support and must resort to slow software
emulation. In contrast, the CPU-based implementations (even with Neon SIMD or 256 threads)
gain performance as precision decreases (int8 > int32), but their absolute speedups remain much
lower. The 256-thread CPU reaches only on the order of 20–30× speed-up on this 512×512 GEMM,
far below MatrixFlow’s hundreds-fold improvement. Across all data types, MatrixFlow sustains the
highest throughput – demonstrating the advantage of a specialized systolic array accelerator with
an optimized dataflow, compared to general-purpose processors.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 16 ---
111:16
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
Fig. 7(b) describes the GEMM speed-up with different matrix size using Int8 as desired data
type for MatrixFlow compared to CPU baselines. Bars show improvement factors (log scale)
relative to single-core execution, for three matrix sizes. direct-cache (DC) and direct-memory
(DM) denote MatrixFlow’s access modes; OMP is a 256-thread CPU; Neon is single-core SIMD.
MatrixFlow exhibits extremely large speedups that grow with problem size, reaching 400× at a
512×512 matrix (in direct-cache mode). In these int8 tests, MatrixFlow’s direct cache (DC) mode
slightly outperforms the direct memory (DM) mode for the largest matrices (e.g., 1024×1024), due to
better use of the CPU’s cache hierarchy in the DC setup; however, both modes vastly outperform the
CPU baselines. The 256-thread CPU implementation saturates at only 20–25× speed-up, and even an
optimized single-core Neon SIMD achieves <10×, at these matrix sizes. This stark contrast highlights
MatrixFlow’s superior scaling efficiency: As matrix dimensions grow, MatrixFlow continues to
exploit data reuse and high memory bandwidth, while the CPU quickly hits its limits in memory
bandwidth and parallelism.
Fig. 8. Runtime Analysis [26]
Fig. 8 illustrates the breakdown of inference runtime by major operation on four platforms: (a)
a single-core ARM CPU baseline, (b) a CPU with Neon SIMD optimizations, (c) the TiC-SAT [3]
tightly-coupled accelerator, and (d) the MatrixFlow accelerator. The baseline is a single ARM core,
no Neon SIMD; ‘Neon-optimized CPU’ uses ARM Neon intrinsics for GEMM to show the benefit
of SIMD. Each donut chart shows the percentage of total runtime spent in key operations: Feed-
Forward layers 1 and 2 (FF1, FF2), Multi-Head Attention (MHA), output projection, non-GEMM
operations, and control/communication overhead. Each segment indicates the percentage of time
spent in a specific component of the transformer workload (e.g., GEMM computations, feed-forward
layers, softmax/normalization, or host-accelerator communication overheads).
We measure per-class times in gem5/Gem5-AcceSys by tagging each kernel launch and DMA
episode with a class label, and then aggregating wall-clock time by class: FF1/FF2 (MLP GEMMs),
MHA (attention GEMMs), Projection (QKV/out linears), Non-GEMM (softmax, layer norm, activa-
tions), and Control (CPU orchestration, descriptor setup, SMMU/IOMMU page walks). Unless stated
otherwise, numbers are the mean over runs of ViT-Base (batch=1, 224×224). The baseline CPU is
almost entirely dominated by matrix computations. GEMM-based layers consume 99% of the infer-
ence time (with the two feed-forward layers alone accounting for ≈87.7%). Offloading computation
to Neon (SIMD) reduces this somewhat, but GEMM operations still remain the bottleneck. With
accelerators, the profile shifts significantly. In MatrixFlow, the heavy GEMM layers are drastically
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 17 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:17
accelerated, so other costs become more visible: about 13% of time is spent in non-GEMM parts of
the workload (e.g. softmax, normalization), and importantly a control overhead of 24% emerges from
the loosely-coupled design (PCIe/DMA transfers and driver interaction). By shifting the primary
bottleneck from CPU compute to PCIe/DMA communication, MatrixFlow deliberately accepts an
additional ≈24% communication overhead, yet still outperforms TiC-SAT overall. In MatrixFlow,
the primary bottleneck has been shifted from the compute-intensive GEMM layers to the I/O
subsystem. TiC-SAT, being tightly integrated, incurs negligible PCIe/DMA overhead, but it still
spends a large fraction of runtime in the feed-forward (FF) layers and other non-GEMM operations,
even though those are accelerated, because their performance is limited by the CPU’s internal
bandwidth and data reuse constraints. Notably, by offloading the large matrix multiplications more
efficiently, MatrixFlow actually reduces the relative time spent in the feed-forward layers compared
to TiC-SAT, even though MatrixFlow incurs communication overhead.
5.2
Microbenchmark Analysis
We begin by assessing the platform’s theoretical performance limits with a roofline-style model.
Figure 9 illustrates the system’s execution time as a function of ideal accelerator compute throughput.
Initially, increasing compute capability yields nearly linear speedups, but beyond a certain point the
curve flattens as the memory bandwidth “roof” is reached and additional compute can no longer
improve performance. This defines an upper bound on useful accelerator speedup and underscores
the need to balance computation and data movement in a co-designed system. To identify the
practical bottlenecks in our accelerator, we conducted microbenchmark experiments focusing on
three key factors: (i) the PCIe interface bandwidth and transaction packet size, (ii) the memory
technology and data placement (device-side vs. host-side memory), and (iii) the address translation
overhead. We used a representative 2048×2048 matrix multiplication to isolate each factor’s impact,
as detailed below.
Fig. 9. Roofline Model of the Accelerator System [25]
5.2.1
PCIe Bandwidth and Packet Size. As expected, increasing PCIe transfer throughput dramati-
cally reduces execution time. In our experiments, scaling the PCIe link from a minimal configuration
(2 lanes at 2 Gbps) up to a high-end link (16 lanes at 16 Gbps) yielded an 11× speedup for the
2048×2048 GEMM workload. However, beyond raw bandwidth, the size of the PCIe transaction
packet also affects efficiency (Figure 10). Very small transfers (64B) incurred about 12% longer exe-
cution time than the optimal size due to higher per-packet overhead, while extremely large packets
(4096B) caused pipeline stalls in the PCIe subsystem, leading to up to 36% slowdown at lower link
speeds. We observed an optimal transaction size of around 256B across all tested bandwidths, which
balances transfer overhead and pipeline utilization. Thus, both a high-bandwidth PCIe interface
(e.g., ×16 Gen4/Gen5) and a properly tuned packet size (≈256B) are critical for minimizing data
transfer bottlenecks.
5.2.2
Memory Technology and Location. Next, we analyze the impact of the memory subsystem. Our
platform supports both device-side memory (dedicated DRAM attached directly to the accelerator)
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 18 ---
111:18
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
Fig. 10. Execution Time under different packet sizes for different PCIe bandwidth [25].
and host-side memory (system memory accessed over PCIe), with configurable models for common
DRAM types. We evaluated five memory technologies, DDR3, DDR4, DDR5, GDDR6, and HBM2,
each in two scenarios: attached directly to the accelerator vs. accessed via the host interface. Table 7
summarizes the key parameters of these memory configurations (e.g., per-channel data width and
bandwidth ranging from 12.8GB/s for DDR3 up to 64GB/s for HBM2).
Table 7. Memory Configuration
Component
Channel
Data width
Bandwidth
Data Rate
DDR3
1
64
12.8 GB/s
1600 MT/s
DDR4
1
64
19.2 GB/s
2400 MT/s
DDR5
2
32
25.6 GB/s
3200 MT/s
HBM2
2
128
64 GB/s
2000 MT/s
GDDR6
2
64
32 GB/s
2000 MT/s
Figure 11 compares GEMM performance for different memory types and placements. In all cases,
using device-attached memory yields better performance than using host-accessed memory, and
this gap grows wider for higher-bandwidth memories. For example, with HBM2 (≈64GB/s per
stack in our setup), the 2048×2048 matrix multiplication completes much faster when that HBM2 is
directly on the accelerator, whereas accessing the same high-speed memory over the PCIe link is
bottlenecked by the interconnect. Even a high-bandwidth PCIe (Gen5 ×16) cannot fully bridge the
difference – it narrows the performance gap (by improving host-memory throughput) but still falls
short of the device-attached case. These results highlight the importance of memory placement: to
fully exploit fast memories like HBM2 or GDDR6 on accelerators, they must be integrated on the
device side; otherwise, the benefits are limited by off-chip interface constraints.
Fig. 11. Impact of DRAM type and location [25]
In addition to memory placement, we performed sensitivity studies to separate the effects of
memory bandwidth vs. latency on the GEMM workload. Keeping DRAM latency constant, we varied
the available memory bandwidth over a wide range (up to 256GB/s). We found that performance
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 19 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:19
improves rapidly with increased bandwidth up to around 50GB/s, beyond which returns diminish
significantly – for example, increasing the memory bandwidth from 50GB/s to 256GB/s yielded only
an extra 1.7% reduction in execution time. In contrast, maintaining fixed bandwidth and varying
DRAM latency (from a baseline of 12 ns to 4 ns and up to 36ns) had only a minor effect: even tripling
the latency increased execution time by merely 4.9% in total. This indicates that our transformer
inference workload is far more bandwidth-bound than latency-bound in the memory subsystem.
The implication for co-design is that investing in higher memory bandwidth (or better utilization
of memory through improved dataflows and caching) will be more beneficial than aggressively
minimizing latency, as long as latency remains within a reasonable range.
5.2.3
Address Translation Overhead. Finally, we examine the cost of virtual address translation
in the full-system context. Modern accelerators often rely on an I/O Memory Management Unit
(IOMMU) or the host CPU to handle address translation for device memory, which adds latency
on TLB misses. Using Gem5-AcceSys, we quantified the translation overhead for progressively
larger matrix multiplication workloads (increasing memory footprints); Table 8 summarizes the
results. For small matrices, the overhead is negligible (on the order of ∼1% of runtime), but it rises
sharply as the working set grows and TLB misses become more frequent. At the largest tested size
(2048×2048, requiring ≈12,288 pages of memory), address translation accounts for about 6.5% of
the total execution time, with average multi-level page-walk latency exceeding 368 cycles. The
mean per-access translation latency was lowest at an intermediate problem size (∼1024×1024) but
then jumped by roughly 5× at 2048×2048 once the TLB reach was exceeded. These results show
that while address translation overhead is negligible for small models (or for accelerators with very
large TLBs), it can become a non-trivial bottleneck for large models. In a co-designed system, it
may therefore be necessary to support larger memory pages or incorporate more efficient TLB
architectures when scaling to extremely large transformer models, in order to keep translation
overhead manageable.
Table 8. Results with Larger Matrix Sizes [25]
Metric
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
Memory Footprint (Pages)
12.0
48.0
192.0
768.0
3072.0
12288.0
Translation Times
3130
18470
142738
1082780
8593259
68430699
Trans Mean Time
23.42683
20.37948
13.87159
9.91735
10.478634
54.38005
PTW Times
15
54
227
1034
7675
479244
PTW Mean Time
176.6666
281.90740
265.255507
252.465184
294.609381
368.141137
uTLB Lookup times
2350
17690
137290
1081610
8586250
68423690
uTLB Misses times
195
862
8644
65808
731513
10416279
Trans Overhead
6.02%
1.87%
1.59%
1.30%
1.00%
6.49%
5.3
End-to-End Transformer Performance
To evaluate our accelerator in a complete application context, we measured end-to-end inference
throughput on representative transformer models (BERT and ViT of various sizes) using the cache-
coherent (DC) configuration (selected for its best GEMM performance in prior tests). The accelerator
offloads all matrix multiplication operations, while the host CPU executes the remaining layers
(e.g., Softmax, normalization, transpose). We compare against a single-core CPU baseline (as in
Section 5.2), an optimized CPU implementation using ARM NEON (with a custom data layout), and a
multi-threaded CPU run with OpenMP on all cores. We also include two state-of-the-art accelerator
frameworks for context: SMAUG (a gem5-based loosely-coupled DNN accelerator simulator) and
TiC-SAT (a tightly-coupled systolic array accelerator with custom ISA extensions). These cover
CPU-only, loosely coupled, and tightly coupled designs to put our co-designed MatrixFlow system
in context.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 20 ---
111:20
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
5.3.1
Performance under Different System Configurations. To quantify the impact of system ar-
chitecture, we evaluated transformer inference throughput under four memory/interconnect con-
figurations: (1) using only host memory with a low-bandwidth PCIe link (2 GB/s, 4 lanes @ 4
Gbps), (2) host memory with a moderate PCIe bandwidth (8 GB/s, 8 lanes @ 8 Gbps), (3) host
memory with a high-bandwidth interconnect (64 GB/s, 16 lanes @ 64 Gbps), and (4) a system with
device-side memory (no host memory accesses for the model, effectively a NUMA node with HBM
attached to the accelerator). These options range from a constrained host–accelerator link to an
idealized on-card memory setup. We applied best-case optimizations from our microbenchmarks
(e.g., 256B DMA transfers and appropriate memory controllers for each scenario) to ensure that
each configuration was as efficient as possible given its constraints.
Fig. 12. Performance comparison of memory locations and interconnects [25]
Figure 12 summarizes the normalized inference throughput for three representative models
(ViT-Base, ViT-Large, ViT-Huge) under these four configurations. Several clear trends emerge. First,
increasing the PCIe bandwidth dramatically improves end-to-end performance when using host
memory. Increasing the link from 2GB/s to 8GB/s and 64GB/s yields speedups of roughly 2.5× and
3×, respectively. For example, ViT-Huge runs about 3.4× faster with a 64GB/s interface compared
to a 2GB/s link. This shows that a slow PCIe interface can bottleneck the entire transformer
workload and that a high-bandwidth standard interconnect (e.g., a PCIe Gen5 link and beyond) can
largely bridge the gap. Second, the on-card memory configuration (DevMem) achieves competitive
performance, but does not vastly outperform the best host-memory scenario. In fact, in our results,
a purely host-memory system with a 64GB/s PCIe link slightly outpaced the DevMem setup by
roughly 5–15% for the same models. For instance, on ViT-Huge the host-memory + 64GB/s PCIe
configuration delivered 1.13× the throughput of the HBM-based (DevMem) system. This outcome
is initially surprising given the accelerator’s fast local HBM2 memory, but the explanation lies in
system-level overheads for the portions of the workload that run on the host CPU. Simply adding
on-card high-bandwidth memory does not guarantee a speedup if the rest of the system (software,
data movement, workload distribution) is not co-optimized to take advantage of it. In summary,
aggressively maximizing standard interconnect bandwidth can allow a host-memory design to
approach or even exceed the performance of a device-memory design, offering a potential cost
advantage (using commodity host memory) when the workload characteristics are favorable.
To complement the normalized throughput of Fig. 12, we report wall-clock, end-to-end latency
(batch = 1) and the corresponding frame rate for ViT with 224 × 224 inputs. For ViT-Large, a
constrained host link of 2 GB/s processes one image in 2.98 s (≈0.34 FPS), improving to 1.108 s
(≈0.90 FPS) at 8 GB/s and 0.98 s (≈1.02 FPS) at 64 GB/s; the DevMem (HBM) setup completes in
1.13 s (≈0.89 FPS). For ViT-Base, which is 4.45× faster under the same conditions, the latencies
are 669.66 ms (≈1.49 FPS), 248.99 ms (≈4.02 FPS), and 220.22 ms (≈4.54 FPS) for 2, 8, and 64 GB/s
host links, respectively, and 253.93 ms (≈3.94 FPS) for DevMem. Increasing host-side bandwidth
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 21 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:21
from 2 GB/s to 64 GB/s reduces per-image latency by 2000 ms for ViT-Large and 449.44 ms for
ViT-Base, corresponding in both cases to an FPS gain of about 3.04×. These absolute numbers make
the interconnect effect explicit and explain why a well-provisioned host-memory plus fast PCIe
path can match or slightly exceed DevMem in end-to-end ViT throughput on our setup (Fig. 12).
5.3.2
Analysis of GEMM vs. Non-GEMM Operations. Figure 13 examines overall accelerator per-
formance as we vary the fraction of non-GEMM computations in the workload, comparing an
all-DevMem system to host-memory systems with different PCIe bandwidths (performance is
normalized to the DevMem case). The key trend is clear: as the non-GEMM portion of the workload
grows, the advantage of keeping all data in device memory rapidly erodes. When the model is
almost entirely matrix computations (non-GEMM <∼5%), the DevMem configuration yields the best
performance – the accelerator handles almost all work locally and avoids PCIe transfer overhead.
However, once even a modest share of the workload is non-GEMM (e.g., >∼35%), a fast host-memory
system can catch up to and eventually surpass the DevMem baseline. This crossover occurs because
in the DevMem scenario every CPU-side operation (the non-GEMM work) incurs a penalty to access
data over PCIe. As the non-GEMM fraction increases, those penalties accumulate and decrease
DevMem’s benefit. By contrast, using host memory means that the CPU can perform non-GEMM
tasks without off-chip delays, and only the GEMM portions incur PCIe transfer costs. At higher
non-GEMM fractions, the time saved on CPU operations outweighs the extra time spent transferring
matrices for GEMMs. In other words, for transformer models with a moderate or large amount of
non-matrix computation, a well-tuned host-memory system – especially with a high-bandwidth
PCIe interface – will eventually overtake an all-DevMem approach in total throughput. In fact,
Figure 13 shows that with a PCIe link of the top end (64GB / s), the host memory configuration
begins to outperform DevMem once the workload is no longer almost exclusively GEMM. Slower
PCIe links require a larger non-GEMM share to flip this balance, but the overall pattern remains
the same: the more non-GEMM work, the less DevMem’s initial lead matters.
Fig. 13. Overall Transformer Performance as a Function of Non-GEMM Workload Fraction for various PCIe
Bandwidths vs DevMem [25]
MatrixFlow’s loosely-coupled design is well-suited to exploit this trade-off. Because the accelera-
tor is not tied to a fixed on-card memory pool, it can flexibly use host memory and PCIe bandwidth
to handle non-GEMM portions of the workload without stalling the compute units. The result
is that for realistic transformer inference tasks (which include operations like attention softmax,
normalization, etc., not just GEMMs), a balanced system with high-speed host memory access
can outperform a device-memory-only setup. This insight underscores an important architectural
point: Beyond a very small fraction of non-GEMM, simply keeping all data in accelerator local
memory is suboptimal – leveraging a fast host interface for non-GEMM parts yields better overall
performance.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 22 ---
111:22
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
5.3.3
Comparison with Existing Accelerators. We finally compare our co-designed MatrixFlow
platform with other state-of-the-art accelerator solutions for transformer inference. Table 9 sum-
marizes the performance (throughput or speed-up) of several systems on transformer models,
including a multi-core CPU baseline, a prior loosely-coupled accelerator simulation (SMAUG), and
a tightly-coupled systolic array accelerator (TiC-SAT), alongside our MatrixFlow results. For fair
comparison, all accelerators are evaluated within a full-system simulation environment (gem5-
based), and performance is normalized to a single-core CPU baseline. The many-core CPU (OpenMP)
system achieves about 24–26× speed-up over one core on these transformer workloads, which
underscores strong scaling, but also the limitations of general-purpose processors (performance
plateaus for larger models due to memory bottlenecks and limited vectorization). The SMAUG
platform (a gem5-based simulator with an integrated accelerator model) reports up to 88× speed-up
over the single-core baseline. This loosely-coupled design significantly improved over the CPU by
offloading to a custom unit, but it used Float16 precision and relatively limited off-chip bandwidth.
The tightly-coupled TiC-SAT accelerator (integrated as an ISA extension using int8 arithmetic)
performs even better, with speed-ups ranging from 58× on smaller transformers to 89× on large
ones. TiC-SAT benefits from minimal communication overhead (the accelerator is in-core) and
aggressive data reuse optimizations, showing good scaling on larger models.
Table 9. Transformer Performance Comparison [26]
Configuration
BERT Models
ViT Models
Medium
Base
Large
Base
Large
Huge
Single-thread
1
1
1
1
1
1
Multi-threaded
23.7
24.3
25.6
23.7
24.3
25.6
SMAUG [39]
88
-
-
-
-
-
TIC-SAT [3]
58.3
69.3
89.5
69.4
82.5
82.7
MatrixFlow
453.9
633.7
698.2
327.9
392.0
427.6
Against this backdrop, MatrixFlow achieves the highest performance. Our design reaches up
to 698× single-core speed-up on BERT-Large, versus 89× for TiC-SAT on the same model. That is an
8× improvement over the state-of-the-art tightly-coupled accelerator. Similarly, against the loosely-
coupled SMAUG, MatrixFlow is about 5× faster (e.g., 453× vs 88× on a medium transformer). These
gains stem from the holistic hardware/software co-design: MatrixFlow uses int32 precision to avoid
any accuracy loss (unlike float16 in SMAUG) yet still excels due to its optimized dataflow, efficient
DMA/PCIe usage, and the elimination of unnecessary memory buffering. In fact, MatrixFlow’s
design uses only three small 4KB on-chip buffers (one for each operand and for results) – drastically
smaller than other accelerators that dedicate tens or hundreds of KB to SRAM scratchpads. This lean
buffering is possible because the accelerator pipelines data directly from memory in a streaming
fashion, enabled by our high-throughput PCIe and memory subsystem co-design. The result is a
system that outperforms both loosely and tightly coupled prior accelerators, while maintaining
flexibility (MatrixFlow is loosely coupled and does not require custom ISA changes). It is worth
noting that MatrixFlow also handily beats a many-core CPU baseline; in our experiments, it was
up to 22× faster than a 64-thread CPU system on end-to-end transformer inference. Overall, these
comparisons validate that our system-level approach – focusing not just on the accelerator array,
but also on data orchestration, standard interconnect integration, and software mapping – yields
state-of-the-art performance for transformer workloads.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 23 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:23
6
Conclusion
This work has demonstrated that a holistic hardware/software co-design strategy can dramatically
improve transformer inference performance. By co-optimizing a compact 16×16 systolic-array
accelerator (MatrixFlow) together with its full-system integration in gem5-AcceSys, we achieved a
near-streaming execution of transformer layers with minimal on-chip buffering and maximized
data throughput. The result is a lean accelerator system that delivers up to 22× faster end-to-end
inference latency than a CPU-only baseline and outperforms state-of-the-art accelerators by 5×–8×,
all while using standard system interfaces and without requiring any specialized host processor
modifications. These results underscore the potency of co-design, shifting data orchestration into
the system (leveraging conventional PCIe, DMA, and memory hierarchy resources) allows the
accelerator to avoid idle stalls and fully utilize its compute capacity, and provide a novel example
on the architecture exploration with the combination of lightweight accelerator and data streaming
accelerator.
Beyond raw performance gains, our co-design approach yields broader system-level insights.
Full-system analysis revealed that memory bandwidth, rather than latency, is the dominant factor
in sustaining high-transmission throughput. This finding suggests that future AI accelerators must
be architected with balanced system integration in mind, ensuring ample memory bandwidth and
efficient interconnects to keep the compute engines fed. The Gem5-AcceSys framework proved
instrumental in exposing such bottlenecks, showing that aligning accelerator microarchitecture
with realistic integration constraints can unlock exceptional performance without any custom
host support. In summary, the joint development of MatrixFlow and Gem5-AcceSys redefines the
performance limits of transformer inference and provides a practical blueprint for next-generation
AI accelerators, illustrating the effectiveness of a balanced co-design paradigm in modern AI
systems.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by the Swiss State Secretariat for Education, Research, and
Innovation (SERI) through the SwissChips research project, and also by Intel as part of the Intel
Center for Heterogeneous Integrated Platforms (HIP).
References
[1] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2018. AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual, Volume 3: General-Purpose and System
Instructions. AMD, Santa Clara, CA. https://developer.amd.com/resources/developer-guides-manuals/ Section 4
documents SSE and AVX instruction support.
[2] Milad Alian, Amin Ghazizadeh, Erfan Azarkhish, Pedro Cidron, James B. Held, and Luiz A. Barroso. 2018. Simulating
PCI-Express Interconnect for Future System Exploration. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on
Workload Characterization (IISWC). IEEE, Raleigh, NC, USA, 168–178. https://doi.org/10.1109/IISWC.2018.8573496
[3] Abolfazl A. Amirshahi, Jan A. H. Klein, Giuseppe Ansaloni, and David Atienza. 2023. TiC-SAT: Tightly-Coupled
Systolic Accelerator for Transformers. In Proceedings of the 28th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference
(ASP-DAC). IEEE, Tokyo, Japan, 657–663. https://doi.org/10.1109/ASP-DAC56687.2023.10066894
[4] ARM Ltd. 2005.
Architecture and Implementation of the ARM Cortex-A8 Microprocessor.
Design & Reuse
Articles.
https://www.design-reuse.com/articles/11580/architecture-and-implementation-of-the-arm-cortex-a8-
microprocessor.html Online article, Accessed 10-May-2025.
[5] Arnau Armejach, Guillem López-Paradís, and Miquel Moretó. 2021. gem5 + RTL: A Framework to Enable RTL Models
Inside a Full-System Simulator. In Proceedings of the 50th International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP). ACM,
Lemont, IL, USA, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1145/3472456.3472461
[6] Nathan Binkert, Bradford Beckmann, Gabriel Black, Steven K. Reinhardt, Ali Saidi, and Arkaprava Bas. 2011. The gem5
Simulator. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News 39, 2 (2011), 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1145/2024716.2024718
[7] Vijay Bondalapati, Dilip Sankar, and Mert Catak. 2023. Amazon’s Custom ML Accelerators: AWS Trainium and
Inferentia. Cloud Optimo Blog. https://www.cloudoptimo.com/blog/amazons-custom-ml-accelerators-aws-trainium-
and-inferentia/ Online; accessed 10-May-2025.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 24 ---
111:24
Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza
[8] Tianshi Chen, Zidong Du, Ninghui Sun, Jia Wang, Chengyong Wu, Yunji Chen, and Olivier Temam. 2014. DianNao: A
Small-Footprint High-Throughput Accelerator for Ubiquitous Machine-Learning. In Proc. 19th Int’l Conf. on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS). ACM, Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 269–284.
[9] Yu-Hsin Chen, Tushar Krishna, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2016. Eyeriss: An Energy-Efficient Reconfigurable
Accelerator for Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, ISSCC 2016,
Digest of Technical Papers. IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 262–263.
[10] Zhe Chen, Yuchen Duan, Wenhai Wang, Junjun He, Tong Lu, Jifeng Dai, and Yu Qiao. 2023. Vision Transformer
Adapter for Dense Predictions. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). OpenReview.net, Kigali,
Rwanda, 1–22. ICLR Spotlight.
[11] Yifan Chi, Xiaodong Lin, and Xiaoyu Zheng. 2022. Design of a High-Performance SoC Simulation Model Based on
Verilator. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Algorithms, Computing and Artificial Intelligence (ACAI).
ACM, Sanya, China, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3579654.3579751
[12] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional
Transformers for Language Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 4171–4186. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/N19-1423
[13] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa
Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. 2021. An Image is Worth
16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR). OpenReview.net, Virtual, 1–21. arXiv:2010.11929 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.11929
[14] Hasan Genc, Yang Liu, Albert Li, Vasily G. Lorenz, Jonathan Roscoe, Yunsup Lee, Krste Asanović, and Yakun Sophia
Shao. 2021. Gemmini: Enabling Systematic Deep-Learning Architecture Evaluation via Full-Stack Integration. In
Proceedings of the 58th ACM/IEEE Design Automation Conference (DAC). IEEE, San Francisco, CA, USA, 769–774.
https://doi.org/10.1109/DAC18074.2021.9586216
[15] Intel Corporation. 1999. Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) in the Pentium III Processor. Intel Technology Brief.
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/support/articles/000005779/processors.html Online; accessed 10-May-
2025.
[16] Intel Corporation. 2012. Intel® Advanced Vector Extensions (Intel AVX) Introduces 256-bit Vector Processing. Intel
Developer Documentation. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/support/articles/000005779/processors.html
Online; accessed 10-May-2025.
[17] Andrei Ivanov, Nikoli Dryden, Tal Ben-Nun, Shigang Li, and Torsten Hoefler. 2020. Data Movement Is All You Need: A
Case Study on Optimizing Transformers. arXiv:2007.00072 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00072
[18] Norman P. Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David Patterson, et al. 2017. In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a
Tensor Processing Unit. In Proc. 44th Int’l Symp. on Computer Architecture (ISCA). ACM, Toronto, ON, Canada, 1–12.
[19] Norman P. Jouppi, Cliff Young, Nishant Patil, David A. Patterson, Gururaj S. Agrawal, Raminder Bajwa, Sarah Bates,
Suresh Bhatia, Nan Boden, Alexander Borchers, et al. 2017. In-Datacenter Performance Analysis of a Tensor Processing
Unit. In Proceedings of the 44th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). ACM, Toronto, ON,
Canada, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3079856.3080246
[20] Rachid Karami, Sheng-Chun Kao, and Hyoukjun Kwon. 2025. NonGEMM Bench: Understanding the Performance
Horizon of the Latest Machine-Learning Workloads with NonGEMM Operations. arXiv:2404.11788 [cs.AR] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2404.11788
[21] Mahmoud Khairy, Zhesheng Shen, Tor M. Aamodt, and Timothy G. Rogers. 2020. Accel-Sim: An Extensible Simulation
Framework for Validated GPU Modeling. In Proceedings of the 47th International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA). IEEE, Virtual, 848–861. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA45697.2020.00047
[22] H. T. Kung. 1979. Systolic Arrays (for VLSI). In Proceedings of the SIAM Conference on Sparse Matrix Processing. SIAM,
Knoxville, TN, USA, 256–282. No DOI available.
[23] Qunyou Liu, Pengbo Yu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza. 2026. SigmaQuant: Hardware-Aware Heterogeneous
Quantization Method for Edge DNN Inference. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Artificial Intelligence
(2026). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCASAI.2026.3666506
[24] Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza. 2024. Intermediate Address Space: Virtual Memory Optimization of
Heterogeneous Architectures for Cache-Resident Workloads. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization
21, 3 (2024), 50:1–50:29. https://doi.org/10.1145/3659207
[25] Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza. 2025. Gem5-AcceSys: Enabling System-Level Exploration of Standard
Interconnects for Novel Accelerators. arXiv:2502.12273 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12273
[26] Qunyou Liu, Marina Zapater, and David Atienza. 2025.
MatrixFlow: System-Accelerator Co-Design for High-
Performance Transformer Applications. arXiv:2503.05290 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.05290
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.


--- Page 25 ---
Mitigating the Bandwidth Wall via Data-Streaming System–Accelerator Co-Design
111:25
[27] Simone Machetti, Pasquale Davide Schiavone, Lara Orlandic, Darong Huang, Deniz Kasap, Giovanni Ansaloni, and
David Atienza. 2025. e-GPU: An Open-Source and Configurable RISC-V Graphic Processing Unit for TinyAI Applica-
tions. arXiv:2505.08421 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.08421
[28] Tobias Mann. 2024. Tenstorrent’s Blackhole chips boast 768 RISC-V cores and almost as many FLOPS. The Register
(Online). https://www.theregister.com/2024/08/27/tenstorrent_ai_blackhole/ Accessed 10-May-2025.
[29] Kyriakos Paraskevas, Kyriakos Iordanou, Michele Luján, and John Goodacre. 2020. Analysis of the Usage Models
of System Memory Management Unit in Accelerator-Attached Translation Units. In Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Memory Systems (MEMSYS). ACM, Washington, DC, USA, 86–96. https://doi.org/10.1145/3422575.
3422781
[30] Yasir M. Qureshi, William A. Simon, Miguel Zapater, Kristof Olcoz, and David Atienza. 2021. Gem5-X: A Many-Core
Heterogeneous Simulation Platform for Architectural Exploration and Optimization. ACM Transactions on Architecture
and Code Optimization 18, 4 (Dec 2021), 44:1–44:27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3461662
[31] René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. 2021. Vision Transformers for Dense Prediction. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). IEEE, Montreal, QC, Canada, 12179–12188.
[32] Andy Rock, Omar Khalil, Ofer Shai, and Paul Grouchy. 2022. INT8 Transformers for Inference Acceleration. Poster,
2nd Workshop on Efficient Natural Language and Speech Processing (ENLSP) at NeurIPS 2022. https://neurips2022-
enlsp.github.io/papers/paper_52.pdf
[33] Scott Rogers, Jonah Slycord, Mohammad Baharani, and Hussein Tabkhi. 2020. gem5-SALAM: A System Architecture
for LLVM-Based Accelerator Modeling. In Proceedings of the 53rd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, Athens, Greece, 471–482. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO50266.2020.00047
[34] Yakun S. Shao, Sam L. Xi, Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. 2016. Co-Designing Accelerators
and SoC Interfaces Using gem5-Aladdin. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, Taipei, Taiwan, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1109/MICRO.2016.7783751
[35] Lukas Steiner, Matthias Jung, Felipe S. Prado, Kirill Bykov, and Norbert Wehn. 2022. DRAMSys4.0: An Open-Source
Simulation Framework for In-Depth DRAM Analyses. International Journal of Parallel Programming 50, 2 (2022),
217–242. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10766-022-00727-4
[36] Megh Vasa, Chih-Lin Liao, Sudeep Kumar, Chung-Hsun Chen, and Balaji Mutnury. 2020. PCIe Gen-5 Design Challenges
of High-Speed Servers. In IEEE Conference on Electrical Performance of Electronic Packaging and Systems (EPEPS). IEEE,
San Jose, CA, USA, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/EPEPS48591.2020.9231458
[37] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. 2017. Attention Is All You Need. In Proceedings of the 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS). Curran Associates, Inc., Long Beach, CA, USA, 6000–6010.
https://papers.nips.cc/paper/7181-
attention-is-all-you-need
[38] John Whitham and Neil Audsley. 2010. Studying the Applicability of the Scratchpad Memory Management Unit. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium (RTAS). IEEE, Stockholm,
Sweden, 205–214. https://doi.org/10.1109/RTAS.2010.21
[39] S. L. Xi, Yakun Sophia Shao, Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan, Gu-Yeon Wei, and David Brooks. 2020. SMAUG: End-to-End
Full-Stack Simulation Infrastructure for Deep Learning Workloads. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code
Optimization 17, 4 (2020), 39:1–39:26. https://doi.org/10.1145/3424669
[40] Peng Yu, Junjun He, Kai Zhu, Xinyu Zhang, and Xiangyu Zheng. 2024. An Energy-Efficient Soft SIMD Microarchitecture
and Its Application on Quantized CNNs. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems 32, 6 (2024),
1018–1031. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVLSI.2024.3375793
[41] Pengbo Yu, Flavio Ponzina, Alexandre Levisse, Dwaipayan Biswas, Giovanni Ansaloni, David Atienza, and Francky
Catthoor. 2024. DBFS: Dynamic Bitwidth-Frequency Scaling for Efficient Software-defined SIMD. In 2024 IEEE Computer
Society Annual Symposium on VLSI (ISVLSI). IEEE, Knoxville, TN, USA, 204–209.
ACM Trans. Arch. Code Optim., Vol. 37, No. 4, Article 111. Publication date: August 2026.
