--- Page 1 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via
Retrieval-conditioned Inference
GUANMING LIU, Fudan University, China
MENG WU, Lenovo Group Ltd, China
PENG ZHANG, Fudan University, China
YU ZHANG, Lenovo Group Ltd, China
YUBO SHU, Fudan University, China
XIANLIANG HUANG, Fudan University, China
KAINAN TU, Fudan University, China
NING GU, Fudan University, China
LIUXIN ZHANG, Lenovo Group Ltd, China
QIANYING WANG, Lenovo Group Ltd, China
TUN LU, Fudan University, China
Large language models (LLMs) have become integral to modern Human-AI collaboration workflows, where accurately understanding
user intent serves as a crucial step for generating satisfactory responses. Context-aware intent understanding, which involves inferring
user intentions from situational environments, is inherently challenging because it requires reasoning over both the immediate context
and the user’s underlying motivations that drive their behavior. Moreover, existing approaches often treat intent understanding as
a static recognition task, overlooking users’ accumulated intent patterns that could provide valuable references for more accurate
and generalizable understanding. To address this gap, we propose IntPro, a proxy agent that learns to adapt to individual users via
retrieval-conditioned intent inference. We design intent explanations that abstract how contextual signals connect to expressed intents,
and store them in an individual intent history library for retrieval. We train IntPro through supervised fine-tuning on retrieval-
conditioned trajectories and multi-turn Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) with tool-aware reward functions, enabling the
agent to learn when to leverage historical intent patterns and when to infer directly. Experiments across three diverse scenarios
(Highlight-Intent, MIntRec2.0, and Weibo Post-Sync) demonstrate that IntPro achieves strong intent understanding performance with
effective context-aware reasoning capabilities across different scenarios and model types.
CCS Concepts: • Information systems →Personalization; • Computing methodologies →Natural language generation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Intent Understanding, Context-aware Reasoning, Proxy Agent, Retrieval-conditioned Inference,
Reinforcement Learning
Authors’ Contact Information: Guanming Liu, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, gmliu24@m.fudan.edu.cn; Meng Wu, Lenovo Group Ltd, Beijing,
China, wumeng5@lenovo.com; Peng Zhang, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, zhangpeng_@fudan.edu.cn; Yu Zhang, Lenovo Group Ltd, Beijing, China,
zhangyu29@lenovo.com; Yubo Shu, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 20110240032@fudan.edu.cn; Xianliang Huang, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, huangxl21@m.fudan.edu.cn; Kainan Tu, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, kntu25@m.fudan.edu.cn; Ning Gu, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China, ninggu@fudan.edu.cn; Liuxin Zhang, Lenovo Group Ltd, Beijing, China, zhanglx2@lenovo.com; QianYing Wang, Lenovo Group Ltd, Beijing,
China, wangqya@lenovo.com; Tun Lu, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, lutun@fudan.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1
arXiv:2603.03325v1  [cs.CL]  10 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
Guanming Liu, et al.
Human
LLM
Response
Query
Multi-turn User Explanations
(A) Current Human-LLM Collaboration
Human
Proxy
Response
Intent and Intent Explanations
Environment
LLM
(B) Human-Proxy-LLM with Context-aware Intent Understanding 
Interaction
Context
Fig. 1. Current Human-LLM Collaboration (A) VS Human-Proxy-LLM Collaboration with context-aware intent understanding (B).
1
Introduction
The paradigm of Human-LLM interaction is rapidly becoming integral to modern workflows, profoundly reforming
powerful and autonomous pipelines for web-scale applications such as information seeking [15], in-session navigation
[17], and user-generated content analysis. In these scenarios, accurately understanding human intent is a crucial first step
for generating satisfactory responses [39]. Human intentions can vary substantially across different contexts [23, 33],
and different users often exhibit distinct intent patterns even under similar contextual conditions, making personalized
intent understanding critical. This motivates context-aware intent understanding: inferring a user’s underlying intentions
from the human context, including both the interaction history (which reflects user-specific behavioral patterns and
motivations) and the current situational environment [19]. However, existing approaches typically rely on simple
query-based recognition, without fully leveraging contextual information and the implicit intent patterns embedded in
user intent history. In practice, the situational environment and interaction history provide complementary cues for
intent reasoning: the former offers immediate contextual signals, while the latter captures the implicit motivations
behind user intentions. Therefore, effective intent understanding requires going beyond static recognition to actively
leverage both types of contextual signals.
Directly applying LLMs for context-aware intent understanding typically relies on fragile prompt workflows while
introducing substantial costs. A promising alternative is the Human-Proxy-LLM collaboration framework [5, 18, 31],
where a dedicated proxy agent is introduced between humans and LLMs (Figure 1). The proxy is designed to actively
reason over human context by leveraging its context perception and intent understanding capabilities. Specifically, the
proxy processes and augments user’s context, infers the underlying intent and intent explanations. The predicted intent
and the corresponding intent explanations are then transmitted to cloud LLMs to inspire responses better aligned with
human intents. In this way, the proxy serves as an intent-centric agent that actively leverages contextual signals to
understand and structure human needs, bridging the gap between raw user queries and effective LLM responses.
Recent work has explored training language models for intent recognition. The work [9] demonstrates that fine-tuned
models can achieve competitive accuracy for on-device intent prediction in conversational settings, while another
work [11] leverages reinforcement learning to improve generalization across different intent detection tasks. However,
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 3 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
3
these approaches primarily treat intent understanding as a discriminative classification problem over predefined labels,
lacking the capabilities to actively perceive personalized human context and generate explanatory descriptions that
articulate the reasoning behind intent predictions. Constructing such an intent-centric proxy agent poses several
fundamental challenges. First, the agent must perform context-aware reasoning that goes beyond pattern matching,
connecting diverse contextual cues to infer latent user goals and articulate the reasoning behind its predictions. Second,
the agent must learn to leverage user-specific historical patterns for personalized intent recognition, understanding how
individual users’ intent tendencies manifest across different contexts. Third, the agent should adapt to new contexts
as interaction history accumulates, rather than overfitting to specific intent domains or contextual patterns. These
considerations point to the need for a generative approach that produces structured intent explanations and flexibly
retrieves user-specific historical patterns when needed, enabling continuous adaptation to evolving human contexts.
To address these challenges, we design a retrieval-conditioned intent inference mechanism for the proxy agent. The
agent generates intent labels along with intent explanations, which are natural language descriptions that abstract how
contextual signals connect to the expressed intent. These intent explanations are stored in a per-user intent history
library, serving as retrieval representations for personalized intent pattern matching. When facing straightforward
cases, the agent directly infers the intent and generates its explanation. When encountering ambiguous cases with
multiple possible intents, the agent retrieves relevant historical intent patterns from the intent history library to inform
its final judgment. As interaction history accumulates, the intent history library grows richer, enabling the agent to
progressively improve its personalized intent understanding.
To realize this capability, we establish a training paradigm consisting of a supervised fine-tuning phase and a
reinforcement learning phase. In the fine-tuning phase, we design a Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference Trajectory
Generation framework that constructs training trajectories demonstrating both direct inference and retrieval-conditioned
inference behaviors. The framework generates intent explanations that abstract contextual patterns and performs
retrieval from the intent history library when needed, forming complete trajectories for supervised learning. In the
reinforcement learning phase, we leverage multi-turn GRPO (Group Relative Policy Optimization) [14] with tool-aware
reward functions that dynamically adjust based on context difficulty, guiding the agent to balance direct inference and
retrieval-conditioned inference. We evaluate IntPro across three diverse scenarios: Highlight-Intent (reading-based),
MIntRec2.0 (dialogue-based), and Weibo Post-Sync (social media-based). Experimental results demonstrate that IntPro
achieves strong intent understanding performance with effective context-aware reasoning capabilities across different
scenarios and model types.
The primary contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We design intent explanations as retrieval representations that abstract context-intent connections for person-
alized intent pattern matching, and propose a Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference Trajectory Generation
framework that constructs training trajectories demonstrating both direct inference and retrieval-conditioned
inference behaviors.
• We design a multi-turn GRPO training paradigm with tool-aware reward functions to enhance the agent’s
context-aware intent understanding capabilities, supporting both retrieval-based and direct inference behaviors.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our IntPro achieves strong intent understanding performance with
effective context-aware reasoning capabilities, showing improved generalization across different model types
and domains.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 4 ---
4
Guanming Liu, et al.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on intent understanding and
agentic training. Section 3 introduces the key definitions including context, context-aware intent understanding, and
intent. Section 4 presents our data construction pipeline for context-aware intent understanding. Section 5 describes
the proposed methodologies including supervised fine-tuning and GRPO with tool-aware reward functions. Section 6
reports experimental results and analysis. Finally, Section 7 concludes the paper.
2
Related Works
2.1
Intent Understanding
Intent understanding aims to infer latent goal behind user behavior, typically under contextual signals such as dialogue
history, user profiles, or situational environment. In task-oriented dialogue and conversational assistants, accurate
intent inference is a prerequisite for downstream routing, tool invocation, and personalized assistance. Recent work
further emphasizes context-aware intent modeling in conversational settings, showing that leveraging prior turns and
situational cues can reduce ambiguity in underspecified queries [23, 33]. Domain shift remains a practical challenge in
real deployments, and domain adaptation methods aim to transfer intent models across domains with limited labeled
data [3]. Beyond text-only inputs, intent understanding has been extended to multimodal and out-of-distribution
settings, where intent must be inferred from heterogeneous signals and under open-world uncertainty [45].
With the emergence of large language models, intent understanding is increasingly formulated as instruction
following or generative classification via prompting and in-context learning. User-facing evaluations indicate that LLMs
can recognize intents under natural language instructions, yet performance may be sensitive to prompt design, label
verbalization, and the amount and placement of contextual evidence [1, 4, 16, 25]. To improve deployability and privacy,
recent work explores on-device or hybrid architectures that combine language models with selective cloud calls [9], as
well as population-to-individual tuning that personalizes adapters [13]. A complementary direction leverages LLMs
to generate synthetic intent-aware dialogs at scale, showing that models trained on mixed human and synthetic data
can substantially outperform those using only human annotations for intent prediction [2]. Another line compresses
interaction histories into user representations that can be injected into prompts, e.g., user embeddings for personalized
prompting [8, 20].
While these directions broaden the modeling toolkit, a common operational setting in both intent benchmarks and
deployed assistants remains discriminative classification over predefined labels, where models assign per-turn intent
categories under a fixed ontology [28]. In parallel, there is growing interest in relaxing the closed-set assumption
(e.g., open intent discovery for previously unseen intents) [34], and in producing human-interpretable explanations or
evidence for model decisions [7]. Meanwhile, long-term memory and personalization mechanisms for LLM assistants
increasingly store and retrieve user-specific information to condition downstream generation [22, 48]. Benchmarks such
as LaMP study retrieval augmentation for personalized outputs [26], and recent work further enriches RAG context
through author-specific features and contrastive examples to better capture fine-grained user traits [43]. However, these
lines typically treat memory as a support for response generation rather than explicitly modeling intent inference itself
as a retrieval-augmented generative process that produces structured, reusable intent abstractions. Moreover, existing
approaches lack mechanisms to continuously incorporate new user feedback as interaction history accumulates. These
gaps motivate approaches that jointly generate structured intent explanations, flexibly leverage user-specific retrieval,
and progressively adapt as interaction history accumulates. Our work follows this direction by maintaining an evolving
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 5 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
5
intent-history library and performing retrieval-conditioned intent inference to improve both context awareness and
personalization.
2.2
Agentic Training
Agentic training studies how to endow LLMs with the ability to plan, act, and interact with external tools over multi-step
trajectories, rather than producing a single-shot response. Early tool-augmented paradigms combine reasoning traces
with action execution, exemplified by ReAct, which interleaves chain-of-thought reasoning and environment actions to
improve decision making [42]. In parallel, Toolformer proposes a self-supervised recipe to let language models learn
when to call tools and how to incorporate tool outputs through simple APIs, reducing the dependence on costly human
annotations [27]. Recent agent benchmarks and environments further highlight that the design of the agent–computer
interface can substantially affect tool-use performance; for example, SWE-agent studies interfaces that make software
engineering actions more reliable for language agents [40]. Other work explores modular or hybrid agent architectures
(e.g., dividing on-device and cloud capabilities) to improve efficiency and controllability [9, 29], and tool-usage learning
“in the wild” shows the potential of collecting diverse tool trajectories for general-purpose tool invocation [30].
On the training side, supervised fine-tuning on demonstrations remains a common starting point, but it scales poorly
with trajectory length and tool diversity. Alignment methods such as RLHF optimize behavior using preference feedback,
improving helpfulness and instruction following [21]. For agentic settings, recent work increasingly investigates more
structured or verifiable objectives to mitigate the cost and noise of preference labeling, as well as knowledge distillation
and self-improvement pipelines that transfer strong multi-step behaviors into smaller or cheaper models [37, 47, 49].
Complementary lines leverage self-critique and correction signals to iteratively refine responses, which can be viewed
as a lightweight alternative to full RL in some workflows [36, 41]. Meanwhile, group-based policy optimization methods
and their variants (e.g., GiGPO) have recently been used to stabilize RL for reasoning-capable LLMs [10, 14], suggesting
practical recipes for post-training with limited reward supervision.
A key challenge in agentic training is credit assignment across multiple reasoning and action steps, especially when
tool calls are expensive and the reward is sparse. Step-level supervision and RL methods tailored to tool use explicitly
optimize intermediate tool decisions; StepTool introduces step-grained rewards for tool-augmented reasoning, while
ToolRL designs RL objectives to improve tool invocation competence [24, 44]. Step-Wise Reinforcement Learning
(SWiRL) further targets multi-step optimization by generating and filtering synthetic tool-use trajectories and optimizing
sub-trajectories corresponding to each action [12]. Another emerging idea is to treat LLMs as informative priors over
actions and integrate them into RL frameworks through probabilistic inference, improving sample efficiency in sequential
decision making [38]. Despite this progress, most agentic training work is oriented toward general problem solving
or external task completion, and rarely couples tool learning with a dynamic, user-specific intent history library. In
contrast, our framework trains a proxy agent to decide when to rely on direct inference versus retrieving historical
intent patterns from the intent history library, and uses tool-aware rewards and retrieval-conditioned trajectories to
improve context-aware intent understanding.
3
Definitions
3.1
Context
The term context can be explained as any information that characterizes the circumstances of a user’s action [6].
Concretely, in the scope of intent understanding, context refers to the interaction-centered factors that connect humans’
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 6 ---
6
Guanming Liu, et al.
Intent History Library
𝑢, 𝐶, ℓ!"
Direct Inference
Retrieve-conditioned Inference
Intent History 
Library Construction
𝑢, 𝐶, ℓ!", 𝑒𝑥𝑝
Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference 
Trajectory Generation
𝑢, 𝐶
Retrieval
ℓ#, ℓ$, …
𝑢, ℓ, 𝑒𝑥𝑝
[ℓ%&'( = ℓ!", 𝑒𝑥𝑝]
Fig. 2. Overview of our data construction pipeline for context-aware intent understanding, including intent history library construction
and retrieval-conditioned intent inference trajectory generation.
behavior with their related environment. Operationally, we consider several settings where context guides intent. For
example, in a web reading context, the user’s intent depends on the highlighted text and surrounding paragraphs; In a
dialogue context, the speaker’s intent is inferred from the current utterance with the prior conversation history; In
a social media context, the user’s intention is derived from the content of the post, together with information about
the platform and topic hashtags. In each case, for a given user 𝑢, the relevant context 𝐶encompasses both the user’s
interaction history (e.g., past actions or feedbacks) and the situational environment (e.g., surrounding content, task
descriptions, or social setting).
3.2
Context-aware Intent Understanding
In Human-Proxy-LLM collaboration settings, user queries are augmented by predicted intents inferred from human
context. Context-aware intent understanding can be viewed as a compression process that maps the context 𝐶to a
structured intent representation. We define the proxy’s function and LLM response generation as:
I = Proxy(𝐶),
𝑟𝑒𝑠= LLM(I),
(1)
where I represents the predicted intent (the detailed structure of I is defined in the following Intent section) and 𝑟𝑒𝑠is
the response generated by the LLM based on the predicted intent.
3.3
Intent
Intent represents the underlying goal or purpose that motivates a user’s action or query within a specific context. A
single intent label alone remains unavoidably ambiguous, as it is inherently detached from the rich human context that
would give it meaning. In Human-Proxy-LLM collaboration, the proxy agent needs to not only predict the intent label
but also provide explanatory information to help the cloud LLM better understand user needs. Therefore, we define
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 7 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
7
intent with its accompanying explanation as a tuple:
I = (ℓ,𝑒𝑥𝑝)
(2)
where ℓdenotes the intent label (a categorical value such as "asking for clarification" or "seeking comparison") and 𝑒𝑥𝑝
represents the intent explanation (a natural language description). The intent explanation abstracts the context and
articulates how contextual signals connect to the expressed intent.
We distinguish two types of intent explanations based on the information they incorporate: Generic intent
explanations capture the reasoning process from context to intent, explaining how contextual signals reveal the
underlying intent in a transferable way that applies across similar situations. Personalized intent explanations, in
contrast, first reason about personal motivations and preferences, then articulate how these individual factors lead to
specific intents. The key insight is that different individuals with distinct motivations and preferences may express
different intents under the same context.
This structural organization enables intent explanations to serve as retrieval representations of personal context-
aware intent patterns, thereby supporting personalized intent understanding. Moreover, as textual artifacts in natural
language form, intent explanations offer inherent interpretability: they can be inspected and visualized, providing
transparency for human oversight.
4
Data Construction for Context-aware Intent Understanding
Training the proxy agent for retrieval-conditioned intent inference requires two key components: an intent history
library that stores intent explanations as retrieval representations, and training trajectories that demonstrate both
direct inference and retrieval-conditioned inference behaviors. We present a data construction pipeline (Figure 2)
that first prepares context-aware intent datasets, then builds the per-user intent history library, and finally generates
retrieval-conditioned inference trajectories for supervised fine-tuning.
4.1
Context-aware Intent Data Preparation
We formulate context-aware intent dataset preparation as two steps: user context collection and intent annotation.
The first step collects user queries containing system prompts and human contexts. The system prompts provide task
instructions and output format specifications with candidate intent classifications. The human contexts include user
identifications and actions with related environment. The second step assigns intent labels through manual annotation
or LLM-assisted labeling. For example, the Highlight-Intent dataset takes highlighted sentences with surrounding
paragraphs as context, annotates user intents, and generates search-augmented responses based on the predicted intents.
During the intent annotation process, annotators can either directly assign ground-truth labels or rank LLM-generated
intent candidates. This yields a context-enriched dataset for training intent understanding models.
4.2
Intent History Library Construction
Before constructing SFT trajectories, we first build a personalized intent history library that stores each user’s historical
intent patterns for retrieval-conditioned Inference. For each training sample with context 𝐶𝑖, user 𝑢𝑖, and ground-truth
intent label ℓ𝑖, we use Qwen3-30B-A3B as the teacher model to generate an intent explanation 𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑖. As defined in
Section 3, we design two types of intent explanations: generic explanations that focus on general semantic patterns,
and personalized explanations that additionally incorporate inferred personal motivation cues from user history.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 8 ---
8
Guanming Liu, et al.
Since intent explanations abstract the transferable patterns connecting contexts and intents, they enable semantic
matching across similar situations. The personalized intent history library is constructed as DB = {(𝑢𝑖, ℓ𝑖,𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑖)}𝑁
𝑖=1,
where each entry associates a user with an intent label and its corresponding explanation. During retrieval, the
model generates possible intent options, then queries the library by filtering for the same user and the candidate
intents, and ranks the filtered entries by semantic similarity using BGE-small-en-v1.5 to retrieve the top-𝑘most similar
historical patterns. The quality of intent explanations as retrieval targets is supported by our discriminability analysis
(Section 6.2.1), which shows that personalized explanations improve separation and user-specific retrieval accuracy
compared to generic explanations. Through the subsequent supervised fine-tuning on retrieval-conditioned trajectories
(Section 5), the model learns to generate high-quality, generalizable explanations that effectively capture context-intent
connections.
Algorithm 1 Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference Trajectory Generation
Require: Context 𝐶with user 𝑢, ground-truth ℓ𝑔𝑡, database DB
Ensure: Training dataset 𝐷
1: 𝑀←[𝑚𝑠𝑔𝑠𝑦𝑠,𝑚𝑠𝑔𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟(𝐶)]
2: 𝐷←∅
3: for 𝑡= 1 to 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥do
4:
𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡←LLM(𝑀);
𝑀←𝑀∪{𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡}
5:
if 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡is tool_call then
6:
Parse intent options O𝑡from 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡
7:
Ensure ℓ𝑔𝑡∈O𝑡
8:
R𝑡←Retrieve from DB matching (𝑢, O𝑡)
9:
𝑀←𝑀∪{tool_response : R𝑡}
10:
else if 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡is answer then
11:
Parse predicted intent ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑from 𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑡
12:
if ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑔𝑡then
13:
𝐷←𝐷∪{𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑗𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑜𝑟𝑦};
break
14:
else
15:
Append feedback to 𝑀(prompt retrieval after repeated failures)
16:
end if
17:
end if
18: end for
19: if no correct prediction within 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥iterations then
20:
Reveal ℓ𝑔𝑡and collect final supervised trajectory into 𝐷
21: end if
22: return 𝐷
4.3
Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference Trajectory Generation
With the personalized intent history library DB constructed, we generate training trajectories that teach the model
two reasoning paths: retrieval-conditioned inference (retrieve relevant patterns when uncertain) and direct inference
(answer directly when confident). We use the teacher model (Qwen3-30B-A3B) to iteratively generate outputs, collecting
validated trajectories for the training dataset 𝐷.
As shown in Algorithm 1, the algorithm maintains a message history 𝑀initialized with a system prompt 𝑚𝑠𝑔𝑠𝑦𝑠
(containing task instructions and candidate intent classifications) and a user message 𝑚𝑠𝑔𝑢𝑠𝑒𝑟(𝐶) (containing the input
context). Starting from the input context 𝐶with user 𝑢and ground-truth ℓ𝑔𝑡, the model enters a loop where it can either
call the retrieval tool or directly give an answer. If the model calls the retrieval tool, it outputs intent options O𝑡and
receives the top-𝑘matching historical patterns from DB, then makes its final judgment based on retrieved evidence.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 9 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
9
When the ground-truth intent is absent from the generated options, the algorithm temporarily prompts the model
to consider it, then removes this prompt before proceeding with retrieval to avoid information leakage. If the model
directly outputs an answer, the algorithm checks correctness: correct predictions are collected into 𝐷, while incorrect
ones receive feedback appended to 𝑀that gradually guides the model toward using retrieval after repeated failures.
If no correct prediction is obtained within 𝐼𝑚𝑎𝑥iterations, the ground-truth is revealed to collect a final supervised
trajectory.
5
Methodologies
Based on the prepared training dataset, we establish an agentic training framework to build IntPro for context-aware
intent understanding.
5.1
Supervised Fine-Tuning
We perform supervised fine-tuning (SFT) using multi-turn trajectories generated by our Retrieval-conditioned Intent
Inference Trajectory Generation framework (Algorithm 1). Since the training trajectories inherently involve generating
intent explanations as part of the retrieval-conditioned inference process, the model naturally learns to produce high-
quality explanations that capture context-intent connections while learning to decide between direct inference and tool
usage. This initializes the agent with intent explanation generation and multi-turn tool-use behaviors that are later
refined by GRPO [32, 35].
We leverage assistant-only loss masking, which excludes user prompts and external tool responses from gradient
computation, thereby focusing the learning signal on the model’s outputs (e.g., tool calls, retrieval-conditioned reasoning,
and final intent predictions). With trajectories that explicitly reflect retrieval-conditioned decision-making, the proxy
agent learns controllable behaviors that support subsequent policy optimization in the reinforcement learning phase.
5.2
Reinforcement Learning for Intent Understanding
To further improve the proxy agent’s retrieval-conditioned intent inference beyond SFT, we apply reinforcement
learning (RL) to optimize its policy under verifiable reward signals. In this setting, the agent observes the context 𝐶
and generates an output trajectory 𝑜(including intermediate tool calls and the final intent prediction) according to its
policy 𝜋𝜃(𝑜|𝐶), where 𝜃denotes the policy parameters. The agent receives a trajectory-level reward 𝑅(𝑜) that reflects
both intent prediction quality and the effectiveness of tool usage (detailed in Section 5.3.3).
Formally, we formulate retrieval-conditioned intent inference as a sequential decision-making problem over a
generated trajectory. At each step 𝑡, the agent observes the current state 𝑠𝑡(which includes the context 𝐶, tool responses
if any, and the partial output 𝑜<𝑡), and selects an action 𝑎𝑡(which may correspond to a tool call or a final answer)
according to the policy 𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡). The agent generates a complete output sequence 𝑜= (𝑎1,𝑎2, . . . ,𝑎𝑇) and receives a
reward 𝑅(𝑜) computed from the final prediction and tool-use outcomes.
The objective of reinforcement learning is to maximize the expected cumulative reward:
𝐽(𝜃) = E𝑜∼𝜋𝜃(·|𝐶) [𝑅(𝑜)],
(3)
where the expectation is taken over the distribution of outputs generated by the policy 𝜋𝜃.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 10 ---
10
Guanming Liu, et al.
5.2.1
Policy Gradient Methods. We adopt policy-gradient-style optimization, where the policy parameters 𝜃are updated
to increase expected reward over generated trajectories. The policy gradient theorem provides the foundation:
∇𝜃𝐽(𝜃) = E𝑜∼𝜋𝜃(·|𝐶) [𝑅(𝑜)∇𝜃log 𝜋𝜃(𝑜|𝐶)] .
(4)
In practice, we approximate this expectation using Monte Carlo sampling over trajectories. Given a batch of 𝑁
samples {𝑜𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1 generated from the policy, the policy gradient can be estimated as:
∇𝜃𝐽(𝜃) ≈1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
𝑅(𝑜𝑖)∇𝜃log 𝜋𝜃(𝑜𝑖|𝐶).
(5)
Policy gradient estimates can suffer from high variance. A common variance-reduction strategy is to subtract a
baseline 𝑏from the reward:
∇𝜃𝐽(𝜃) = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
[𝑅(𝑜𝑖) −𝑏]∇𝜃log 𝜋𝜃(𝑜𝑖|𝐶),
(6)
where 𝑏is typically chosen as the average reward: 𝑏= 1
𝑁
Í𝑁
𝑖=1 𝑅(𝑜𝑖).
5.2.2
Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO). Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) is a widely used stabilized policy-
gradient method that constrains updates via a clipped surrogate objective:
LPPO(𝜃) = E
h
min

𝑟𝑡(𝜃) ˆ𝐴𝑡, clip(𝑟𝑡(𝜃), 1 −𝜖, 1 + 𝜖) ˆ𝐴𝑡
i
,
(7)
where 𝑟𝑡(𝜃) =
𝜋𝜃(𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡)
𝜋𝜃old (𝑎𝑡|𝑠𝑡) is the importance sampling ratio, ˆ𝐴𝑡is the advantage estimate, and 𝜖is a clipping hyperpa-
rameter (typically 0.2).
The advantage function ˆ𝐴𝑡measures relative improvement compared to a baseline:
ˆ𝐴𝑡= 𝐺𝑡−𝑉(𝑠𝑡),
(8)
where 𝐺𝑡denotes the return from step 𝑡, and 𝑉(𝑠𝑡) is a value function estimate that serves as a baseline.
ˆ𝐴𝑡= 𝛿𝑡+ (𝛾𝜆)𝛿𝑡+1 + (𝛾𝜆)2𝛿𝑡+2 + · · · ,
(9)
where 𝛿𝑡= ˆ𝑟𝑡+ 𝛾𝑉(𝑠𝑡+1) −𝑉(𝑠𝑡) is the temporal difference error, ˆ𝑟𝑡is the immediate reward at step 𝑡, 𝛾is the discount
factor, and 𝜆is the GAE parameter.
PPO also includes a KL divergence penalty to prevent the policy from deviating too far from the reference policy:
LPPO(𝜃) = E
h
min

𝑟𝑡(𝜃) ˆ𝐴𝑡, clip(𝑟𝑡(𝜃), 1 −𝜖, 1 + 𝜖) ˆ𝐴𝑡

−𝛽𝐷KL[𝜋𝜃||𝜋𝜃old]
i
,
(10)
where 𝛽controls the strength of the KL penalty.
5.3
GRPO with Tool-aware Reward Function
We adopt Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), a group-based policy optimization method that computes
advantages relative to a set of sampled trajectories, avoiding the need to train a separate value function. As illustrated
in Figure 3, this design is well-suited to our retrieval-conditioned intent inference setting, where each rollout forms a
multi-turn trajectory with possible tool calls. We set the group size 𝐺= 8 in our experiments. We further equip GRPO
with tool-aware reward functions to improve the proxy agent’s retrieval-conditioned intent inference behavior.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 11 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
11
Ⅱ: GRPO with Tool-aware Reward Function
Ground Truth Intent: doubt
Context: “Penny: … Sheldon: … ”
Target: “Penny: you know, i gotta ask, 
why didn't you just get a license at 16 like 
everybody else?
Ⅰ: Supervised Fine-Tuning
Policy 
Model
𝑅!"#$
𝑅%&&
𝑅'""(
𝑜!          
𝑜"
𝑜#
𝑅'""( = 𝑟)
𝑜$
Direct Answer
Intent Explanation
Driven by skepticism toward 
unconventional choices, when 
responding to a past decision that 
deviates from a common social norm, 
the speaker employs a rhetorical 
question with a tone of mild 
incredulity to express doubt about 
the validity of the decision.
Tool Hit ✘
Final Intent
Final Intent
𝑅'""( = 𝑟*
𝑅'""( = 𝑟+
𝑅'""( = 𝑟!
Easy
Hard
Tool Hit ✔
Final Intent
Final Intent
Direct Answer
Fig. 3. The whole training pipeline of IntPro includes supervised fine-tuning and GRPO with tool-aware reward function.
5.3.1
From PPO to GRPO. GRPO generates a group of 𝐺trajectories {𝑜𝑖}𝐺
𝑖=1 for each prompt 𝑞and computes advantages
using group-level reward statistics, providing an adaptive baseline and variance reduction without a learned value
function.
Instead of using 𝑉(𝑠𝑡) as the baseline, GRPO uses the group mean reward ¯𝑅as a natural, adaptive baseline:
¯𝑅= 1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑅(𝑜𝑗),
(11)
where 𝑅(𝑜𝑗) is the reward for the 𝑗-th output in the group. The advantage is then normalized by the group standard
deviation:
ˆ𝐴𝑖= 𝑅(𝑜𝑖) −¯𝑅
𝜎𝑅
,
(12)
where 𝜎𝑅=
√︃
1
𝐺
Í𝐺
𝑗=1(𝑅(𝑜𝑗) −¯𝑅)2 is the group standard deviation. Note that in GRPO, the advantage ˆ𝐴𝑖is constant
across all time steps 𝑡for a given output 𝑜𝑖(i.e., ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑡= ˆ𝐴𝑖), as it depends only on the final reward 𝑅(𝑜𝑖). This group-
relative advantage calculation provides a baseline that automatically adapts to the difficulty of each prompt, making
GRPO more sample-efficient than standard PPO while avoiding the need for a separate value function.
5.3.2
GRPO Loss Function. Similar to PPO, GRPO uses importance sampling, clipping, and KL divergence regularization,
but applies these techniques across the group of outputs. The GRPO loss function is:
LGRPO(𝜃) = −1
𝐺
𝐺
∑︁
𝑖=1
|𝑜𝑖|
∑︁
𝑡=1

min
 𝜋𝜃
 𝑜𝑖
𝑡| 𝑞, 𝑜𝑖
<𝑡

𝜋𝜃old
 𝑜𝑖
𝑡| 𝑞, 𝑜𝑖
<𝑡
 ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑡, clip  𝜋𝜃
𝜋𝜃old , 1−𝜖, 1+𝜖 ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑡

−𝛽𝐷KL

𝜋𝜃
 · | 𝑞, 𝑜𝑖
<𝑡
 ∥𝜋𝜃old
 · | 𝑞, 𝑜𝑖
<𝑡

,
(13)
where 𝐺is the group size, 𝜋𝜃and 𝜋𝜃old are the current and previous policy models, respectively, 𝑜𝑖
𝑡denotes the 𝑡-th
token in the 𝑖-th output sequence, 𝑞is the input prompt, 𝑜𝑖
<𝑡represents the tokens generated before step 𝑡in sequence
𝑖, 𝜖is the clipping hyperparameter, and 𝛽controls the KL divergence penalty term to restrict the extent of gradient
updates.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 12 ---
12
Guanming Liu, et al.
The key difference from PPO lies in how the advantage ˆ𝐴𝑖,𝑡is computed. Instead of using a value function estimate,
GRPO calculates the advantage using Equation (12), where the advantage for each output 𝑜𝑖is normalized relative to
the group statistics.
The reward function 𝑅(𝑜) combines multiple components to provide comprehensive training signals. We use both a
format check reward function 𝑅format and an answer accuracy reward function 𝑅accuracy. The format reward validates
whether the model’s output follows the expected structure (e.g., proper tool call syntax, valid intent label format),
assigning a small positive reward for valid formats. For the accuracy reward, we use a simple binary scheme where a
correct response earns a reward of 1, while an incorrect response receives a reward of 0:
𝑅accuracy(𝑜) =


1,
if ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑔𝑡
0,
otherwise
(14)
where ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑is the predicted intent label and ℓ𝑔𝑡is the ground-truth intent label. While these basic reward components
provide essential learning signals, they do not explicitly guide the model’s tool usage decisions, which motivates our
tool-aware reward extension.
5.3.3
Tool-aware Reward Function. To explicitly guide the model’s retrieval behavior, we introduce a tool-aware reward
term 𝑅tool(𝑜) that provides fine-grained feedback on tool usage decisions. Without proper guidance, the model tends to
converge to a single strategy (either always retrieving or always answering directly), losing the ability to adaptively
select strategies based on context difficulty.
To address this, we dynamically adjust tool-related rewards based on group-level accuracy. For each training group
G containing 𝐺generated outputs, we compute the group accuracy 𝛼G = 1
𝐺
Í𝐺
𝑖=1 1[ℓ(𝑖)
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑔𝑡]. Based on this accuracy,
we classify the context as easy (𝛼G ≥0.5) or hard (𝛼G < 0.5), and define the tool-aware reward as:
𝑅tool(𝑜) =


𝑟𝑑,
if 𝛼G ≥0.5 and no tool called and ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑔𝑡
𝑟𝑓,
if 𝛼G ≥0.5 and tool called and ℓ𝑔𝑡∉O𝑡
𝑟𝑠,
if 𝛼G < 0.5 and tool called and ℓ𝑔𝑡∈O𝑡
𝑟𝑒,
if 𝛼G < 0.5 and no tool called and ℓ𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑≠ℓ𝑔𝑡
0,
otherwise
(15)
where O𝑡denotes the set of intent options generated during retrieval tool calls. For easy contexts (𝛼G ≥0.5), we reward
correct direct answers (𝑟𝑑= 0.1) and penalize failed retrieval (𝑟𝑓= −0.1). For difficult contexts (𝛼G < 0.5), we reward
successful retrieval (𝑟𝑠= 0.5) and penalize incorrect direct answers (𝑟𝑒= −0.1). The reward magnitudes are set to keep
𝑅tool secondary to 𝑅accuracy, ensuring that tool-aware signals guide retrieval behavior without dominating the primary
intent prediction objective.
The overall reward combines format checking, accuracy, and tool-aware components:
𝑅(𝑜) = 𝑅format(𝑜) + 𝑅accuracy(𝑜) + 𝑅tool(𝑜).
(16)
This design ensures that the model learns conditional tool usage: for easy contexts where the model can reliably infer
intent directly, retrieval is discouraged; for hard contexts where direct inference is unreliable, the model is encouraged
to leverage historical patterns through retrieval.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 13 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
13
6
Experiments and Analysis
6.1
Experimental Settings
6.1.1
Data and Settings. We conduct experiments across three datasets spanning different domains: dialogue-based
intent understanding (MIntRec2.0), social media intent understanding (Weibo Post-Sync), and reading-based intent
understanding (Highlight-Intent). We evaluate IntPro under two settings: (1) In-domain evaluation: For each dataset, we
train a proxy agent on the corresponding training set and evaluate on its test set. (2) Cross-domain evaluation: We train
exclusively on MIntRec2.0, then test on Weibo Post-Sync and Highlight-Intent to evaluate zero-shot transferability
(Section 6.5.3).
MIntRec2.0. MIntRec2.0 [45] is a benchmark for multimodal intent recognition in multi-party dialogues, comprising
thirty fine-grained intent labels spanning two semantic super-categories (express emotion/attitude vs. achieve goal).
The In-scope subset comprises 9,304 utterances (6,165/1,106/2,033 for train/validation/test) sampled from 1,245 dialogues
across three sitcoms, with speaker identity metadata enabling character-level analysis. The dataset exhibits a pronounced
long-tail distribution; frequent communicative acts such as Inform, Explain and Complain dominate, whereas rarer
intents like Warn or Flaunt occur sparsely. We use each dialogue’s history and speaker identification, paired with
corresponding utterances, as context.
Weibo Post-Sync. The Weibo Post-Sync dataset [46] consists of anonymized posts collected from Chinese social
platforms, and each post is annotated with a primary posting intent (such as advertisement, exhibition, identity
clarification, intimate interaction, personal record, emotional venting, or social approval), along with content category
and topic labels. These multi-level annotations make the dataset especially suitable for intent recognition tasks. We
incorporate the user ID and topic hashtags along with the post content to construct the user context.
Highlight-Intent. Highlight-Intent is a self-constructed, bilingual (English and Chinese) dataset for context-aware
intent understanding. The dataset captures the full workflow of information search-based reading assistance: from a
user’s text highlight to intent inference, explanation, AI response, and final human labeling. As the AI system provides
knowledge-retrieved answers based on predicted intents, users can rank different intent options according to their
perceptual feelings towards the corresponding responses. We preserve the fine-grained interaction records of users
who actively select text snippets and independently mark their reading motivations during the reading process. The
predefined intent classes include 12 categories, such as analyzing trends, understanding reasons and comparing with
similar terms. Table 1 presents comprehensive statistics of Highlight-Intent dataset.
For all three datasets, we select each user’s historical intent records (at least one per user) along with their contexts
to construct personalized intent history libraries for retrieval during tool calls.
6.1.2
Models and Baselines. We conduct experiments using three base models: Qwen-2.5 3B, Llama-3.2 3B, and Qwen-3
4B. We train proxy agents using supervised fine-tuning followed by GRPO with tool-aware reward functions, where
the reward function explicitly guides both intent prediction accuracy and retrieval tool usage decisions. We compare
against the following baselines: (1) Cloud LLMs: GPT-4o and Qwen3-30B-A3B, evaluated in both zero-shot and retrieval-
augmented settings; (2) Discriminative models: BERT-base, RoBERTa-base, and MAG-BERT [45] (a domain-specific
multimodal baseline for MIntRec2.0 that additionally leverages audio and visual features); (3) Training variants: SFT
with Answer-only, SFT with Retrieval-conditioned, and Naive GRPO (using only accuracy-based rewards without
tool-aware signals).
6.1.3
Metrics. We evaluate our method using the following metrics:
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 14 ---
14
Guanming Liu, et al.
Table 1. Highlight-Intent Dataset Summary Statistics
Metric
Value
Dataset Size
Intent Categories
12
Users
23
Total Queries
2695 (Train/Test = 1970/725)
User Statistics
Queries per User (Median)
115
Query Range
11–226
Intent Types per User
6–12 (Avg: 11.09)
Intent Statistics
Most Frequent Intent
Define or Explain (772)
Least Frequent Intent
Trace Controversies (27)
Distribution Concentration
Top-3 Intent Coverage
55.21%
Bottom-3 Intent Coverage
8.42%
Accuracy (Acc) measures the proportion of correctly predicted intent labels:
Acc = 1
𝑁
𝑁
∑︁
𝑖=1
I[ℓ𝑖
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑖
𝑔𝑡],
(17)
where 𝑁is the total number of samples, ℓ𝑖
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑and ℓ𝑖
𝑔𝑡are the predicted and ground-truth intent labels for sample 𝑖, and
I[·] is the indicator function.
Macro-F1 (M-F1) computes the unweighted average of F1 scores across all intent classes, treating each class equally
regardless of frequency:
M-F1 = 1
𝐾
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
2 · 𝑃𝑘· 𝑅𝑘
𝑃𝑘+ 𝑅𝑘
,
(18)
where 𝐾is the number of intent classes, 𝑃𝑘and 𝑅𝑘are the precision and recall for class 𝑘. This metric is particularly
important for evaluating performance on imbalanced datasets with long-tail intent distributions.
Weighted-F1 (W-F1) computes the weighted average of F1 scores, where each class is weighted by its support
(number of samples):
W-F1 =
𝐾
∑︁
𝑘=1
𝑛𝑘
𝑁· 2 · 𝑃𝑘· 𝑅𝑘
𝑃𝑘+ 𝑅𝑘
,
(19)
where 𝑛𝑘is the number of samples in class 𝑘. This metric reflects overall performance while accounting for class
imbalance.
Pass@N measures the probability that at least one of 𝑁sampled predictions is correct:
Pass@N = 1
𝑀
𝑀
∑︁
𝑖=1
I
h
∃𝑗∈{1, ..., 𝑁} : ℓ𝑖,𝑗
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑= ℓ𝑖
𝑔𝑡
i
,
(20)
where 𝑀is the number of test samples and ℓ𝑖,𝑗
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑑is the 𝑗-th sampled prediction for sample 𝑖. We set 𝑁= 4 in our
experiments.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 15 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
15
Table 2. Discriminability and retrieval comparison on MIntRec2.0.
Representation
Intra-Sim↑
Inter-Sim↓
User LOO Acc↑
Global R@1↑
Utterance Only
0.6274
0.5893
0.2864
0.3212
Full Context
0.7297
0.7262
0.2599
0.2262
Intent Exp. (generic)
0.7916
0.7687
0.2948
0.3642
Intent Exp. (personalized)
0.8128
0.7790
0.3631
0.5316
Generalization Gap quantifies the model’s ability to generalize from training to test data:
Gen-Gap = Acc𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛−Acc𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡.
(21)
A smaller gap indicates better generalization. For radar chart visualization, we apply an inverted min-max normalization
so that higher values indicate better generalization:
Gen-Gapvis = 𝑔max −Gen-Gap
𝑔max −𝑔min
,
(22)
where 𝑔min and 𝑔max are dataset-specific range bounds determined by the observed Gen-Gap values across all compared
methods.
6.2
Preliminary Analysis
Before presenting the main results, we conduct two preliminary analyses to validate key design choices: the quality
of intent explanations as retrieval representations, and the selection of fine-tuning strategy for initializing the GRPO
training phase.
6.2.1
Discriminability of Intent Explanations. To evaluate the quality of intent explanations as retrieval representations,
we first analyze their discriminability across intent categories. Effective intent explanations should exhibit high
intra-class similarity (explanations for the same intent should be semantically similar) and low inter-class similarity
(explanations for different intents should be distinguishable). We compute sentence embeddings for all generated intent
explanations using a pre-trained sentence transformer and measure the following metrics:
• Intra-class Similarity: Average cosine similarity between intent explanations belonging to the same intent
category.
• Inter-class Similarity: Average cosine similarity between intent explanations from different intent categories.
We also use two retrieval metrics: (1) User LOO Acc: for each user with at least two samples, we hold out one
sample as query and retrieve from the user’s remaining samples, computing macro accuracy across users; (2) Global
R@1: the proportion of queries whose top-1 retrieved result shares the same intent label. Table 2 reports results on
MIntRec2.0 (users with at least two samples: 41 users, 4,997 samples).
We compare four representation approaches: (1) Utterance Only: using only the user’s current utterance or action;
(2) Full Context: the complete contextual information encompassing both situational background and user behavior;
(3) Intent Exp. (generic): intent explanations focusing on general semantic patterns without user-specific cues; and
(4) Intent Exp. (personalized): intent explanations that incorporate inferred personal motivation patterns alongside
contextual and strategic information.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 16 ---
16
Guanming Liu, et al.
Separation = 0.061
(a) Raw Human Context
Separation = 0.200 (+228%)
(b) Intent Explanation
Intent
Inform
Doubt
Complain
Praise
Agree
Oppose
Advise
Thank
Fig. 4. t-SNE Visualization Comparison on MIntRec2.0. (a) Raw human context representations show overlapping clusters with weak
intent separation. (b) Intent explanation embeddings exhibit clearer clusters, indicating improved separation.
The results reveal several key findings. Utterance Only representations achieve the lowest inter-class similarity but
also suffer from low intra-class similarity, resulting in poor retrieval performance. This suggests that raw utterances
are too diverse even within the same intent category to serve as effective retrieval keys. Full Context representations
improve intra-class similarity but at the cost of nearly equivalent inter-class similarity, leading to the worst retrieval
accuracy. This indicates that including all contextual information introduces excessive noise that obscures intent
boundaries—the rich but unstructured context makes different intents appear deceptively similar.
Generic intent explanations demonstrate substantial improvements in both clustering quality and retrieval accuracy,
validating the benefit of abstracting context-intent connections into structured representations. Personalized intent
explanations further achieve the best overall performance, with the highest intra-class similarity and a 46% improvement
in Global R@1 over generic explanations. Notably, the average token length remains similar between personalized
and generic explanations, suggesting that the performance gains stem from incorporating user-specific motivational
patterns rather than simply generating longer text. Based on these results, we adopt personalized intent explanations
for constructing the intent history library in all subsequent experiments.
Figure 4 compares t-SNE projections of raw human context versus intent explanation embeddings on MIntRec2.0.
The left panel shows that raw contextual data produces overlapping clusters where different intents are difficult to
distinguish. In contrast, the right panel demonstrates that intent explanations form more coherent clusters, with
semantically contrasting intents (e.g., “Praise” vs “Complain”, “Agree” vs “Oppose”) positioned apart. This visualization
provides an intuitive complement to the discriminability analysis in Table 2.
6.2.2
Comparison of Fine-Tuning Strategies. Based on the discriminability analysis above, we further evaluate different
supervised fine-tuning strategies to prepare models for GRPO training, as shown in Figure 5. We compare four SFT
strategies that progressively increase the complexity of generated outputs: (1) Answer-only: outputs only the predicted
intent label without any reasoning process; (2) Explanation-based: predicts the intent label and then generates
an intent explanation that articulates the reasoning from context to intent; (3) Reasoning-based: first produces a
chain-of-thought reasoning process, then predicts the intent label, and finally generates the intent explanation as a
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 17 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
17
Qwen2.5 3B
44.4
2.3
22
50
53
42.0
0.1
322
Acc.
Gen. Gap
Avg. Len.
Pass@4
Highlight-Intent
63.5
10.9
13
65
68
61.1
1.3
219
MIntRec2.0
69.9
9.2
4
80
85
67.3
1.3
87
Weibo Post-Sync
Qwen3 4B
46.1
4.6
39
42.4
51
1.1
335
53
65.1
7.6
19
68
61.3
0.3
218
70
74.9
8.7
23
82
71.7
88
4.6
102
Answer-only
Explanation-based
Reasoning-based
Retrieval-conditioned
Fig. 5. Performance of Four Fine-Tuning Strategies (Answer-only, Explanation-based, Reasoning-based, Retrieval-conditioned) across
Two Models and Three Datasets.
structured summary; (4) Retrieval-conditioned: our full approach that invokes a retrieval tool to obtain historically
similar intent patterns, reasons over the retrieved evidence, and generates both the prediction and intent explanation.
All models are trained for one epoch.
We observe that Answer-only SFT achieves the highest accuracy on training data but exhibits the largest generalization
gap, indicating overfitting to the training distribution. Adding intent explanation generation (Explanation-based) reduces
this gap while maintaining comparable Pass@4 scores, suggesting that the explanation process encourages the model
to learn transferable reasoning patterns rather than memorizing label associations. Introducing chain-of-thought
reasoning (Reasoning-based) further improves Pass@4 and generalization, demonstrating that explicit analytical
reasoning before prediction helps the model explore a richer hypothesis space. The average output length (Avg. Len.)
increases progressively across the four strategies, reflecting the growing complexity of the generated trajectories.
Retrieval-conditioned achieves the lowest single-shot accuracy but the best Generalization Gap and Pass@4 per-
formance, despite producing substantially longer outputs due to tool calls and retrieval-conditioned reasoning. This
pattern reveals a key insight: the complex retrieval-conditioned trajectory is difficult to master through SFT alone, yet
the model has learned effective reasoning patterns—as evidenced by its high Pass@4, indicating that the correct intent
frequently appears among sampled predictions. The large gap between Pass@4 and Accuracy suggests substantial room
for reinforcement learning to stabilize predictions, directly motivating our subsequent GRPO training phase.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 18 ---
18
Guanming Liu, et al.
Table 3. Performance Comparison across Different Models and Datasets. We compare our IntPro with tool-aware reward functions
against baselines including Answer-only SFT, Retrieval-conditioned SFT, Naive GRPO, and LLM baselines. For IntPro, we report
mean±std over 3 independent evaluation runs.
Model
Highlight-Intent
MIntRec2.0
Weibo Post-Sync
Acc (%)
M-F1 (%)
W-F1 (%)
Acc (%)
M-F1 (%)
W-F1 (%)
Acc (%)
M-F1 (%)
W-F1 (%)
Others
GPT-4o
30.62
13.71
26.88
38.48
26.82
40.02
42.16
38.58
45.49
GPT-4o (w/ retrieval)
36.97
17.82
32.45
41.84
30.56
43.68
65.18
42.34
58.76
Qwen3-30B-A3B
28.45
12.39
24.67
36.21
24.77
37.89
41.05
30.78
36.76
Qwen3-30B-A3B (w/ retrieval)
34.56
15.67
29.82
40.23
28.89
42.15
62.45
38.92
55.34
BERT-base
38.17
13.82
29.66
42.49
23.44
33.16
67.27
33.45
60.36
RoBERTa-base
43.21
22.37
35.80
46.40
28.44
39.26
62.69
30.80
55.72
MAG-BERT [45]
-
-
-
60.58
55.17
59.68
-
-
-
Qwen2.5-3B
SFT with Answer-only
44.42
23.55
37.11
63.52
58.12
62.63
69.90
52.52
68.81
SFT with Retrieval-conditioned
41.98
22.67
35.24
61.14
56.52
60.65
67.32
51.18
66.74
Naive GRPO
43.82
26.14
37.65
61.30
53.97
59.82
69.21
56.31
69.06
IntPro (Ours)
46.34±0.74
28.75±1.18
40.82±0.85
64.93±0.52
57.99±0.86
63.54±0.63
74.06±0.68
60.95±0.93
74.12±0.71
Llama3.2-3B
SFT with Answer-only
36.18
24.88
35.58
58.16
48.23
57.01
67.26
51.23
65.89
SFT with Retrieval-conditioned
34.25
23.94
33.72
55.62
47.05
55.13
64.58
49.86
63.42
Naive GRPO
42.75
26.84
38.92
57.67
43.46
56.68
67.22
51.25
67.13
IntPro (Ours)
45.24±0.83
30.52±1.24
41.35±0.97
59.24±0.61
48.72±0.79
57.85±0.58
70.32±0.75
55.15±1.07
69.04±0.82
Qwen3-4B
SFT with Answer-only
46.12
28.45
40.56
65.14
55.37
65.65
74.89
59.83
74.55
SFT with Retrieval-conditioned
44.25
27.14
38.86
62.85
53.92
63.40
72.14
58.21
71.78
Naive GRPO
47.17
28.12
41.28
66.12
54.82
66.45
75.87
60.14
75.24
IntPro (Ours)
48.28±0.69
30.56±0.94
43.14±0.81
67.37±0.47
56.68±0.72
66.59±0.53
76.98±0.58
62.45±0.85
76.12±0.61
6.3
Performance Comparison
We evaluate how our IntPro with tool-aware reward functions enhances the proxy agent’s capabilities across the
Highlight-Intent, MIntRec2.0, and Weibo Post-Sync datasets. As shown in Table 3, IntPro achieves the best or near-best
performance across all datasets and model types, demonstrating its effectiveness at improving intent understanding.
Note that all GRPO variants (Naive GRPO and IntPro) are initialized from the SFT with Retrieval-conditioned checkpoint,
which has lower single-shot accuracy than Answer-only SFT but stronger reasoning patterns (as shown in Section 5.2).
This explains why Naive GRPO occasionally underperforms Answer-only SFT on metrics like M-F1: without tool-aware
reward signals, the GRPO phase cannot fully exploit the retrieval-conditioned reasoning capability inherited from SFT,
whereas IntPro’s tool-aware rewards effectively bridge this gap.
Comparison with Cloud LLMs. GPT-4o and Qwen3-30B-A3B achieve limited performance in zero-shot settings,
as they lack access to user-specific intent history and cannot ground their predictions in personalized contextual
patterns. Equipping these LLMs with the same retrieval mechanism (w/ retrieval) yields consistent improvements
across all datasets, with particularly large gains on Weibo Post-Sync, confirming the inherent value of leveraging
historical intent patterns for context-aware understanding. However, IntPro still substantially outperforms these
retrieval-augmented LLMs across all datasets and metrics. This persistent gap highlights a limitation of the retrieve-
then-prompt paradigm: general-purpose LLMs treat retrieved patterns as passive reference material, whereas IntPro
learns to actively generate discriminative intent options, evaluate retrieved evidence against the current context, and
make calibrated judgments—capabilities acquired through its retrieval-conditioned SFT trajectories and tool-aware
GRPO training.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 19 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
19
complain
doubt
advise
explain
complain
(5.1%)
doubt
(6.8%)
advise
(5.2%)
explain
(9.9%)
True Intent
0.83
0.11
0.00
0.06
0.01
0.99
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.97
0.01
0.09
0.00
0.02
0.89
GRPO with Tool-aware Reward
complain
doubt
advise
explain
complain
(5.1%)
doubt
(6.8%)
advise
(5.2%)
explain
(9.9%)
0.75
0.12
0.00
0.12
0.01
0.98
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.05
0.89
0.06
0.06
0.01
0.00
0.93
Naive GRPO
complain
doubt
advise
explain
Predicted Intent
complain
(5.1%)
doubt
(6.8%)
advise
(5.2%)
explain
(9.9%)
True Intent
0.80
0.09
0.01
0.09
0.02
0.95
0.03
0.01
0.00
0.06
0.92
0.03
0.09
0.02
0.01
0.89
SFT with Answer-only
complain
doubt
advise
explain
Predicted Intent
complain
(5.1%)
doubt
(6.8%)
advise
(5.2%)
explain
(9.9%)
0.84
0.06
0.00
0.10
0.08
0.91
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.88
0.07
0.09
0.04
0.01
0.86
SFT with Retrieval-conditioned
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Recall Rate
Fig. 6. Recall Analysis of Major Intent Categories via Confusion Matrices.
Comparison with Discriminative Models. While discriminative models (BERT-base, RoBERTa-base) achieve
higher accuracy than Cloud LLMs, they still struggle on context-rich scenarios and cannot generate intent explanations
required for downstream LLM response generation in the Human-Proxy-LLM framework.
Comparison with Training Variants. Compared to Naive GRPO that uses only accuracy-based rewards, IntPro
achieves notable improvements by incorporating tool-aware reward signals that guide both intent prediction and
retrieval behavior. The improvements are consistent across all three model types (Qwen2.5-3B, Llama3.2-3B, Qwen3-4B),
demonstrating the generalizability of our approach.
We also evaluate context-aware intent understanding on the Highlight-Intent dataset using a relaxed Top-1 criterion:
if multiple intent classes share the highest user rating, any one of them is treated as a correct ground-truth. This
relaxed evaluation better reflects real-world scenarios, where users may perceive multiple intents as equally appro-
priate responses. As shown in Table 4, IntPro consistently outperforms Naive GRPO under this relaxed evaluation,
demonstrating its effectiveness for robust, context-aware intent understanding even when multiple candidate intents
are equally preferred.
We visualize the confusion matrices for four strategies (SFT with Answer-only, SFT with Retrieval-conditioned,
Naive GRPO, and IntPro) on four major intent categories in MIntRec2.0. We select the four categories with the highest
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 20 ---
20
Guanming Liu, et al.
Refuse (0.76%)
Emphasize (0.92%)
Explain (9.86%)
Inform (10.95%)
Intent Category
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
Accuracy
0.28
0.00
0.53
0.37
0.29
0.12
0.57
0.44
0.35
0.18
0.58
0.57
0.45
0.33
0.68
0.53
0.10
0.05
0.65
0.44
SFT with answer-only
SFT with retrieval-conditioned
Naive GRPO
GRPO with tool-aware reward
Qwen3-30B-A3B
Fig. 7. Accuracy Comparison of Head and Tail Intents (Top-2/Bottom-2) on MIntRec2.0.
inter-category confusion rates in the baseline (SFT with Answer-only) to examine where retrieval-conditioned reasoning
provides the most benefit. As illustrated in Figure 6, IntPro generally achieves the highest recall across these challenging
categories, demonstrating its enhanced capacity to differentiate between easily confused intents.
Finally, we present a histogram comparing accuracy across top-2 and bottom-2 intent categories by proportion in
the MIntRec2.0 dataset, as shown in Figure 7. The results reveal that relying solely on SFT or Cloud LLM leads to
significant performance degradation on low-frequency intent categories, highlighting the imbalance issue. Notably, SFT
strategies that generate richer outputs (Explanation-based and Reasoning-based) consistently outperform Answer-only
across both high-frequency and low-frequency intents, underscoring the importance of structured reasoning during
fine-tuning. Furthermore, IntPro yields improvements in both frequent and rare intents, demonstrating its effectiveness
in addressing the long-tailed distribution challenge.
Table 4. Performance on the Highlight-Intent dataset under a relaxed Top-1 criterion (multiple highest-rated intents all treated as
correct). ↑means the improvement of IntPro compared to Naive GRPO.
Model
Acc (%)
M-F1 (%)
W-F1 (%)
Qwen2.5-3B
63.36 (1.53 ↑)
48.64 (0.97 ↑)
60.64 (2.12 ↑)
Llama3.2-3B
59.24 (0.92 ↑)
44.24 (0.72 ↑)
56.71 (0.88 ↑)
Qwen3-4B
63.97 (2.14 ↑)
48.10 (0.43 ↑)
61.60 (3.09 ↑)
GPT-4o
48.55
30.02
46.20
Qwen3-30B-A3B
46.23
28.15
43.87
6.4
Ablation Study
To understand the contribution of each component in our framework, we conduct ablation studies on the tool-aware
reward function and retrieval configurations. All experiments are conducted using Qwen3-4B as the base model, as it
represents the most capable architecture in our experiments. The consistent performance trends across all three model
types in Table 3 suggest that the conclusions generalize across different model architectures.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 21 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
21
Table 5. Ablation Study Results. We evaluate the impact of tool-aware reward components and top-𝑘retrieval settings across three
datasets. TC% denotes the tool call rate.
Setting
Highlight-Intent
MIntRec2.0
Weibo Post-Sync
Acc
M-F1
TC%
Acc
M-F1
TC%
Acc
M-F1
TC%
Tool-aware Reward Components
IntPro (Full)
48.28
30.56
27.45
67.37
56.68
20.32
76.98
62.45
14.18
w/o 𝑟𝑠(retrieval success)
47.33
28.72
12.82
66.35
55.21
9.48
76.12
60.68
6.62
w/o 𝑟𝑓(retrieval failure)
48.01
30.12
25.99
67.05
56.32
19.24
76.75
61.92
13.43
w/o 𝑟𝑑(direct answer)
47.68
29.42
15.15
66.72
55.45
11.21
76.45
61.28
7.83
w/o 𝑟𝑒(direct error)
47.85
29.78
21.66
66.88
55.92
16.04
76.58
61.72
11.19
w/o 𝑅tool (Naive GRPO)
47.17
28.12
7.91
66.12
54.82
5.85
75.87
60.14
4.08
Top-𝑘Retrieval
𝑘= 1
46.42
28.18
-
65.82
54.52
-
75.28
59.98
-
𝑘= 2
47.15
29.05
-
66.48
55.38
-
75.98
60.85
-
𝑘= 3 (default)
48.28
30.56
-
67.37
56.68
-
76.98
62.45
-
𝑘= 5
47.82
29.92
-
66.98
55.85
-
76.55
61.78
-
6.4.1
Effect of Tool-aware Reward Components. We analyze the contribution of each component in the tool-aware
reward function, where rewards are dynamically assigned based on context difficulty (determined by group accuracy
𝛼G). As shown in Table 5, removing the successful retrieval reward (𝑟𝑠, applied on hard contexts) leads to the largest
performance drop and the most significant TC% reduction, indicating that explicitly rewarding successful retrieval on
difficult cases has the largest individual impact on encouraging the model to leverage historical intent patterns. The direct
answer reward (𝑟𝑑, applied on easy contexts) also substantially affects TC%, revealing an interesting complementary
role: by rewarding correct direct answers on easy contexts, 𝑟𝑑implicitly discourages unnecessary retrieval, helping
the model develop a clear decision boundary between direct inference and retrieval-conditioned inference. Removing
the direct error penalty (𝑟𝑒, applied on hard contexts) results in a moderate drop, confirming its role in preventing the
model from overconfidently bypassing retrieval on genuinely ambiguous cases. The failed retrieval penalty (𝑟𝑓, applied
on easy contexts) has the smallest individual impact, providing complementary guidance for retrieval quality. Removing
all tool-aware rewards (Naive GRPO) leads to consistent degradation with the lowest TC%, confirming that without
explicit tool-aware signals, the model converges toward a retrieval-averse policy that underutilizes the intent history
library. We additionally varied the reward magnitudes (e.g., scaling 𝑟𝑠from 0.1 to 1.0) and found that the presence of
each component matters substantially more than its specific magnitude, as long as the tool-aware rewards remain
secondary to the accuracy reward.
6.4.2
Effect of Top-𝑘Retrieval. We investigate the impact of the number of retrieved intent patterns by varying 𝑘from
1 to 5. Table 5 reveals a clear trend: performance improves as 𝑘increases from 1 to 3, then slightly decreases at 𝑘= 5.
Setting 𝑘= 3 achieves the best balance across all datasets: smaller values (𝑘= 1, 2) provide insufficient context for
disambiguation, while larger values (𝑘= 5) may introduce noise from less relevant patterns. This suggests that moderate
retrieval breadth is optimal for intent understanding, allowing the model to leverage diverse historical patterns without
being overwhelmed by marginally relevant examples.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 22 ---
22
Guanming Liu, et al.
6.5
Analysis of Retrieval-Conditioned Behavior
To further understand the effectiveness of our retrieval-conditioned approach, we conduct four complementary analyses:
(1) training dynamics that reveal how tool-aware rewards shape the learning process, (2) a retrieval strategy comparison
that evaluates whether the model learns appropriate retrieval behavior, (3) a cross-domain generalization experiment
that evaluates transferability across different scenarios, and (4) a progressive accumulation experiment that validates
the framework’s ability to improve as user intent history grows.
6.5.1
Training Dynamics of Tool-aware Rewards. To complement the ablation results with a process-level perspective,
we visualize four key training metrics during GRPO on MIntRec2.0 using Qwen3-4B. As shown in Figure 8, the intent
accuracy reward and direct answer accuracy both exhibit steady upward trends throughout training, indicating that
tool-aware rewards not only encourage effective tool usage but also strengthen the model’s intrinsic reasoning ability.
More importantly, the tool retrieval miss count shows a sharp decline, confirming that the retrieval success reward (𝑟𝑠)
and failure penalty (𝑟𝑓) effectively guide the model toward more precise retrieval decisions—the model progressively
learns to generate intent options that include the correct intent, improving the quality of retrieved evidence. Meanwhile,
the gradual decrease in policy entropy reflects increasing confidence in inference strategy selection, as the model
converges toward a stable policy that appropriately routes between direct inference and retrieval-conditioned inference.
These coupled trends suggest that IntPro’s reward components work in a complementary manner: improved retrieval
precision feeds better evidence into the reasoning process, which in turn reinforces the model’s confidence in its strategy
selection.
6.5.2
Retrieval Strategy Comparison. We investigate whether IntPro learns effective retrieval behavior by comparing
three settings: (1) No Retrieval, where the retrieval tool is disabled and the model must rely solely on direct inference;
(2) Self-decided (IntPro), where the model autonomously decides whether to invoke retrieval; and (3) Forced Retrieval,
where the model is required to call the retrieval tool for every query. As shown in Figure 9 (Left), the self-decided strategy
consistently achieves the highest accuracy across all three datasets, outperforming both extremes. Notably, No Retrieval
outperforms Forced Retrieval on MIntRec2.0, indicating that indiscriminate retrieval may introduce noise from less
relevant patterns for straightforward queries, interfering with the model’s contextual understanding. The self-decided
strategy bridges this gap by selectively invoking retrieval only when the context is genuinely ambiguous, validating
that our tool-aware reward design successfully teaches the model to balance direct inference and retrieval-conditioned
inference based on context difficulty.
6.5.3
Cross-domain Generalization. We evaluate IntPro’s transferability by training exclusively on MIntRec2.0 (selected
as the source domain due to its largest training set and most diverse intent taxonomy, 30 categories), then testing on
Weibo Post-Sync and Highlight-Intent without any in-domain training data. This simulates real-world deployment
where the proxy agent encounters new domains. We compare against zero-shot LLM baselines (GPT-4o and Qwen3-
30B-A3B) that require no domain-specific training. As shown in Figure 9 (Right), IntPro achieves the highest accuracy
on both target datasets, outperforming both LLM baselines by clear margins despite using a much smaller model. This
suggests that the retrieval-conditioned mechanism learns transferable intent reasoning patterns: the ability to generate
intent options, retrieve relevant historical evidence, and synthesize a judgment generalizes across domains, even when
the specific intent taxonomies and contextual formats differ substantially. Notably, GPT-4o achieves higher M-F1 on
Weibo, likely because the larger model generalizes better on rare intent categories where IntPro’s limited cross-domain
retrieval library provides insufficient coverage.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 23 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
23
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Reward
(a) Intent Accuracy Reward
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Rate
(b) Direct Answer Accuracy
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Training Step
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
Count (per batch)
(c) Tool Retrieval Miss Count
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
Training Step
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.25
1.30
Entropy
(d) Policy Entropy
Fig. 8. Training dynamics of IntPro during GRPO on MIntRec2.0 (Qwen3-4B). Curves are smoothed with a rolling window; shaded
areas indicate standard deviation.
6.5.4
Progressive History Accumulation. A key design principle of our Human-Proxy-LLM framework is that the proxy
agent should improve as user intent history accumulates over time. To validate this capability, we conduct a progressive
accumulation experiment on the MIntRec2.0 dataset. Specifically, we select the speaker with the most samples (Amy, 383
samples from the combined test and development sets) to ensure sufficient data for observing meaningful accumulation
trends, and simulate a realistic deployment scenario where the proxy agent processes queries in a streaming fashion:
for each incoming sample, the model first makes a prediction using the current intent history library, then generates an
intent explanation for this sample and adds it to the library for future retrieval.
To ensure balanced intent coverage during accumulation, we adopt a deterministic round-robin ordering: samples
are first grouped by intent label, then iteratively drawn from each group in descending order of intent frequency.
This avoids early-stage concentration on a single intent and produces a stable, reproducible evaluation trajectory. We
compare IntPro with retrieval against the same model without retrieval capability.
Figure 10 presents the results. IntPro with retrieval demonstrates consistent performance improvement as the intent
history library grows, achieving a +5.5 percentage point gain from the earliest to the final checkpoint. In contrast, the
baseline without retrieval shows minimal variation across accumulation stages, confirming that the performance gains
are attributable to the retrieval mechanism leveraging an increasingly rich set of historical intent patterns, rather than
other confounding factors.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 24 ---
24
Guanming Liu, et al.
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Score (%)
Highlight
Weibo
MIntRec2.0
28.1
30.6
28.5
45.1
48.3
45.8
58.5
62.5
61.2
72.3
77.0
75.5
52.5
56.7
54.9
62.1
67.4
65.7
Acc
M-F1
Acc
M-F1
Acc
M-F1
(a) Retrieval Strategy Comparison
Self-decided (IntPro)
No Retrieval
Forced Retrieval
0
10
20
30
40
50
Score (%)
Qwen3-30B-A3B
GPT-4o
IntPro (Ours)
12.3
30.8
28.4
41.0
13.7
38.6
30.6
42.2
12.6
34.4
35.9
45.8
Acc
M-F1
Acc
M-F1
Acc
M-F1
(b) Cross-domain Generalization
(Train: MIntRec2.0)
Weibo
Highlight
Fig. 9. Analysis of retrieval-conditioned behavior. Left: Retrieval strategy comparison across three settings: forced no retrieval,
self-decided (IntPro), and forced retrieval. Right: Cross-domain generalization where models are trained on MIntRec2.0 and tested on
Weibo and Highlight-Intent without in-domain training.
38
77
115
153
192
230
268
306
345
383
Accumulated Samples
54
56
58
60
62
64
Accuracy (%)
7.9pp
57.9
63.5
IntPro (with retrieval)
IntPro (without retrieval)
Fig. 10. Progressive accumulation analysis on MIntRec2.0 (speaker Amy, 383 samples). The x-axis shows the number of accumulated
intent history samples. IntPro with retrieval shows consistent improvement as history accumulates, while the baseline without
retrieval remains flat.
This progressive improvement pattern supports our framework’s core hypothesis: by maintaining and leveraging an
expanding intent history library, the proxy agent can continuously adapt to user-specific intent patterns.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 25 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
25
Model
Training
Model Size
Latency
Memory
Intent
Strategy
(ms/query)
(GB)
Explanation
GPT-4o
Zero-shot API
N/A
∼800-2500†
N/A
Yes
Qwen3-30B-A3B
Zero-shot API
∼61 GB
∼600-1800†
∼70 GB
Yes
BERT-base
Fine-tuned
440 MB
12 ms
1.8 GB
No
RoBERTa-base
Fine-tuned
500 MB
18 ms
2.1 GB
No
IntPro (Qwen2.5-3B)
SFT+GRPO
6.2 GB
145 ms
8.5 GB
Yes
IntPro (Llama3.2-3B)
SFT+GRPO
6.4 GB
152 ms
8.8 GB
Yes
IntPro (Qwen3-4B)
SFT+GRPO
8.5 GB
178 ms
11.2 GB
Yes
Table 6. Computational efficiency comparison across different approaches. IntPro achieves a balance between intent understanding
performance and deployment feasibility, enabling on-device execution with intent explanation generation capability. Local latency is
measured on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU with batch size 1. †Cloud API latency includes network overhead (typically 200–500 ms
additional) and varies with server load.
6.6
Computational Efficiency and Case Analysis
6.6.1
Computational Efficiency. To evaluate the practical feasibility of IntPro for on-device deployment, we compare
computational costs across different approaches. Table 6 presents a comprehensive comparison of model size, inference
latency, memory usage, and deployment characteristics.
IntPro demonstrates practical efficiency for on-device deployment. Compared to large LLMs (GPT-4o, Qwen3-
30B-A3B), IntPro requires significantly less memory (8-12 GB vs ∼70 GB), making it feasible for local devices while
eliminating privacy risks associated with cloud-based inference. Note that the latency comparison is not strictly apples-
to-apples: cloud LLM latency includes network overhead, whereas IntPro’s latency reflects pure on-device computation.
Nevertheless, IntPro’s local inference (145-178 ms) avoids the variable network delays (typically 200-500 ms additional)
inherent in cloud-based deployment. While discriminative models (BERT, RoBERTa) offer lower latency, they cannot
generate intent explanations, which are crucial for downstream LLM response generation in the Human-Proxy-LLM
framework. IntPro’s 3-4B parameter models strike a balance: they fit within typical device memory constraints while
providing full retrieval-conditioned intent inference with structured explanations. The retrieval mechanism adds
minimal overhead (∼10-15ms for top-𝑘retrieval), making the overall latency acceptable for interactive applications.
6.6.2
Case Analysis. We visualize a successful intent understanding case in Figure 11. In the first reasoning turn, the
model analyzes Sandra’s utterance “Ugh, always do that.” and identifies the expression of irritation and frustration toward
a recurring pattern, narrowing down the candidate intents to “complain,” “taunt,” “doubt,” and “criticize.” Recognizing
the ambiguity among these candidates, the proxy invokes the retrieval tool to query Sandra’s historical intent patterns.
In the second turn, the retrieved results reveal that Sandra’s prior “complain” instances share a consistent pattern
of expressing dissatisfaction with recurring burdens through flat, understated delivery. By aligning these retrieved
patterns with the current context, the model correctly classifies Sandra’s intent as “complain,” demonstrating how
retrieval-conditioned reasoning leverages personalized historical evidence to disambiguate semantically similar intents.
7
Conclusions
In this paper, we tackle a key challenge in Human-LLM collaboration by introducing IntPro, a proxy agent for retrieval-
conditioned intent inference. We design intent explanations as retrieval representations that abstract context-intent
connections, and store them in a per-user intent history library for personalized intent pattern matching. We propose a
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 26 ---
26
Guanming Liu, et al.
Tool Call and Response:
<think>
The utterance "ugh, always do that" expresses irritation or 
frustration with a recurring pattern. The context involves a 
shared moment of eating, likely with a shared experience of 
prior indulgence. The tone suggests dissatisfaction with a habit 
or behavior that occurs repeatedly.
</think>
<tool_call>
{ 
“tool”: “retrieve_personal_intent_context”, 
 "speaker": "Sandra", 
"intents": [" complain", ”taunt", ”doubt", "criticize"] }
</tool_call>
<tool_response>
{ 
“speaker”: “Amy”, 
" Complain": [ {
“intent_explanation”: Complaining about an unreasonable 
burden imposed during a personal crisis, in a shared anecdote 
where a past obligation is recalled, the speaker uses a dry, 
understated delivery to highlight the absurdity and emotional 
toll of the situation.
}, ... ],
“ Taunt”: […],
...}
</tool_response>
Ground True Intent: Complain
Context: 
Superstore person1: We ask you to bless it with your light. 
Father god, we pray that all our efforts are rewarded and that 
this food replenishes our spent and tired bodies.
Garrett: Yeah, nice and tight.
Amy: So dig in. Garrett?
Garrett: Uh, what, me? Wow, thank you.
Amy: Um, brisket? some I filled up on water before I came.
Target: “Sandra: Ugh, always do that.”
Final Answer:
<think>
The retrieved examples for "complain" align with the speaker’s tone 
and context. "Ugh, always do that" reflects frustration with a 
recurring, burdensome action. The delivery is flat and dismissive, 
consistent with expressing irritation over a persistent habit. The 
intent is not taunting, doubting, or criticizing, but rather complaining 
about the unfairness or repetition of the behavior.
</think>
<answer>complain</answer>
<intent_explanantion>Motivated by frustration over an unfair and 
recurring burden, in a shared moment of reflection on a repeated 
action, the speaker uses a flat, dismissive expression to convey 
dissatisfaction with the ongoing pattern.
</intent_explanation>
Context
Retrieval-conditioned
Inference
Fig. 11. Successful case based on Qwen3-4B from MIntRec2.0.
Retrieval-conditioned Intent Inference Trajectory Generation framework to construct training trajectories demonstrating
both direct inference and retrieval-conditioned inference behaviors for supervised fine-tuning. We further design multi-
turn GRPO with tool-aware reward functions that guide the agent to adaptively decide when to leverage historical
intent patterns and when to infer directly. Experiments across three diverse scenarios (Highlight-Intent, MIntRec2.0, and
Weibo Post-Sync) and multiple model types demonstrate that IntPro achieves strong intent understanding performance,
with effective adaptive retrieval behavior that outperforms both always-retrieving and never-retrieving strategies. In
future work, we plan to extend IntPro to open-vocabulary intent generation beyond predefined taxonomies and explore
few-shot adaptation mechanisms for cold-start users with limited interaction history.
Acknowledgments
This research was Sponsored by CAAI-Lenovo Blue Sky Research Fund and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (NSFC) under the Grant No. 62372113. Peng Zhang is a faculty of College of Computer Science and Artificial
Intelligence, Fudan University. Tun Lu is a faculty of College of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, School of
International Communication and Global Leadership, Fudan University, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Data Science.
References
[1] Gaurav Arora, Shreya Jain, and Srujana Merugu. 2024. Intent detection in the age of llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01627 (2024).
[2] Arian Askari, Roxana Petcu, Chuan Meng, Mohammad Aliannejadi, Amin Abolghasemi, Evangelos Kanoulas, and Suzan Verberne. 2025. SOLID:
Self-seeding and Multi-intent Self-instructing LLMs for Generating Intent-aware Information-Seeking Dialogs. In Findings of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025. 6375–6395.
[3] Jesse Atuhurra, Hidetaka Kamigaito, Taro Watanabe, and Eric Nichols. 2024. Domain Adaptation in Intent Classification Systems: A Review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.14415 (2024).
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 27 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
27
[4] Anna Bodonhelyi, Efe Bozkir, Shuo Yang, Enkelejda Kasneci, and Gjergji Kasneci. 2024. User intent recognition and satisfaction with large language
models: A user study with chatgpt. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.02136 (2024).
[5] Guoxin Chen, Minpeng Liao, Peiying Yu, Dingmin Wang, Zile Qiao, Chao Yang, Xin Zhao, and Kai Fan. 2025. C-3PO: Compact Plug-and-Play
Proxy Optimization to Achieve Human-like Retrieval-Augmented Generation. In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=hlpwAmQ4wr
[6] Anind K Dey. 2001. Understanding and using context. Personal and ubiquitous computing 5, 1 (2001), 4–7.
[7] Jay DeYoung, Sarthak Jain, Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Eric Lehman, Caiming Xiong, Richard Socher, and Byron C Wallace. 2020. ERASER: A benchmark
to evaluate rationalized NLP models. In Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics. 4443–4458.
[8] Sumanth Doddapaneni, Krishna Sayana, Ambarish Jash, Sukhdeep Sodhi, and Dima Kuzmin. 2024. User embedding model for personalized language
prompting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04858 (2024).
[9] Mateusz Dubiel, Yasmine Barghouti, Kristina Kudryavtseva, and Luis A Leiva. 2024. On-device query intent prediction with lightweight llms to
support ubiquitous conversations. Scientific reports 14, 1 (2024), 12731.
[10] Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. 2025. Group-in-Group Policy Optimization for LLM Agent Training. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems. https://neurips.cc/virtual/2025/poster/118123
[11] Zihao Feng, Xiaoxue Wang, Ziwei Bai, Donghang Su, Bowen Wu, Qun Yu, and Baoxun Wang. 2025. Improving Generalization in Intent Detection:
GRPO with Reward-Based Curriculum Sampling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13592 (2025).
[12] Anna Goldie, Azalia Mirhoseini, Hao Zhou, Irene Cai, and Christopher D. Manning. 2025. Synthetic Data Generation and Multi-Step Reinforcement
Learning for Reasoning and Tool Use. In Conference on Language Modeling (COLM). https://openreview.net/forum?id=oN9STRYQVa
[13] Jiahui Gong, Jingtao Ding, Fanjin Meng, Guilong Chen, Hong Chen, Shen Zhao, Haisheng Lu, and Yong Li. 2024. A population-to-individual
tuning framework for adapting pretrained LM to on-device user intent prediction. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining. 896–907.
[14] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu, Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1:
Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 (2025).
[15] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang, Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. 2024. Webvoyager: Building an
end-to-end web agent with large multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.13919 (2024).
[16] Chen Hu, Haikuo Du, Heng Wang, Lin Lin, Mingrui Chen, Peng Liu, Ruihang Miao, Tianchi Yue, Wang You, Wei Ji, et al. 2025. Step-DeepResearch
Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.20491 (2025).
[17] Jiarun Liu, Jia Hao, Chunhong Zhang, and Zheng Hu. 2025. Wepo: Web element preference optimization for llm-based web navigation. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39. 26614–26622.
[18] Jiahao Liu, Yiyang Shao, Peng Zhang, Dongsheng Li, Hansu Gu, Chao Chen, Longzhi Du, Tun Lu, and Ning Gu. 2025. Filtering Discomforting
Recommendations with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 (Sydney NSW, Australia) (WWW ’25). Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 3639–3650. doi:10.1145/3696410.3714850
[19] Haoxiang Luo, Yinqiu Liu, Ruichen Zhang, Jiacheng Wang, Gang Sun, Dusit Niyato, Hongfang Yu, Zehui Xiong, Xianbin Wang, and Xuemin Shen.
2025. Toward edge general intelligence with multiple-large language model (Multi-LLM): architecture, trust, and orchestration. IEEE Transactions on
Cognitive Communications and Networking (2025).
[20] Lin Ning, Luyang Liu, Jiaxing Wu, Neo Wu, Devora Berlowitz, Sushant Prakash, Bradley Green, Shawn O’Banion, and Jun Xie. 2025. User-LLM:
Efficient LLM Contextualization with User Embeddings. In Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025 (Sydney NSW, Australia)
(WWW ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1219–1223. doi:10.1145/3701716.3715463
[21] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex
Ray, et al. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems 35 (2022),
27730–27744.
[22] Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as
Operating Systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560 (2023). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2310.08560
[23] V Jothi Prakash and S Arul Antran Vijay. 2024. A unified framework for analyzing textual context and intent in social media. ACM Transactions on
Intelligent Systems and Technology 15, 6 (2024), 1–25.
[24] Cheng Qian, Emre Can Acikgoz, Qi He, Hongru Wang, Xiusi Chen, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, Gokhan Tur, and Heng Ji. 2025. Toolrl: Reward is all tool
learning needs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13958 (2025).
[25] Libo Qin, Qiguang Chen, Jingxuan Zhou, Jin Wang, Hao Fei, Wanxiang Che, and Min Li. 2025. Divide-Solve-Combine: An Interpretable and Accurate
Prompting Framework for Zero-shot Multi-Intent Detection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39. 25038–25046.
[26] Alireza Salemi, Sheshera Mysore, Michael Bendersky, and Hamed Zamani. 2023. LaMP: When Large Language Models Meet Personalization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.11406 (2023). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2304.11406
[27] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. https:
//proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/d842425e4bf79ba039352da0f658a906-Abstract-Conference.html
[28] Timo Schick and Hinrich Schütze. 2021. Exploiting cloze-questions for few-shot text classification and natural language inference. In Proceedings of
the 16th conference of the European chapter of the association for computational linguistics: main volume. 255–269.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 28 ---
28
Guanming Liu, et al.
[29] Chenyang Shao, Xinyuan Hu, Yutang Lin, and Fengli Xu. 2025. Division-of-thoughts: Harnessing hybrid language model synergy for efficient
on-device agents. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025. 1822–1833.
[30] Zhengliang Shi, Shen Gao, Lingyong Yan, Yue Feng, Xiuyi Chen, Zhumin Chen, Dawei Yin, Suzan Verberne, and Zhaochun Ren. 2025. Tool learning
in the wild: Empowering language models as automatic tool agents. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2025. 2222–2237.
[31] Yubo Shu, Haonan Zhang, Hansu Gu, Peng Zhang, Tun Lu, Dongsheng Li, and Ning Gu. 2024. Rah! recsys–assistant–human: A human-centered
recommendation framework with llm agents. IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems 11, 5 (2024), 6759–6770.
[32] Yijun Tian, Yikun Han, Xiusi Chen, Wei Wang, and Nitesh V Chawla. 2025. Beyond answers: Transferring reasoning capabilities to smaller llms
using multi-teacher knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the Eighteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining. 251–260.
[33] Tong Tong, Rossitza Setchi, and Yulia Hicks. 2022. Context change and triggers for human intention recognition. Procedia Computer Science 207
(2022), 3826–3835.
[34] Nikhita Vedula, Nedim Lipka, Pranav Maneriker, and Srinivasan Parthasarathy. 2019. Towards Open Intent Discovery for Conversational Text.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.08524 (2019). doi:10.48550/arXiv.1904.08524
[35] Linyong Wang, Lianwei Wu, Shaoqi Song, Yaxiong Wang, Cuiyun Gao, and Kang Wang. 2025. Distilling structured rationale from large language
models to small language models for abstractive summarization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39. 25389–25397.
[36] Yubo Wang, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. 2025. Critique fine-tuning: Learning to critique is more effective than learning to imitate. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.17703 (2025).
[37] Hongling Xu, Qi Zhu, Heyuan Deng, Jinpeng Li, Lu Hou, Yasheng Wang, Lifeng Shang, Ruifeng Xu, and Fei Mi. 2025. KDRL: Post-Training Reasoning
LLMs via Unified Knowledge Distillation and Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.02208 (2025).
[38] Xue Yan, Yan Song, Xidong Feng, Mengyue Yang, Haifeng Zhang, Haitham Bou Ammar, and Jun Wang. 2025. Efficient Reinforcement Learning with
Large Language Model Priors. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). https://openreview.net/forum?id=e2NRNQ0sZe
[39] Bufang Yang, Lilin Xu, Liekang Zeng, Kaiwei Liu, Siyang Jiang, Wenrui Lu, Hongkai Chen, Xiaofan Jiang, Guoliang Xing, and Zhenyu Yan. 2025.
ContextAgent: Context-Aware Proactive LLM Agents with Open-World Sensory Perceptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14668 (2025).
[40] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. 2024. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer
Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_
files/paper/2024/hash/5a7c947568c1b1328ccc5230172e1e7c-Abstract-Conference.html
[41] Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Minkai Xu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Bin CUI, and Shuicheng YAN. 2025. SuperCorrect: Advancing Small
LLM Reasoning with Thought Template Distillation and Self-Correction. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=PyjZO7oSw2
[42] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in
language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
[43] Mert Yazan, Suzan Verberne, and Frederik Situmeang. 2025. Improving RAG for Personalization with Author Features and Contrastive Examples. In
European Conference on Information Retrieval. Springer, 408–416.
[44] Yuanqing Yu, Zhefan Wang, Weizhi Ma, Zhicheng Guo, Jingtao Zhan, Shuai Wang, Chuhan Wu, Zhiqiang Guo, and Min Zhang. 2024. Steptool: A
step-grained reinforcement learning framework for tool learning in llms. (2024).
[45] Hanlei Zhang, Xin Wang, Hua Xu, Qianrui Zhou, Kai Gao, Jianhua Su, jinyue Zhao, Wenrui Li, and Yanting Chen. 2024. MIntRec2.0: A Large-scale
Benchmark Dataset for Multimodal Intent Recognition and Out-of-scope Detection in Conversations. In The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=nY9nITZQjc
[46] Peng Zhang, Baoxi Liu, Xianghua Ding, Tun Lu, Hansu Gu, and Ning Gu. 2021. Studying and Understanding Characteristics of Post-Syncing Practice
and Goal in Social Network Sites. ACM Trans. Web 15, 4, Article 16 (June 2021), 26 pages. doi:10.1145/3457986
[47] Jiaxing Zhao, Xihan Wei, and Liefeng Bo. 2025. R1-omni: Explainable omni-multimodal emotion recognition with reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.05379 (2025).
[48] Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and Yanlin Wang. 2023. MemoryBank: Enhancing Large Language Models with Long-Term
Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10250 (2023). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2305.10250
[49] Yuhang Zhou, Jing Zhu, Shengyi Qian, Zhuokai Zhao, Xiyao Wang, Xiaoyu Liu, Ming Li, Paiheng Xu, Wei Ai, and Furong Huang. 2025. DISCO
Balances the Scales: Adaptive Domain-and Difficulty-Aware Reinforcement Learning on Imbalanced Data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.15074 (2025).
A
Highlight-Intent Dataset Details
We constructed the Highlight-Intent dataset based on a highlighting and intent annotation task conducted over 19
English articles spanning diverse domains including technology, science (e.g., civil engineering, physics), language,
art, and social studies. A total of 23 annotators, comprising office workers, researchers, and students, were instructed
to highlight words, sentences, or passages they found interesting during reading, provide their intent behind each
highlight, and rate their satisfaction with system-generated intent suggestions.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 29 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
29
Data Collection Methodology. The highlighting task was designed to capture natural reading behaviors in diverse
contexts. Annotators were presented with articles through a web interface that recorded not only their highlighting
actions but also contextual metadata. Alongside annotation data, we collected user context information during the task,
including:
• Social setting (e.g., working alone, with colleagues or classmates)
• Physical location (e.g., workplace, school, home)
• Emotional valence (from very negative to very positive)
This rich contextual information enables deeper analysis of how environmental factors influence intent formation.
Annotation Process. For each reader, the system captured the highlighted sentences and related paragraphs, then
prompted users to rate AI-generated intent prediction results, explanations, and answers. Specifically, readers were
asked to select the “best” and “worst” intent predictions and optionally provide justifications for their choices in natural
language.
Data Filtering and Curation. We initially collected 21,380 raw instances and, after a strict filtering process to
ensure high agreement and preference consistency, curated a final set of 10,276 instances from the top-rated items. The
rank levels range from −2 to 2, and we found that the best-marked results provided by highlighting with intent-based
Prediction-Explanation-Answer are strongly preferred by readers, as only 145 out of 4,787 total annotations received
ranks lower than 1.
Intent Category Schema. We defined a comprehensive schema of 12 intent categories based on the original intent
distribution of highlighted texts and the nature of the content being highlighted (see Table 7). The taxonomy was
developed through iterative refinement based on: (1) empirical analysis of naturally occurring highlighting patterns, (2)
cognitive theories of information-seeking behavior, and (3) practical considerations for downstream applications. The
categories are mutually exclusive yet comprehensive, covering the spectrum from basic information needs (definitions)
to complex analytical tasks (trend analysis, controversy exploration). Each category is associated with specific content
types to provide clear guidance for annotation and model training.
Dataset Partitioning. The dataset was partitioned into training (1,970 instances) and test sets (725 instances) using
stratified split to maintain balance across user demographics and intent distribution. The dataset exhibits a characteristic
long-tail distribution across intent categories, reflecting real-world user behavior patterns where some intents (e.g.,
“Define or Explain”) are more common than others (e.g., “Trace Controversies”).
B
Implementation Details
B.1
System Prompt Template
Our IntPro agent uses a structured system prompt that defines the retrieval-conditioned intent inference workflow. The
prompt template is shown below:
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 30 ---
30
Guanming Liu, et al.
Table 7. Intent taxonomy for the Highlight-Intent dataset. Each category corresponds to specific content types that commonly trigger
user highlighting behavior.
Intent Category
Content Type
Description
Define or Explain
Nouns, Terms
Provide clear definition or explanation of
highlighted terms
Find Subtypes or Classifications
Nouns, Terms
List related categories or classifications for
the term
Compare with Similar Terms
Nouns, Terms
Analyze differences/similarities with re-
lated concepts
Investigate Historical Context
Nouns, Terms
Explore origin, evolution, or historical sig-
nificance
Explore How-To Operations
Nouns, Terms
Retrieve actionable steps or processes re-
lated to the term
Verify and Compare Data
Data
Check accuracy and compare with other
known data
Analyze Trends
Data, Citations
Identify patterns or changes over time
Explore Applications
Data
Investigate practical applications or impli-
cations
Trace Source and Context
Citations, Data
Locate origin or primary reference for in-
formation
Understand Reasons
Attitudes, Opinions
Identify rationale or evidence supporting
viewpoints
Analyze Viewpoints
Attitudes, Opinions
Investigate various perspectives or de-
bates
Trace Controversies
Attitudes, Opinions
Highlight contentious aspects or debates
System Prompt Template (Simplified)
Role: You are an intent recognition expert. Given user context, infer the underlying intent.
Tool Available:
• retrieve_intent_context(user, intent_options)
Returns: [(user, intent_label, intent_explanation), ...]
Output Format:
• <answer>intent_label</answer>
• <intent_explanation>[PersonalMotivation] + [Context] + [Strategy]</intent_explanation>
Workflow:
• If confident: Directly output <answer> and <intent_explanation>
• If uncertain: Call retrieve_intent_context with 2+ intent_options, review retrieved patterns, then output final
answer
Intent Categories: [30 intents for MIntRec2.0 / 7 for Weibo / 12 for Highlight-Intent]
The key design principle is flexibility: the agent learns when to rely on direct inference versus retrieval, guided by
tool-aware reward signals during GRPO training.
Manuscript submitted to ACM


--- Page 31 ---
IntPro: A Proxy Agent for Context-Aware Intent Understanding via Retrieval-conditioned Inference
31
B.2
Intent Taxonomies
MIntRec2.0 (30 intents): doubt, acknowledge, refuse, warn, emphasize, complain, praise, apologize, thank, criticize,
care, agree, oppose, taunt, flaunt, joke, ask for opinions, confirm, explain, invite, plan, inform, advise, arrange, introduce,
comfort, leave, prevent, greet, ask for help.
Weibo Post-Sync (7 intents): advertisement, exhibition, identity clarification, intimate interaction, personal record,
emotional venting, social approval.
Highlight-Intent (12 intents): define or explain, find subtypes or classifications, compare with similar terms,
investigate historical context, explore how-to operations, verify and compare data, analyze trends, explore applications,
trace source and context, understand reasons, analyze viewpoints, trace controversies.
Manuscript submitted to ACM
