--- Page 1 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank
Aggregation
Yijun Jin1[0009−0000−1237−0648], Simon Klüttermann1[0000−0001−9698−4339],
Chiara Balestra1[0000−0002−3620−9012], and Emmanuel
Müller1,2[0000−0002−5409−6875]
1 TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
2 Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security, University Alliance Ruhr,
Dortmund, Germany
yijun.jin@tu-dortmund.de (corresponding author)
Simon.Kluettermann@cs.tu-dortmund.de
Abstract. Aggregating a consensus ranking from multiple input rank-
ings is a fundamental problem with applications in recommendation sys-
tems, search engines, job recruitment, and elections. Despite decades
of research in consensus ranking aggregation, minimizing the Kemeny
distance remains computationally intractable. Specifically, determining
an optimal aggregation of rankings with respect to the Kemeny dis-
tance is an NP-hard problem, limiting its practical application to rel-
atively small-scale instances. We propose the Kemeny Transformer, a
novel Transformer-based algorithm trained via reinforcement learning to
efficiently approximate the Kemeny optimal ranking. Experimental re-
sults demonstrate that our model outperforms classical majority-heuristic
and Markov-chain approaches, achieving substantially faster inference
than integer linear programming solvers. Our approach thus offers a prac-
tical, scalable alternative for real-world ranking-aggregation tasks.
1
Introduction
Consensus ranking aggregation is a fundamental problem concerned with merg-
ing multiple, often conflicting, rank-ordered lists into a single representative
ranking that best reflects the collective preferences of the inputs. This challenge,
with its origins in social choice theory and political elections [3], has gained sig-
nificant traction across a diverse range of modern applications, including search
engines [9], recommendation systems [20], biotechnology workflows [18], and ma-
chine learning [22].
A foundational principle in consensus ranking is the Condorcet criterion,
which dictates that an item consistently winning pairwise comparisons should be
ranked first [7]. Because cyclical preferences (the Condorcet paradox) can prevent
a guaranteed winner, this concept is naturally extended to finding an optimal
winning ranking [2]. Among Condorcet-based methods, optimizing the Kemeny
distance measured via pairwise Kendall-tau disagreements [14,15] stands out as
the unique approach that simultaneously satisfies neutrality, consistency, and the
arXiv:2603.15218v1  [cs.LG]  16 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
Yijun Jin et al.
Condorcet criterion [27], making the minimization of the total Kemeny distance
the standard objective for ideal consensus aggregation.
Finding the Kemeny optimal ranking is known to be NP-hard, as established
through a reduction to the Feedback Arc Set problem even in cases involving
as few as four input permutations, thereby rendering exact algorithms compu-
tationally infeasible for large-scale instances [4,10]. As a result, numerous ap-
proximation methods have been proposed, including heuristic approaches [5],
pivot-based sorting algorithms [1], Markov chain models [10], and differential
evolution approaches [11].
Intuitively, consensus ranking aggregation can be viewed as analogous to
language translation tasks in natural language processing (NLP), given that
both are fundamentally sequence-to-sequence tasks. However, they differ signifi-
cantly in their evaluation metrics. NLP translation evaluation metrics are often
ambiguous and subjectively defined, making precise optimization challenging.
Conversely, ranking aggregation benefits from the clearly defined mathemati-
cal metric of the Kemeny distance. Unlike language translation, where massive
historical human-generated data facilitates learning translation patterns, rank-
ing aggregation lacks extensive datasets. Nevertheless, the explicit and mathe-
matically well-defined nature of the Kemeny distance enables the development
of self-teaching deep reinforcement learning (DRL) methods. Leveraging recent
advances in DRL, such approaches can learn effective aggregation patterns to
minimize the Kemeny distance without extensive pre-existing data.
The advent of the Transformer architecture in 2017 represents a seminal
development in artificial intelligence [24]. It has catalyzed a paradigm shift
in natural language processing (NLP), elevating the performance of numerous
sequence-to-sequence tasks to near-human proficiency across applications such
as machine translation, text summarization, and question answering [13]. Cen-
tral to the Transformer’s success is its self-attention mechanism, which enables
the model to dynamically weight the importance of different tokens within an
input sequence, thereby capturing complex contextual relationships. This design
principle gives Transformers an exceptional capacity to learn rich, context-aware
mappings between sequences.
Consensus ranking is itself a structured sequence generation problem, pro-
ducing a permutation that reflects complex, global preferences. Motivated by
the Transformer’s demonstrated ability to model and generalize over sequence
relationships efficiently, we introduce the Kemeny Transformer: a sequence-to-
sequence Transformer model featuring an auto-regressive decoder that incre-
mentally generates a consensus ranking. The model is trained via reinforcement
learning to directly minimize the expected Kemeny distance, thereby aligning the
learning objective with the underlying aggregation criterion. Empirical evalua-
tions demonstrate that our approach consistently outperforms a range of widely
used approximation methods. Moreover, it achieves significant inference time
speedups relative to exact integer linear programming (ILP) solvers [8], which,
although capable of producing optimal Kemeny rankings, are hindered by ex-
ponential worst-case computational complexity. Our method also outperforms


--- Page 3 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
3
differential evolution algorithms [11]. These results highlight the scalability and
practical utility of our approach for real-world consensus ranking aggregation.
Our main contributions can be summarized as follows:
– We are the first to explore a sequence-to-sequence Transformer architecture
for approximating the Kemeny optimal rank aggregation problem and dis-
cover a suitable reinforcement framework to train the model.
– We perform comprehensive empirical comparisons against classical approxi-
mation techniques, including heuristic procedures, pivot-based algorithms,
Markov chain methods, and differential evolution algorithms, evaluating
both ranking quality (Kemeny distance) and computational efficiency.
– We benchmark against integer linear programming solvers to quantify re-
ductions in inference time and scalability gains, highlighting the practicality
of our approach for large-scale ranking tasks.
– We demonstrate that our method generalizes well beyond the training dis-
tribution and can thus be used even for ranking problems it has never seen
during training.
To increase reproducibility, our implementation, used datasets, and trained
model checkpoints are available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Kemeny-
Transformer-ECBE/.
2
Related Work
2.1
Rank Aggregator
Conitzer et al. [8] formulated the Kemeny rank aggregation problem as an integer
linear program (ILP), yielding exact, theoretically optimal solutions. However,
this approach suffers from a super-polynomial worst-case runtime, rendering it
impractical for large-scale instances.
To address scalability challenges, a variety of approximation methods have
been proposed. Beck et al. introduced a greedy heuristic based on maximizing
agreement and minimizing regret, which achieves a 2−3% Kemeny distance gap
to the optimal solution for ten-item instances [5]. However, its accuracy tends
to deteriorate as the number of items increases.
Dwork et al. [10] proposed a Markov chain-based rank aggregation tech-
nique, which constructs a stationary distribution over items based on pairwise
preferences. This method demonstrated superior empirical performance when
compared to classical heuristics in applications such as web search result fusion
and biomarker identification.
Ailon et al. [1] developed KiwiSort, a Quicksort-like algorithm that selects
a pivot item and partitions the remaining items based on majority preferences
in the base rankings: items that are preferred over the pivot are placed to the
left, and others to the right. The process is applied recursively until a complete
ranking is formed. KiwiSort is proven to be a 2-approximation algorithm with
respect to the optimal Kemeny distance.


--- Page 4 ---
4
Yijun Jin et al.
D’Ambrosio et al. proposed the Differential Evolution Consensus Ranking
(DECoR) algorithm, which employs evolutionary strategies to identify rankings
that minimize the Kemeny distance to a set of input base rankings [11]. The
algorithm begins by initializing a population of item rankings and iteratively
evolves this population using mutation and crossover operations, selecting in-
dividuals with lower Kemeny distances for survival. DECoR has been shown
to outperform benchmark techniques such as simulated annealing in both solu-
tion quality and runtime on moderate-scale instances. However, its performance
depends heavily on two parameters: the population size (P) and the allowed
number of consecutive generations without improvement (L). Because achieving
high-quality solutions typically requires large values for both, the computational
cost increases substantially, limiting the algorithm’s scalability for large-scale
real-world applications.
2.2
Transformers for Combinatorial Optimization
In recent years, Transformer architectures [24] and attention-based neural mod-
els [25] have demonstrated impressive performance on NP-hard combinatorial
optimization problems. Kool et al. [17] adapted a pointer network with atten-
tion mechanisms for routing problems by encoding node coordinates directly
as input embeddings, omitting standard positional encoding, and employing an
auto-regressive decoder to sequentially construct tours. Their approach achieved
state-of-the-art results on the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP), outperform-
ing traditional heuristics and optimization techniques in both quality and speed.
Building on this foundation, Bresson et al. [6] introduced a modified Trans-
former architecture specifically tailored to the TSP. Their model achieved an
average optimality gap of just 1.42% on instances with 100 nodes, with an aver-
age runtime of only 4.6 seconds. This represents a substantial efficiency gain over
classical solvers, which often take several minutes to reach comparable solutions.
These results underscore the potential of Transformer-based models as scalable,
general-purpose solvers for complex combinatorial tasks.
2.3
Positioning Our Approach
Building on these successes, our work is the first to use Transformer models for
consensus ranking. The Kemeny Transformer solves a major problem in past re-
search: the need to choose between fast but inaccurate methods and accurate but
slow methods like ILP or DECoR. By treating rank aggregation as a sequence-
to-sequence task and training it with reinforcement learning, our model avoids
the slow search processes of older algorithms. It uses an attention mechanism to
understand the whole picture and generate highly accurate rankings in a single
pass. As a result, our approach surpasses the speed limits of prior work and sets
a new standard for fast, accurate, and practical consensus ranking.


--- Page 5 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
5
Fig. 1: The Kemeny Transformer is organized as a classic encoder–decoder archi-
tecture. In this design, the encoder first processes the inputs to produce contex-
tual representations, and the decoder then employs an auto-regressive procedure
to sequentially generate a ranking that is close to Kemeny optimality.
3
Methodology
3.1
Problem Definition
Let X = {x1, . . . , xn} be a set of n items. A ranking ρ ∈Sn is a permutation of
these items, denoted as:
ρ = [xρ(1) ≺xρ(2) ≺· · · ≺xρ(n)],
where Sn is the set of all permutations over X. Given m base rankings R =
{ρ1, ρ2, . . . , ρm} ⊆Sn, the goal is to derive a consensus ranking that best repre-
sents these inputs.
The Kendall-tau [16] distance between two rankings ρ and σ counts the
number of pairwise disagreements:
K(ρ, σ) =
X
{xi,xj}⊆X
I
 (ρ(xi) < ρ(xj)) ∧(σ(xj) < σ(xi))

,
(1)
where ρ(xi) is the position of item xi in ranking ρ and I(·) is the indicator
function that equals 1 if an item pair {xi, xj} is ordered differently in ρ and σ,
and 0 otherwise.


--- Page 6 ---
6
Yijun Jin et al.
The Kemeny distance [14] is defined as the average Kendall-tau distance from
the ranking ρ to the base rankings in R:
dK(ρ, R) =
1
|R|
X
σ∈R
K(ρ, σ).
(2)
The Kemeny optimal consensus ranking is the ranking ρ∗∈Sn that mini-
mizes the Kemeny distance:
ρ∗= arg min
ρ∈Sn dK(ρ, R)
(3)
3.2
Kemeny Transformer
In this section, we will introduce the structure of our modified Transformer,
denoted as the Kemeny Transformer. The structure is illustrated in Figure 1.
3.3
Tokenization
Unlike the vanilla Transformer, which utilizes one-hot encoding for token repre-
sentation, our model treats each item xi as a distinct token. Specifically, each
item is represented by a continuous feature vector hin
i
∈Rm×1, where the ele-
ments correspond to the rank positions of item xi across the m base rankings:
hin
i =

p1(xi), p2(xi), . . . , pm(xi)

. To enhance the model’s generalization capa-
bilities across varying input dimensions, we normalize these positional vectors
by dividing them by the maximum rank position (i.e., the total number of items,
n). Because the fundamental objective of consensus aggregation relies on relative
orderings rather than absolute positional values, this normalization preserves all
essential ranking information without any loss of fidelity. Consequently, for an
aggregation task comprising n items, the complete input to the encoder is en-
coded in the matrix Hin = [hin
1 , . . . , hin
n ]T ∈Rn×m.
3.4
Encoder
The encoder begins by projecting each input vector hin
i into a dmodel-dimensional
embedding vector via a linear layer. Positional embeddings are omitted, as the
initial rank positions are already encoded in Hin. The resulting embeddings
pass through L layers of multi-head self-attention and feed-forward sub-layers,
yielding contextualized representations Henc ∈Rn×dmodel, which serve as hidden
vectors for the decoder.
3.5
Decoder
Our auto-regressive decoder constructs the consensus ranking one item at a time.
At decoding step t, let xt−1 be the item selected at the previous step. Its encoder


--- Page 7 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
7
output henc
t
is retrieved and added to the positional embedding PE(t, 2di) to
form the query embedding vector:
qt = henc
it
+ PE(t, 2di)
where di is the dimension, and the query embedding vector is stored in the KV
cache Hsel = [q1, q2, ..., qt]. This query attends over all previous decoder outputs
(to enforce prefix consistency) using a self-attention mechanism. The output hsel
t
is computed as follows:
qsel
t
= htW sel
q ,
Ksel
t
= HselW sel
K ,
V sel
t
= HselW sel
V
hsel
t
= softmax
 
qsel
it Ksel
t
T
√dmodel
!
V sel
t
Moving to the subsequent layer, a masked cross-attention mechanism is em-
ployed to compute the attention of hsel
t
over unselected items, facilitating the
selection of the next prospective item from the unselected pool. The output
hcross
t
is determined by:
qcross
t
= hsel
t W unsel
q
,
Kunsel = HencW unsel
K
,
V unsel = HencW unsel
V
hcross
it
= softmax
 
qcross
it
KunselT
√dmodel
⊙Maskt
!
Vt
This is followed by a feed-forward network, as in the vanilla Transformer,
to generate the final hidden vector hf
t . After N layers of the above attention
structure, the hidden vector hf
t goes through a single-head attention over the
unselected encoder representations as Kf
t to produce logits. The output logitst
is calculated as follows:
logitst = qf
t Kf
t
T
√dmodel
⊙Maskt ∈Rn
After applying softmax on the logits, a categorical distribution over the re-
maining items is generated. The next item xt is sampled or chosen greedily from
this distribution, and the model updates the mask vector by masking the selected
item. The process then repeats until all n positions are filled.
3.6
Training Method
During training, we employ the REINFORCE algorithm [26] with a self-critical
roll-out baseline [21], as detailed in Algorithm 1. Both the training and baseline
models are initialized randomly. At each training step, a batch of size B of
instances is sampled. For each instance Ri, the training model produces a ranking
πi via SampleRollout (the next item is probabilistically sampled according to the
model’s predicted distribution), while the baseline model generates a ranking


--- Page 8 ---
8
Yijun Jin et al.
πBL
i
via GreedyRollout (the item with the highest probability is strictly chosen
at each step). We then compute their respective Kemeny distances dK(πi, Ri)
and dK(πBL
i
, Ri). The loss is estimated by:
∇L ←
B
X
i=1
 dK(πi, Ri) −dK(πBL
i
, Ri)

∇θ log pθ(πi)
The training model parameters are updated using the Adam optimizer.
After each epoch of training, the training model’s performance is evaluated.
Both models are evaluated on a validation dataset using greedy rollout. If the
Kemeny distance of the ranking generated by the training model to the base
rankings is significantly smaller than that of the baseline model, the baseline
model is replaced by the current trained model.
Algorithm 1 REINFORCE with Rollout Baseline
Require: number of epochs E, steps per epoch T, batch size B, significance level α,
validation samples Rv
Ensure: updated policy parameters θ
1: Initialize θ and baseline parameters θBL
2: for epoch ←1 to E do
3:
for step ←1 to T do
4:
Ri ←RandomInstance(), ∀i ∈{1, . . . , B}
5:
πi ←SampleRollout(Ri, pθ), ∀i ∈{1, . . . , B}
6:
πB
i ←GreedyRollout(Ri, pθB), ∀i ∈{1, . . . , B}
7:
Compute Kemeny distance gap:
8:
∆i ←dK(πi, Ri) −dK(πBL
i
, Ri)
9:
Compute loss:
10:
∇L ←PB
i=1
 ∆i

∇θ log pθ(πi)
11:
Update policy: θ ←Adam(θ, ∇L)
12:
end for
13:
significance ←OneSidedPairedTTest(pθ, pθBL)
14:
if significance < α then
15:
Update baseline: θBL ←θ
16:
end if
17: end for
4
Experiments
4.1
Hyperparameters
The Kemeny Transformer used in our evaluations consists of three encoder layers
and two decoder layers. Input embeddings have a dimensionality of dmodel = 128,
and each feed-forward sub-layer has an intermediate dimension of 512. The multi-
head attention modules employ eight attention heads.


--- Page 9 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
9
The model is trained for 250 epochs, each comprising 500 steps with a batch
size of B = 1024. We use the Adam optimizer with a fixed learning rate of
η = 10−4. Training is conducted on two NVIDIA RTX 4500 Ada GPUs, requiring
approximately 14 minutes per epoch.
The DECoR baseline is implemented using the R package ConsRank, with
default hyperparameters: population size P = 15 and a stopping criterion based
on L = 100 consecutive generations without improvement.
All methods are executed on an AMD Ryzen Threadripper PRO 5975WX
with 32 physical cores and 512 GB of RAM. For all experiments, the random
seed is fixed to 1234.
4.2
Datasets
We evaluate our model on three types of synthetically generated base rankings,
each comprising eight permutations over n = 100 items:
1. Random base rankings: Each of the eight rankings is generated by in-
dependently sampling a uniform random permutation. This setting yields
minimal inherent consensus, resulting in larger optimal Kemeny distances.
2. Repeat base rankings: A subset of the eight rankings is an exact duplicate
of a reference permutation, while the remainder are independently sampled.
This scenario captures varying levels of consensus; when all eight rankings
coincide, the Kemeny distance of the consensus ranking is zero.
3. Jiggling base rankings: These datasets simulate scenarios with a strong
underlying consensus by applying small, random local perturbations (or “jig-
gling”) to a single reference permutation, ρref. To generate each new base
ranking, we let pi denote the original position of an item xi in ρref. We
then probabilistically select a target position pj to swap it with. To ensure
items mostly stay near their original spots, the probability of choosing tar-
get position pj is exponentially penalized by the distance between the two
positions:
P(j | xi) =
exp(M −|pj −pi|)
P
pk̸=pi exp(M −|pk −pi|),
where M is a constant scaling factor. Because the distance |pj −pi| is sub-
tracted in the exponent, nearby positions have a significantly higher prob-
ability of being chosen for a swap. This procedure guarantees that items
only shift slightly from their reference positions, producing a set of highly
concordant base rankings with relatively small Kemeny distances between
them.
4. Real-world ranking: We compiled country and region rankings based on
eight key metrics from the year 2020: Population, Human Development In-
dex (HDI), Global Peace Index (GPI), Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI),
Global Innovation Index (GII), Democracy Index, Gross Domestic Product
(GDP), and World Trade Value. The data were sourced from the United
Nations Data Portal [23] and Kaggle [12]. We selected the top 100 most


--- Page 10 ---
10
Yijun Jin et al.
populous countries as our primary set, excluding certain countries or regions
due to data unavailability or political instability. This dataset serves as the
real-world benchmark for evaluating the performance of different ranking
aggregation methods.
4.3
Evaluation
We evaluate the Kemeny Transformer on a comprehensive test suite comprising
2,000 random rankings, 10,000 repeat rankings, and 10,000 jiggling rankings.
Performance is assessed using two principal metrics: the gap in Kemeny dis-
tance relative to the optimal solution produced by an integer linear programming
solver, and the inference runtime.
To contextualize the effectiveness of our approach, we compare the Kemeny
Transformer against established baseline methods, including the exact integer
programming solver (Gurobi) and other widely used approximate aggregation
techniques. The results highlight the Kemeny Transformer’s ability to deliver
high-quality consensus rankings with substantially improved computational ef-
ficiency, making it a scalable alternative for large-scale applications.
random 2k
repeat 10k
jiggling 10k
Method
Obj
Gap
Time
Obj
Gap
Time
Obj
Gap
Time
Gurobi (exact)
1858.48
0
25.12h 1245.01
0
46.14h 731.79
0
23.71h
Kiwisort
1980.13 121.65 1.24m 1343.64 98.63 6.15m 785.61 53.82 6.14m
Markov Chain
1894.02 35.54
20s
1349.42 104.41 89.65s 823.15 91.36 90.23s
Max Agreement
1884.92 26.44
1.23m 1314.77 69.75 6.27m 788.76 56.97 6.28m
Min Regret
1885.17 26.68
1.31m 1309.39 64.37 6.42m 783.96 52.17 6.61m
DECoR
1891.65 33.17 94.47m 1282.89 37.88
9.33h 757.69 25.90 8.75h
Transformer(Ours) 1873.20 17.71 0.88s 1265.44 20.43 1.92s 744.45 12.66 1.92s
Table 1: Kemeny Transformer vs. baselines. “Obj” denotes the average Kemeny
distance of the rankings produced by each method. “Gap” measures the abso-
lute and relative difference of each method’s Kemeny distance from the optimal
solution obtained via Gurobi. “Time” indicates the total runtime each method
requires to process the evaluation dataset. The Kemeny Transformer is both
more accurate and faster than each competing approximation method.
5
Results
5.1
Results on Synthetic Datasets
Table 1 presents a comprehensive summary of the experimental results obtained
from evaluating our model on a suite of large-scale synthetic datasets. The results


--- Page 11 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
11
(a) Running time on ran-
dom datasets
(b) Running time on re-
peat datasets
(c) Running time on jig-
gling datasets
Fig. 2: Running time comparison between the Kemeny Transformer and the
Gurobi solver as the length of the base rankings increases. The x-axis denotes
the number of items in the base rankings; the y-axis shows the logarithm of the
mean running time computed over multiple trials. Our model scales more
efficiently to larger ranking problems.
computed by Gurobi are treated as the ground-truth optimal Kemeny rankings,
and accordingly, the Kemeny distance gap for Gurobi is set to zero.
The Kemeny Transformer consistently achieves lower mean Kemeny distance
gaps compared to other approximate methods, demonstrating its superior ability
to approximate the optimal consensus ranking. Moreover, it exhibits substan-
tially reduced runtime across all baseline methods. This efficiency advantage can
be attributed to the inherent design of the Transformer architecture, which is
well-suited to parallel execution on GPUs, unlike many traditional heuristic and
evolutionary algorithms that lack optimized parallel implementations.
In summary, the experimental results confirm the effectiveness of the Kemeny
Transformer in producing high-quality consensus rankings with strong trade-offs
between optimality and computational efficiency. The model demonstrates ro-
bust performance across diverse synthetic datasets, highlighting its adaptability
and practical utility for large-scale consensus ranking tasks.
5.2
Results on Real-World Data
Table 2 presents the results of each method evaluated on a real-world dataset
comprising the top 100 countries and regions ranked according to eight key met-
rics. In addition to reporting the Kemeny distance and its gap from the optimum,
the table includes the top 10 ranked countries from each method’s output. Due
to space constraints, the full rankings of all 100 countries are provided in the
supplementary material. Including the top-ranked subset offers a more intuitive
and interpretable view of each method’s ranking behavior.
Consistent with earlier results, the Kemeny Transformer attains the smallest
gap in Kemeny distance, outperforming all other approximate methods in terms
of alignment with the optimal ranking obtained via Gurobi. A detailed inspection
shows that Switzerland, Germany, and Canada occupy the top three positions
in the optimal ranking, and the Transformer likewise ranks them within its top


--- Page 12 ---
12
Yijun Jin et al.
Gurobi
Kemeny
Trans-
former
(Our)
Markov
Chain
Kiwisort
Minimal
Regret
DECoR
Kemeny distance
997.63
1006.88
1039.63
1027.38
1031.38
1015.13
Swiss
Germany
Canada
Germany
Canada
Germany
Germany
Canada
Germany
Canada
Australia
Swiss
Canada
Swiss
Australia
Swiss
Germany
Netherlands
Sweden
UK
USA
Australia
UK
UK
Netherlands USA
UK
Sweden
USA
Sweden
Australia
Australia
Sweden
Netherlands Japan
USA
UK
Sweden
Japan
UK
France
Canada
USA
Netherlands
Swiss
S. Korea
Sweden
Japan
Japan
Japan
France
Austria
Italy
France
France
France
Netherlands USA
Swiss
S. Korea
Table 2: Top 10 Country Rankings by Various Methods with Kemeny distances
three. In contrast, the Markov Chain, Minimal Regret, and DECoR methods
each omit at least one of these in their highest tiers, relegating it to a lower
position and thereby contributing to an increased Kemeny distance. Further-
more, countries such as South Korea and Italy, absent from the top ten in the
optimal ranking, appear within the top ten of the rankings produced by Ki-
wisort, DECoR, and Minimal Regret, which also inflates their respective Kemeny
distances. The Kemeny Transformer avoids both of these unfavorable ranking
patterns.
These findings indicate that the Kemeny Transformer not only performs ro-
bustly on synthetic benchmarks but also generalizes effectively to complex, real-
world ranking aggregation tasks.
5.3
Scalability
To evaluate the scalability of the proposed method, we conducted a comparative
analysis of inference times. The evaluation was performed on 100 instances for
each of the synthetic datasets (random, jiggling, and repeat) with the number
of items, n, varying across the set 20, 50, 100, 150.
As depicted in Figure 2, the inference time of the Kemeny Transformer
demonstrates a marked advantage over Gurobi as the number of items increases.
The runtime of the Kemeny Transformer grows significantly slower than that
of the exact ILP solver. This empirical observation is consistent with theory:
the Kemeny Transformer runs in O(dmodeln2), i.e., quadratic in the number of
items for a fixed model dimension. In contrast, Gurobi, which utilizes a branch-
and-bound algorithm, has a complexity in the order of O(n2.5bn) [19], where bn


--- Page 13 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
13
represents the number of branches explored. This term can grow exponentially
in the worst-case scenario.
These results highlight the superior scalability of the Kemeny Transformer.
Its ability to efficiently handle large-scale instances makes it a practical solution
for consensus rank aggregation in contexts where the computational cost of exact
solvers becomes prohibitive.
6
Generalization beyond Input Constraints
In this section, we investigate the robustness and generalization capabilities of
the Kemeny Transformer across varying numbers of voters and base ranking
lengths. Specifically, we train a unified Kemeny Transformer model using mixed-
batch training, meaning each training batch contains diverse instances with voter
counts ranging from 6 to 10 and item counts spanning from 90 to 110. To rig-
orously evaluate its adaptability, we test this single trained model across nine
distinct dataset configurations, combining voter counts m ∈{6, 8, 10} and item
counts n ∈{100, 125, 150}. While the tests with a number of items of 100 are
within our training scope, the item counts of 125 and 150 are outside our training
input size range.
6.1
Evaluation
For a clearer and more intuitive visualization, we evaluate the methods in Fig-
ure 3 using a normalized Kemeny distance gap rather than the absolute Kemeny
distance, which naturally scales with the problem size. The best-performing
method for any given size configuration is established as the baseline (a gap
of zero), and the performance of all other models is measured as the relative
deviation from this optimal score3. The settings in the gray area are part of our
training input size distribution, where our model performs best, as shown before.
However, the performance of our model outside the training distribution is also
better than that of each competitor and maintains a stable lead even with 50%
more items. Thus, our method can be used well beyond the training distribution,
paving the way for consensus-aggregation foundation models.
7
Conclusion
In this work, we introduced the Kemeny Transformer, representing a pivotal
step toward establishing a foundation model paradigm for consensus rank ag-
gregation under the Kemeny distance criterion. By framing rank aggregation as
a sequence-to-sequence task trained via deep reinforcement learning, our model
fundamentally departs from the limitations of traditional methods. While clas-
sical heuristics, evolutionary algorithms like DECoR, and exact integer linear
3 Because of time constraints, we are unable to calculate exact Kemeny optimal rank-
ings here.


--- Page 14 ---
14
Yijun Jin et al.
Fig. 3: Performance comparison across varying input dimensions (voters, items)
for the Jiggling datatype. The remaining datatypes are shown in the supple-
mentary material. To ensure a fair comparison across different scales, the y-axis
shows the normalized Kemeny distance gap, with the best-performing method
serving as the baseline (0). Settings within the gray region are included in our
training scope, while the remaining settings are outside it. Both inside and
outside of our training prior, the Kemeny Transformer achieves state-
of-the-art performance.. A possible reason for this good generalization stems
from the input normalization used.
programming solvers struggle with severe trade-offs between computational effi-
ciency and solution optimality, our architecture leverages the global context-
capturing capabilities of self-attention to decisively overcome these barriers.
Through extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real-world datasets, the
Kemeny Transformer consistently generated near-optimal rankings, outperform-
ing traditional baselines in both accuracy and inference speed. Furthermore, our
ablation studies demonstrated the model’s remarkable robustness and zero-shot
scalability across varying voter and item dimensions. These results strongly es-
tablish the Kemeny Transformer not just as a specialized tool, but also as a
generalizable, highly scalable foundation model capable of dominating complex,
large-scale consensus rank-aggregation tasks.
Acknowledgments. This research was in part funded by the Research Center Trust-
worthy Data Science and Security (https://rc-trust.ai), one of the Research Al-
liance centres within the University Alliance Ruhr (https://uaruhr.de).
The research was further supported with computing time provided on LiDO3
(https://lido.itmc.tu-dortmund.de/lido3/).


--- Page 15 ---
Towards Foundation Models for Consensus Rank Aggregation
15
References
1. Ailon, N., Charikar, M., Newman, A.: Aggregating inconsistent information: rank-
ing and clustering. Journal of the ACM (JACM) 55(5), 1–27 (2008)
2. Arrow, K.J., Raynaud, H.: Social choice and multicriterion decision-making. MIT
Press Books 1 (1986)
3. Arrow, K.J., et al.: Social choice and individual values, vol. 2. Wiley New York
(1964)
4. Bartholdi, J., Tovey, C.A., Trick, M.A.: Voting schemes for which it can be difficult
to tell who won the election. Social Choice and welfare 6, 157–165 (1989)
5. Beck, M.P., Lin, B.W.: Some heuristics for the consensus ranking problem. Com-
puters & Operations Research 10(1), 1–7 (1983)
6. Bresson, X., Laurent, T.: The transformer network for the traveling salesman prob-
lem. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.03012 (2021)
7. de Caritat Mis, J.A.N., et al.: Essai sur l’application de l’analyse à la probabilité
des décisions rendues à la pluralité des voix. Imprimerie royale (1785)
8. Conitzer, V., Davenport, A., Kalagnanam, J.: Improved bounds for computing
kemeny rankings. In: AAAI. vol. 6, pp. 620–626 (2006)
9. Desarkar, M.S., Sarkar, S., Mitra, P.: Preference relations based unsupervised rank
aggregation for metasearch. Expert Systems with Applications 49, 86–98 (2016)
10. Dwork, C., Kumar, R., Naor, M., Sivakumar, D.: Rank aggregation methods for
the web. In: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on World Wide Web.
pp. 613–622 (2001)
11. D’Ambrosio, A., Mazzeo, G., Iorio, C., Siciliano, R.: A differential evolution al-
gorithm for finding the median ranking under the kemeny axiomatic approach.
Computers & Operations Research 82, 126–138 (2017)
12. Kaggle: Kaggle: Your machine learning and data science community (2020), https:
//www.kaggle.com/, accessed: 2023-10-25
13. Kalyan, K.S., Rajasekharan, A., Sangeetha, S.: Ammus: A survey of transformer-
based
pretrained
models
in
natural
language
processing.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2108.05542 (2021)
14. Kemeny, J.G.: Mathematics without numbers. Daedalus 88(4), 577–591 (1959)
15. Kemeny, J.G.: Mathematical models in the social sciences (1962)
16. Kendall, M.G.: A new measure of rank correlation. Biometrika 30(1-2), 81–93
(1938)
17. Kool, W., Van Hoof, H., Welling, M.: Attention, learn to solve routing problems!
arXiv preprint arXiv:1803.08475 (2018)
18. Lin, S.: Rank aggregation methods. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computa-
tional Statistics 2(5), 555–570 (2010)
19. Morrison, D.R., Jacobson, S.H., Sauppe, J.J., Sewell, E.C.: Branch-and-bound al-
gorithms: A survey of recent advances in searching, branching, and pruning. Dis-
crete Optimization 19, 79–102 (2016)
20. Oliveira, S.E., Diniz, V., Lacerda, A., Merschmanm, L., Pappa, G.L.: Is rank aggre-
gation effective in recommender systems? an experimental analysis. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 11(2), 1–26 (2020)
21. Rennie, S.J., Marcheret, E., Mroueh, Y., Ross, J., Goel, V.: Self-critical sequence
training for image captioning. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition. pp. 7008–7024 (2017)
22. Salman, R., Alzaatreh, A., Sulieman, H.: The stability of different aggregation
techniques in ensemble feature selection. Journal of Big Data 9(1), 51 (2022)


--- Page 16 ---
16
Yijun Jin et al.
23. United Nations: United nations data portal (2020), https://population.un.org/
dataportal/home?df=16a5d2ec-f118-4a0a-9cc7-7879c7925c6d, accessed: 2023-
10-25
24. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser,
Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems 30 (2017)
25. Vinyals, O., Fortunato, M., Jaitly, N.: Pointer networks. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems 28 (2015)
26. Williams, R.J.: Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist
reinforcement learning. Machine learning 8, 229–256 (1992)
27. Young, H.P., Levenglick, A.: A consistent extension of condorcet’s election princi-
ple. SIAM Journal on applied Mathematics 35(2), 285–300 (1978)
