--- Page 1 ---
CDEoH: Category-Driven Automatic Algorithm Design
With Large Language Models
Yu-Nian Wang
wangyunian@hhu.edu.cn
Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry of Water Resources
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
Shen-Huan LyuB
lvsh@hhu.edu.cn
Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry of Water Resources
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Ning Chen
che-n-ing@hhu.edu.cn
Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry of Water Resources
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
Jia-Le Xu
xujl@hhu.edu.cn
Key Laboratory of Water Big Data Technology of Ministry of Water Resources
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Hohai University, Nanjing, China
Baoliu Ye
yebl@nju.edu.cn
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Qingfu Zhang
qingfu.zhang@cityu.edu.hk
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Abstract
With the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs), LLM-based heuristic search
methods have demonstrated strong capabilities in automated algorithm generation. How-
ever, their evolutionary processes often suffer from instability and premature convergence.
Existing approaches mainly address this issue through prompt engineering or by jointly
evolving thought and code, while largely overlooking the critical role of algorithmic cat-
egory diversity in maintaining evolutionary stability. To this end, we propose Category-
Driven Automatic Algorithm Design with Large Language Models (CDEoH), which ex-
plicitly models algorithm categories and jointly balances performance and category diver-
sity in population management, enabling parallel exploration across multiple algorithmic
paradigms. Extensive experiments on representative combinatorial optimization problems
across multiple scales demonstrate that CDEoH effectively mitigates convergence toward a
single evolutionary direction, significantly enhancing evolutionary stability and achieving
consistently superior average performance across tasks and scales.
Keywords:
Automatic Algorithm Design, Large Language Models, Heuristic Evolution
1 Introduction
Heuristic algorithms have long been central to solving complex optimization and search
problems.
Over the past decades, classical metaheuristics such as simulated annealing
B. Corresponding author
© Preprint 2025 .
Under review. Do not distribute.
arXiv:2603.19284v1  [cs.NE]  8 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
(Van Laarhoven and Aarts, 1987), tabu search (Glover and Laguna, 1997), and iterated
local search (Louren¸co et al., 2018) have achieved broad success in both industry and
academia. However, different applications involve diverse constraints and objectives, ne-
cessitating manual design, adaptation, or tuning of heuristics for each task. This process
relies heavily on expert knowledge, is time-consuming, and limits the practical deployment
of heuristic methods.
To address this issue, Automatic Heuristic Design (AHD) aims to automatically select,
tune, or construct heuristics for a given task class (St¨utzle and L´opez-Ib´a˜nez, 2018). Early
methods include Genetic Programming (GP), a widely used technique (Koza, 1992; Guo
et al., 2022), which has been applied to job-shop scheduling (Miyashita, 2000), wind farm
maintenance strategy design (Ma et al., 2024), hybrid flow-shop scheduling (Liu and Shi,
2022), and more. GP can evolve increasingly fit candidates via crossover and mutation,
but its effectiveness is limited by issues such as program bloat and reliance on a predefined
primitive set (Luke, 2003; Langdon et al., 2008).
A poorly designed primitive set can
restrict the search space, while constructing a suitable one for complex problems remains
challenging.
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has opened new opportunities for au-
tomatic heuristic design (AHD). With strong semantic understanding and code-generation
abilities (Austin et al., 2021; Nijkamp et al., 2022), LLMs can express diverse heuristic
strategies in both natural language and executable code, enabling more powerful AHD
frameworks. Prior work has demonstrated the promise of LLM-based AHD (Zhang et al.,
2024). Recent evolutionary paradigms include FunSearch, which uses a multi-island struc-
ture to generate and recombine programs and achieves breakthroughs on mathematical
search problems (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), and EoH, which co-evolves “thoughts” and
code with multiple prompting strategies to improve quality and reduce cost (Liu et al.,
2024). However, FunSearch incurs high computational overhead, while EoH’s single-island
evolution can lead to limited search directions and premature convergence. AlphaEvolve
extends FunSearch to full program evolution and achieves strong results on matrix multi-
plication search (Novikov et al., 2025). Despite these advances, existing methods generally
lack explicit modeling and control of algorithmic diversity. HSEvo addresses this by intro-
ducing explicit diversity metrics, mapping algorithms into a vector space via an encoder
and clustering them (Dat et al., 2025). In contrast, we feed algorithm thoughts and code
into an LLM to directly classify algorithms using its semantic understanding, differing from
HSEvo’s encoder-based approach.
In this paper, we emphasize the importance of algorithmic category diversity in evo-
lutionary search. In practice, heuristic algorithms often fall into distinct categories (e.g.,
brute-force, greedy, and dynamic programming), each with different performance limits.
Without considering such category structure, evolutionary search tends to converge prema-
turely to a single paradigm, limiting effective exploration of the heuristic space.
Motivated by this observation, we introduce algorithmic categories into LLM-based evo-
lutionary design and propose Category-Driven Evolutionary Algorithm Design (CDEoH).
CDEoH explicitly models and manages algorithm categories within a single, low-cost evolu-
tionary population. For each candidate generated by the LLM, we induce its category and
maintain a category pool to monitor coverage. During each generation, a category-based
two-stage selection preserves high-performing algorithms while ensuring category-level di-
2


--- Page 3 ---
versity. We also introduce a lightweight reflection mechanism to repair or rewrite promising
candidates that fail to execute due to LLM hallucinations.
Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose CDEoH, a category-aware evolutionary framework for automatic heuris-
tic design, which improves algorithmic diversity with low computational cost and
enhances overall search quality.
• We introduce simple yet effective strategies, including algorithm category induction,
category-based population selection, and an LLM-based reflection mechanism, which
can be readily integrated into existing evolutionary AHD methods.
• We conduct extensive experiments on two AHD tasks at multiple scales, showing
CDEoH consistently outperforms baselines, while ablations highlight category induc-
tion’s critical role in preserving diversity.
2 Related Works
2.1 Traditional Hyper-Heuristics
Traditional hyper-heuristic methods mainly fall into two categories: heuristic selection and
heuristic generation. Heuristic selection chooses the best-performing heuristic from a prede-
fined, human-designed set based on the current search state or historical performance (Zhu
et al., 2023), whereas heuristic generation constructs new heuristics by combining or evolv-
ing existing components under predefined rules (Zhao et al., 2024). Owing to their generality
and cross-problem adaptability, hyper-heuristic frameworks have been widely applied across
diverse optimization domains (de Freitas Cardoso et al., 2025; De Clercq and Pillay, 2025;
Luo et al., 2026; Zhao et al., 2025). Nevertheless, their dependence on human-designed
heuristics limits both the selection space and the potential for heuristic innovation.
2.2 LLM-Based Hyper-Heuristics
In recent years, large language models (LLMs) have made significant advances in semantic
understanding and generation (Naveed et al., 2025), accompanied by continuous improve-
ments in their code generation capabilities (Chen et al., 2023; Liventsev et al., 2023). Prior
studies have explored applying LLMs to code performance optimization and algorithmic
problem solving in competitive programming (Shypula et al., 2023; Li et al., 2022; Shinn
et al., 2023), and have further employed them as optimizers in search and decision-making
processes (Yang et al., 2023a).
In the context of algorithm selection, LLMs have also
been used to identify suitable algorithms for specific problem instances via similarity (Wu
et al., 2023). Moreover, LLMs have demonstrated strong performance in general task solv-
ing (Yang et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023). However, most existing approaches rely on single
or static prompt engineering, making it difficult to systematically generate high-quality and
consistently effective heuristic strategies.
2.3 LLM-based Evolutionary Computation
Evolutionary computation (EC) is a general optimization paradigm inspired by natural
evolution (B¨ack et al., 1997), and recent studies show integrating EC with large language
models (LLMs) substantially improves performance across diverse tasks, especially code
3


--- Page 4 ---
generation (Guo et al., 2023; Lehman et al., 2023; Hemberg et al., 2024). EC–LLM com-
binations have also been applied to practical problems, including strategy generation for
control tasks (Hu et al., 2025) and algorithm design for vehicle routing (Li et al., 2025). The
most related work is EoH (Liu et al., 2024), which introduces an LLM-driven evolutionary
framework that decouples heuristic thoughts from code and uses multiple prompts to re-
duce optimization cost while maintaining strong performance. Building on EoH, CDEoH
adds category induction and reflection mechanisms while retaining thought–code separation,
yielding more diverse and stable heuristic exploration.
3 Preliminaries
We consider a specific task instance T to be solved by heuristic algorithms, such as an online
bin packing problem where the number of items and bin capacity constraints are given. All
feasible heuristic algorithms applicable to T constitute a search space, denoted by H.
For any heuristic algorithm h ∈H, we evaluate its performance on the task instance
T using an evaluation function f, which returns a scalar performance score f(h). A larger
value of f(h) indicates better algorithmic performance.
Our objective is to automatically identify an optimal heuristic algorithm h∗from the
search space H such that its evaluation score on T is maximized. This objective can be
formalized as the following optimization problem:
h∗= arg max
h∈H f(h).
The above heuristic algorithm search problems typically exhibit extremely high compu-
tational complexity, and the task of finding optimal or near-optimal heuristic algorithms
is generally regarded as NP-hard. As a result, traditional exact optimization methods are
often impractical at realistic problem scales. In this context, evolutionary algorithms of-
fer an effective search paradigm by balancing exploration and exploitation, enabling the
exploration of complex, non-convex, and discrete search spaces without relying on gradi-
ent information or explicit problem structure, and gradually approaching high-performance
heuristic algorithms. With the recent advances in large language models (LLMs), their
strong semantic understanding and generation capabilities, when combined with evolution-
ary algorithms, further expand the exploration of the search space. Representative works
include ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024), FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), and EoH (Liu
et al., 2024).
4 Method
4.1 Main Idea
CDEoH enhances overall algorithmic diversity and search stability by explicitly catego-
rizing algorithms and jointly considering algorithmic performance and category diversity
during population selection. To achieve this goal, CDEoH incorporates the following key
mechanisms:
• Algorithm category modeling. In addition to maintaining the thought and code of
each algorithm, CDEoH explicitly records its algorithmic category. During each sam-
4


--- Page 5 ---
Generation
Evaluation
Categorization
Selection
Reflection
b. Integrating Reflection and Category Induction (Ours)
Generation
Evaluation
Selection
a. Existing Methods
Algorithm
Erroneous
Algorithm
Fixed
Algorithm
Category
Label
Figure 1: (a) Existing LLM-based automatic algorithm design methods adopt iterative
search frameworks to optimize algorithms, where individuals in the population
are not distinguished by category labels and erroneous algorithms are directly dis-
carded. (b) CDEoH explicitly incorporates category labels to distinguish different
algorithmic paradigms and employs a reflection mechanism to repair erroneous
algorithms.
pling step, CDEoH first follows the practice of EoH by invoking the LLM to generate a
candidate algorithm, including its high-level design rationale (thought) and concrete
implementation (code).
Subsequently, CDEoH invokes the LLM again to perform
category induction based on the algorithm’s thought and code, and assigns a corre-
sponding category label.
• Category-based two-stage selection strategy. When evolving the population toward
the next generation, CDEoH adopts a two-stage selection strategy to jointly balance
performance and diversity. In the first stage, the top-performing (top-1) algorithm
from each category is selected to ensure that high-quality representatives from dif-
ferent categories are preserved. In the second stage, the remaining algorithms are
ranked according to a joint performance–diversity score, and a subset of high-scoring
algorithms is selected to form the next-generation population.
• Reflection mechanism for error repair.
To prevent potentially valuable algorithms
from being prematurely discarded due to LLM hallucinations or inappropriate modifi-
cations, CDEoH introduces a reflection mechanism for repairing erroneous algorithms.
When an algorithm fails during evaluation, CDEoH submits the algorithm informa-
tion together with the corresponding error messages to the LLM, guiding it to correct
the errors so that the repaired algorithm may continue to participate in subsequent
evolution.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Similar to EoH (Liu et al., 2024) and FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), CDEoH
integrates large language models into an evolutionary framework, leveraging their strong
semantic understanding and code generation capabilities to continuously summarize, refine,
and expand the population of algorithms.
Unlike existing methods that primarily rely on prompt engineering and stochastic gen-
eration to indirectly promote diversity, CDEoH explicitly maintains a category pool to
manage all algorithm categories discovered during evolution. Category diversity is actively
enforced through manually designed selection rules during population updates. This mech-
anism expands the search space at the level of algorithmic paradigms and enables CDEoH
to more directly exploit category information compared to prior approaches such as Fun-
Search (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024) and EoH (Liu et al., 2024). Fig. 1 illustrates the
comparison between CDEoH and traditional methods.
4.2 Overall Framework
CDEoH maintains a population consisting of N algorithmic individuals, denoted as
P = {h1, h2, . . . , hN}.
Each algorithmic individual is evaluated on a set of task instances and assigned a fitness
value f(hi), which measures its algorithmic performance.
During evolution, CDEoH samples parent algorithms from the current population to
generate new candidate algorithms. Specifically, two types of prompts are employed for
parent optimization: an improvement prompt and an innovation prompt. The improvement
prompt focuses on local modifications of the parent algorithm, such as adjusting parameter
configurations or refining existing structures. In contrast, the innovation prompt emphasizes
restructuring the thought component of the algorithm, proposing new high-level problem-
solving strategies and generating corresponding novel code implementations. We present
the detailed prompts in Appendix.
Each newly generated algorithm that passes evaluation is subjected to category induc-
tion and assigned a category label. In each generation, CDEoH samples and evaluates at
most 2N feasible new algorithms, added to the candidate pool. Then a category-based
two-stage selection chooses N algorithms to form the next population. This preserves high-
performing algorithms while explicitly maintaining category diversity throughout evolution.
The evolutionary workflow of CDEoH is as follows:
1. Initialization. CDEoH employs an initialization prompt that is repeatedly submitted
to a large language model to obtain the initial population P, consisting of algorithms
h1, h2, . . . , hN.
2. Evolutionary Process. For each generation, CDEoH executes the following steps:
(a) Algorithm Sampling. For each algorithm in the current population, CDEoH
performs:
i. Innovation and Refinement Generation. Given a population member, CDEoH
invokes the LLM with an innovation-oriented prompt and a refinement-
oriented prompt, generating two candidate algorithms.
6


--- Page 7 ---
ii. Evaluation and Reflection. Each candidate is evaluated and assigned a per-
formance score, which is stored as one of its attributes. If execution errors
occur (e.g., due to LLM hallucinations or code inconsistencies), CDEoH em-
ploys a reflection prompt to submit the algorithm’s core idea, code, and error
message back to the LLM for attempted correction. This reflective repair
process is repeated until the candidate executes successfully or a maximum
reflection budget is reached.
iii. Category Induction. Each new algorithm is assigned a category by the LLM
and added to CDEoH’s category pool.
iv. Population Augmentation.
The new algorithm, with its idea description,
code, category, and score, is added to the population.
(b) Population Management. To ensure both high performance and sufficient
diversity, CDEoH uses a category-driven two-stage selection strategy during each
population iteration: first retaining the best algorithm from each category, then
selecting the remaining candidates based on a joint performance-diversity score
to form the next-generation population.
3. Termination. The evolution terminates when the number of samples or the number
of generations in the population reaches the predefined maximum.
4.3 Category Management
Premature convergence and susceptibility to local optima have long been recognized as
core challenges in evolutionary algorithms. These issues primarily stem from the rapid loss
of population diversity, which severely restricts effective exploration of the search space.
Existing approaches attempt to mitigate this problem through structural or prompt-level
designs. For example, FunSearch adopts multi-island parallel evolution to maintain solution
dispersion (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), while EoH employs improvement-oriented and
innovation-oriented prompts to guide the model toward generating diverse algorithms (Liu
et al., 2024). Nevertheless, such methods still rely largely on implicit mechanisms to preserve
diversity, making it difficult to systematically cover distinct algorithmic categories. As a
result, algorithmic homogenization or unstable generation quality may still emerge during
long-term evolution.
To explicitly model algorithmic diversity, we observe that most heuristic algorithms can
be clearly categorized according to their core ideas and code structures, such as greedy
methods, brute-force search, or dynamic programming. Moreover, different categories of-
ten correspond to markedly different performance ceilings. Motivated by this observation,
CDEoH assigns each algorithmic individual a discrete category label that characterizes its
underlying algorithmic paradigm.
Formally, let an algorithmic individual hi be represented by its high-level conceptual
description thoughti and its concrete code implementation codei. Its category is then defined
as
ci = C(thoughti, codei),
where C(·) denotes an algorithm classification mapping implemented by a large language
model.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Number of samples
1
100
200
50
150
Score
0.9510
0.9546
0.9560
0.9569
0.9573
0.9683
0.9768
Final 
Heuristic
Heuristic In & Out
Input: item, bins list
item: size of item
bins list: bin capacities
Output: scores list
scores list: scores of 
each bin
Category: Harmonic
Fill Balance
Category: Harmonic Fit
Proportion Priority
Category: Harmonic
Gaussian Fit Priority
Category: Harmonic
Gaussian Fit Priority
Category: Harmonic
Sigmoid Fit Priority
Category: Harmonic
Sigmoid Fit Priority
def priority(item, bins):
    r = bins - item
    valid = r >= 0
    out = np.full_like(bins, -np.inf, float)
    out[valid] = np.exp(-r[valid] / bins[valid]) * bins[valid] / (bins[valid] + item)
    return out
Assign priority based on the exponential decay of wasted space relative to bin
capacity, favoring bins where the item fits with minimal proportional waste.
Result
Figure 2: One evolutionary run of CDEoH on the online bin packing problem.
We list
the algorithm categories and present the detailed thoughts and code of the best-
performing algorithm.
Based on this category definition, CDEoH maintains a category pool throughout the
evolutionary process to record all algorithm categories discovered so far. This pool is dy-
namically expanded as evolution proceeds and serves as an important basis for subsequent
population selection, thereby explicitly constraining category coverage.
Specifically, let the set of categories discovered up to generation t be
K(t) = {ci | hi ∈P (t)}.
When a newly generated algorithm hnew completes evaluation, if its category cnew /∈K(t),
CDEoH adds this category to the category pool and treats it as a new algorithmic paradigm.
In this way, the structural diversity of the search space is continuously expanded.
4.4 Population Management
During the transition of the population from generation t to generation t+1, we aim to ac-
count for both algorithmic performance and category diversity in the selection process. On
the one hand, selection strategies solely based on performance tend to drive the population
to rapidly converge to a single algorithmic paradigm, thereby increasing the risk of being
trapped in local optima. On the other hand, explicitly encouraging the preservation of di-
verse algorithm categories facilitates sustained exploration along multiple directions of the
search space, fundamentally alleviating premature convergence. Motivated by these consid-
8


--- Page 9 ---
erations, CDEoH introduces a category-driven two-stage selection strategy that explicitly
maintains algorithmic category diversity while ensuring high performance.
I. Category-wise Elitism. Different algorithm categories often correspond to distinct
modeling assumptions and performance ceilings. During the early or intermediate stages
of evolution, even if a category does not yet exhibit competitive overall performance, its
best-performing individual may still possess substantial potential for further improvement
in subsequent generations. Consequently, directly discarding all algorithms from a given
category during selection may prematurely shrink the search space and lead to irreversible
information loss. To address this issue, CDEoH incorporates a category-level elitism mech-
anism in the first selection stage, ensuring that each discovered algorithm category retains
at least its current best representative.
Let H denote the current candidate algorithm set, and let K be the set of algorithm
categories. For each category c ∈K, the best algorithm in that category is defined as
h∗
c =
arg max
hi∈H,C(i)=c
f(hi)
where f(hi) denotes the performance score of algorithm hi, and C(i) indicates its associated
category.
This yields the category-elite set
E = {h∗
c | c ∈K}.
CDEoH then ranks the algorithms in E according to their original performance scores f(hi)
and directly retains the top k algorithms as part of the next-generation population, where
N ≥k and N denotes the population size.
By adding category constraints to selection, this stage preserves high-quality individuals
from different paradigms, enforcing structural diversity and preventing premature conver-
gence to one category.
II. Performance–Diversity Selection. After completing category-wise elitism, it is
still necessary to select additional individuals from the remaining candidates to fill the next-
generation population to a fixed size. Purely performance-based ranking may again induce
category concentration, whereas overly emphasizing diversity may introduce a large number
of low-quality algorithms. To balance these factors, CDEoH designs a performance–diversity
joint scoring mechanism that enables a controllable trade-off between the two objectives.
For each algorithm hi not selected in the first stage, CDEoH computes a joint score
Si =
fi −fmin
fmax −fmin
+ λ ·
1
|C(i)|,
where fmax and fmin denote the maximum and minimum raw performance scores among the
current candidate algorithms, respectively; |C(i)| is the number of algorithms belonging to
the same category as hi; and λ is a hyperparameter that balances performance and diversity.
The scoring function consists of two components. The first term normalizes algorithm
performance to mitigate scale differences across tasks or evaluation settings. The second
term explicitly favors algorithms from rare or newly discovered categories, increasing their
9


--- Page 10 ---
probability of being retained and thereby expanding exploration into underrepresented re-
gions of the search space. When λ = 0, the strategy degenerates into a purely performance-
driven selection scheme, whose behavior closely resembles the selection mechanism used in
EoH (Liu et al., 2024).
Finally, CDEoH ranks the remaining algorithms according to their joint scores Si and
selects the top N −k algorithms to complete the next-generation population.
4.5 Reflection Mechanism
During the evolutionary process, newly generated algorithmic individuals may suffer from
execution failures or logical flaws due to hallucinations of large language models or inap-
propriate modification attempts. Existing evolutionary frameworks typically discard such
erroneous algorithms to prevent interference with subsequent evolution. However, this strat-
egy may prematurely eliminate candidates that are promising at the level of algorithmic
ideas but flawed only in implementation details, thereby reducing search efficiency.
To address this issue, CDEoH introduces a reflection mechanism for automatic repair
of erroneous algorithms during evolution. The core idea is to treat algorithm repair as a
conditional generation process driven by a large language model, which performs targeted
modifications to the original algorithm conditioned on the observed error context.
Specifically, when an algorithmic individual h fails during evaluation and produces an
error message e, CDEoH constructs a reflection input that includes the algorithm’s high-
level description (thought), its code implementation (code), and the corresponding error
information. The large language model is then prompted to generate a repaired algorithmic
individual. This process can be formalized as
h′ ∼RLLM(h, e),
where RLLM(·) denotes a reflection operator parameterized by the LLM, which revises
algorithm h under error e to produce a new candidate h′.
If the repaired algorithm still fails to pass evaluation, CDEoH repeats the reflection
process within a predefined reflection budget B, until the algorithm executes successfully
or the maximum number of reflection attempts is reached. By incorporating this reflection
mechanism, CDEoH is able to recover and refine high-potential but imperfectly implemented
algorithms with low additional computational overhead, thereby improving the effectiveness
and stability of the overall evolutionary process.
5 Experiments
5.1 Tasks and Instances
We conducted systematic experiments on the Online Bin Packing (OBP) problem and the
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). For each problem, the evolutionary process was run
independently 10 times under different experimental settings, and the best performance was
reported. The problems and evaluation protocols are detailed as follows.
• OBP. In OBP, items arrive sequentially and must be assigned online to fixed-capacity
bins, aiming to minimize the total number of bins used. Heuristic algorithms select a
10


--- Page 11 ---
Table 1: OBP results under different problem settings. The relative gap between the num-
ber of bins used by different heuristics and the lower bound on instances generated
from a Weibull distribution (lower is better). In each column, the best results are
highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are shaded.
Method
1kC100
1kC500
5kC100
5kC500
10kC100
10kC500
EoH
2.476
0.991
2.406
0.497
1.071
0.448
FunSearch
3.516
0.991
3.878
0.447
1.820
0.423
ReEvo
3.171
0.991
1.611
0.497
0.478
0.075
CDEoH
2.378
0.744
1.054
0.099
0.483
0.075
Table 2: TSP results under different problem settings.
The table compares the relative
distance between the tour lengths generated by each heuristic and those produced
by the LKH algorithm (lower is better).
In each column, the best results are
highlighted in bold, and the second-best results are shaded.
Method
size50
size100
size200
size500
EoH
10.060
13.097
15.640
21.448
FunSearch
14.921
22.796
17.680
22.513
ReEvo
12.053
15.249
17.024
22.248
CDEoH
9.226
12.328
15.922
17.134
bin for each item. Performance is evaluated by the relative gap to a theoretical lower
bound on the optimal number of bins, computed following Martello and Toth (Martello
and Toth, 1990). The benchmark includes five instances generated from the Weibull
distribution (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), with bin capacities of 100 and 500 and
item counts from 1,000 to 10,000. The evaluation protocol follows Liu et al. (2024).
We provide the task description and template code for OBP in Appendix.
• TSP. TSP aims to find the shortest possible closed tour visiting each city exactly once.
We adopt constructive heuristics from prior work, which build solutions incrementally
by selecting the next city to visit at each step. Performance is measured by the average
relative gap to reference solutions produced by the LKH solver (Helsgaun, 2017). The
benchmark includes sixteen instances with city counts ranging from 50 to 500. City
coordinates are sampled from [0, 1], and Gaussian instances are generated following Bi
et al. (2022). Detailed task descriptions and template code for TSP are provided in
Appendix.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Table 3: Results of the ablation study on the online bin packing problem. The table reports
comparisons of CDEoH with respect to the category mechanism and the reflection
mechanism.
Method
10kC100
10kC500
1kC100
1kC500
5kC100
5kC500
nocategory
0.458
0.075
3.019
0.991
1.083
0.248
noreflection
0.368
0.075
2.969
0.991
1.163
0.248
CDEoH
0.483
0.075
2.378
0.744
1.054
0.099
5.2 Compared Methods and Settings
We compared several recent representative LLM-based automatic heuristic design (AHD)
methods, including ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024), FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), and
EoH (Liu et al., 2024).
All experiments were conducted on the LLM4AD platform, using DeepSeek-Chat as the
underlying language model for all methods. The maximum sampling budget was set to
200 for each method (with minor differences). Except for FunSearch, all methods used a
fixed population size of 10; FunSearch’s population size was dynamically adjusted via its
multi-island mechanism. During CDEoH evolution, the top-1 algorithms from the four best
categories were preserved, and λ was set to 0.7. Each method was independently run 10
times under different problem scales, and the average performance was reported.
It is worth noting that CDEoH does not rely on crossover operations for sampling
algorithm individuals within the population, and algorithms are independent of each other,
which enables high parallelism. Therefore, when the computational cost of evaluation is
relatively low, CDEoH can significantly reduce the overall evolution time. Fig. 2 illustrates
an example of the evolutionary process of CDEoH.
5.3 Results
Table 1 presents the experimental results for the online bin packing problem under different
item scales and bin capacities. It can be observed that CDEoH demonstrates stable per-
formance advantages on the OBP task. In almost all evaluated settings, CDEoH achieves
strong results.
Under multiple problem parameter configurations, CDEoH substantially
reduces the relative gap compared with EoH and FunSearch, indicating strong robustness
in high-dimensional online decision-making scenarios. Under the 10kC100 setting, CDEoH
also achieves performance comparable to the best-performing method. These results sug-
gest that CDEoH is particularly well suited for online combinatorial optimization problems,
where the joint modeling of algorithm diversity and performance during evolution helps
avoid premature convergence and improve solution quality.
Table 2 reports the experimental results for the TSP under different problem sizes.
CDEoH similarly achieves strong performance across all tested scales. In the size50, size100,
and size500 settings, CDEoH attains consistently competitive results. Notably, under the
large-scale size500 setting, the advantage of CDEoH becomes more pronounced, indicating
that the method maintains stable performance as problem scale increases. In the size200
12


--- Page 13 ---
setting, where CDEoH ranks second, its performance remains close to that of the best
method. These results further demonstrate that CDEoH achieves a good balance between
heuristic search space exploration and solution quality, exhibiting strong generalization
ability and scalability.
5.4 Ablation Study
We conduct ablation experiments on OBP to investigate the contribution of the category-
driven mechanism and the reflection module in CDEoH under different problem scales.
Two ablated variants are considered: nocategory, which removes category-based guidance,
and noreflection, which disables the reflection process during heuristic evolution. The full
CDEoH integrates both components.
Table 3 reports the gap between the best results and the lower bound under six OBP
settings. The results reveal that the impact of different components varies with problem
scale. On large-scale instances (10kC100 and 10kC500), the ablated variants achieve com-
parable or slightly better performance than the full model, suggesting that the additional
structural guidance introduced by category modeling and reflection may impose extra con-
straints when the search space is extremely large.
In contrast, as the problem scale decreases or the constraint becomes tighter (e.g.,
1kC100, 1kC500, and 5kC500), CDEoH consistently outperforms both ablated variants,
achieving significantly smaller gaps to the lower bound. This indicates that category-aware
guidance and reflection are particularly effective in structured or moderately sized settings,
where they help refine heuristic behaviors and improve solution quality.
Notably, the reflection module plays a critical role in more constrained settings, as
evidenced by the substantial performance gap between noreflection and the full model on
1kC500 and 5kC500. Overall, these results suggest that the proposed components contribute
complementary benefits, improving robustness and solution quality across a wide range of
problem configurations, while exhibiting different trade-offs at extreme scales.
6 Discussion and Future Work
This work explicitly incorporates algorithm categories into an LLM-driven heuristic evolu-
tion process and jointly considers performance and category diversity in population man-
agement, thereby improving search stability and alleviating premature convergence. The
proposed method is simple and easy to use, can be integrated into existing approaches, and
yields performance improvements under most experimental settings. By exploring multiple
category paradigms in parallel during evolution, CDEoH avoids local optima caused by
reliance on a single paradigm.
However, experimental results show that CDEoH does not consistently achieve the best
performance across all tasks and parameter settings, indicating room for improvement in
expanding the breadth of paradigm exploration. In addition, ablation studies reveal that
the proposed mechanisms may impose performance limitations in a small number of cases,
suggesting the need for further refinement. Future work may focus on refining the proposed
mechanisms, exploring finer-grained or hierarchical category modeling, and investigating
category induction methods that do not rely on LLMs to mitigate potential hallucination
issues.
13


--- Page 14 ---
7 Conclusion
This work proposes CDEoH, a method that performs category induction for evolving algo-
rithms within the EoH framework and jointly considers performance and category diversity
during population iteration. Compared with prior evolutionary approaches that ignore algo-
rithm category information, CDEoH effectively mitigates premature convergence and local
optima during evolution. Extensive experiments on combinatorial optimization problems
demonstrate that CDEoH achieves competitive performance in most experimental settings
and attains the best results in multiple scenarios. This study further highlights the potential
value of incorporating algorithm category induction into LLM-based evolutionary methods.
References
J. Austin, A. Odena, M. Nye, M. Bosma, H. Michalewski, D. Dohan, E. Jiang, C. Cai,
M. Terry, Q. Le, et al. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07732, 2021.
T. B¨ack, D. B. Fogel, and Z. Michalewicz. Handbook of evolutionary computation. Release,
97(1):B1, 1997.
J. Bi, Y. Ma, J. Wang, Z. Cao, J. Chen, Y. Sun, and Y. M. Chee. Learning generaliz-
able models for vehicle routing problems via knowledge distillation. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:31226–31238, 2022.
X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Sch¨arli, and D. Zhou. Teaching large language models to self-debug.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05128, 2023.
P. V. T. Dat, L. Doan, and H. T. T. Binh. Hsevo: Elevating automatic heuristic design
with diversity-driven harmony search and genetic algorithm using llms. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, pages 26931–26938, 2025.
J. De Clercq and N. Pillay. A selection perturbative hyper-heuristic for neural architecture
search. Neural Networks, page 108259, 2025.
G. P. de Freitas Cardoso, P. H. P. De Carvalho, and P. R. L. Gondim. Joint spectrum
allocation and power control for d2d communication and sensing in 6g networks using
drl-based hyper-heuristics. Computer Networks, page 111969, 2025.
F. W. Glover and M. Laguna. Tabu Search. Springer Science & Business Media, New York,
NY, 1997. ISBN 9780792399650. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4615-6089-0.
H. Guo, J. Liu, and C. Zhuang. Automatic design for shop scheduling strategies based
on hyper-heuristics: A systematic review. Advanced Engineering Informatics, 54:101756,
2022.
Q. Guo, R. Wang, J. Guo, B. Li, K. Song, X. Tan, G. Liu, J. Bian, and Y. Yang. Connecting
large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful prompt optimizers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532, 2023.
14


--- Page 15 ---
K. Helsgaun. An extension of the lin-kernighan-helsgaun tsp solver for constrained traveling
salesman and vehicle routing problems. Roskilde: Roskilde University, 12:966–980, 2017.
E. Hemberg, S. Moskal, and U.-M. O’Reilly. Evolving code with a large language model.
Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines, 25(2):21, 2024.
Q. Hu, X. Tong, M. Yuan, F. Liu, Z. Lu, and Q. Zhang. Multimodal llm-assisted evolution-
ary search for programmatic control policies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.05433, 2025.
J. R. Koza. Genetic programming: on the programming of computers by means of natural
selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992. ISBN 0262111705.
W. B. Langdon, R. Poli, N. F. McPhee, and J. R. Koza.
Genetic programming: An
introduction and tutorial, with a survey of techniques and applications. In Computational
intelligence: A compendium, pages 927–1028. Springer, 2008.
J. Lehman, J. Gordon, S. Jain, K. Ndousse, C. Yeh, and K. O. Stanley. Evolution through
large models. In Handbook of evolutionary machine learning, pages 331–366. Springer,
2023.
K. Li, F. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Tong, X. Han, M. Yuan, and Q. Zhang. Ars: Automatic routing
solver with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15359, 2025.
Y. Li, D. Choi, J. Chung, N. Kushman, J. Schrittwieser, R. Leblond, T. Eccles, J. Keel-
ing, F. Gimeno, A. Dal Lago, et al. Competition-level code generation with alphacode.
Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022.
F. Liu, X. Tong, M. Yuan, X. Lin, F. Luo, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, and Q. Zhang. Evolution
of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model,
2024. URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2401.02051, 2024.
L. Liu and L. Shi. Automatic design of efficient heuristics for two-stage hybrid flow shop
scheduling. Symmetry, 14(4):632, 2022.
V. Liventsev, A. Grishina, A. H¨arm¨a, and L. Moonen. Fully autonomous programming
with large language models. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation
Conference, pages 1146–1155, 2023.
H. R. Louren¸co, O. C. Martin, and T. St¨utzle.
Iterated local search: Framework and
applications. In Handbook of metaheuristics, pages 129–168. Springer, 2018.
S. Luke. Modification point depth and genome growth in genetic programming. Evolutionary
Computation, 11(1):67–106, 2003.
L. Luo, X. Yan, and D. Li. Hyper-heuristic with asynchronous double learning for dynamic
distributed hybrid flow shop scheduling problem with fatigue factor. Expert Systems with
Applications, 307:131022, 2026.
Y. Ma, W. Zhang, and J. Branke. Genetic programming hyper-heuristic for evolving a
maintenance policy for wind farms. Journal of Heuristics, 30(5):423–451, 2024.
15


--- Page 16 ---
S. Martello and P. Toth.
Lower bounds and reduction procedures for the bin packing
problem. Discrete applied mathematics, 28(1):59–70, 1990.
K. Miyashita. Job-shop scheduling with genetic programming. In Proceedings of the 2nd
Annual Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, pages 505–512, 2000.
H. Naveed, A. U. Khan, S. Qiu, M. Saqib, S. Anwar, M. Usman, N. Akhtar, N. Barnes,
and A. Mian. A comprehensive overview of large language models. ACM Transactions
on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 16(5):1–72, 2025.
E. Nijkamp, B. Pang, H. Hayashi, L. Tu, H. Wang, Y. Zhou, S. Savarese, and C. Xiong.
Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.
A. Novikov, N. V˜u, M. Eisenberger, E. Dupont, P.-S. Huang, A. Z. Wagner, S. Shirobokov,
B. Kozlovskii, F. J. Ruiz, A. Mehrabian, et al. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific
and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, M. Balog, M. P. Kumar, E. Dupont, F. J.
Ruiz, J. S. Ellenberg, P. Wang, O. Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program
search with large language models. Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. Reflexion: Language
agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 36:8634–8652, 2023.
A. Shypula, A. Madaan, Y. Zeng, U. Alon, J. Gardner, M. Hashemi, G. Neubig, P. Ran-
ganathan, O. Bastani, and A. Yazdanbakhsh. Learning performance-improving code edits.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07867, 2023.
T. St¨utzle and M. L´opez-Ib´a˜nez. Automated design of metaheuristic algorithms. In Hand-
book of metaheuristics, pages 541–579. Springer, 2018.
P. J. Van Laarhoven and E. H. Aarts. Simulated annealing. In Simulated annealing: Theory
and applications, pages 7–15. Springer, 1987.
X. Wu, Y. Zhong, J. Wu, and K. C. Tan. As-llm: When algorithm selection meets large
language model. 2023.
C. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Lu, H. Liu, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, and X. Chen. Large language models
as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023a.
J. Yang, A. Prabhakar, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao. Intercode: Standardizing and bench-
marking interactive coding with execution feedback.
Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:23826–23854, 2023b.
H. Ye, J. Wang, Z. Cao, F. Berto, C. Hua, H. Kim, J. Park, and G. Song. Reevo: Large
language models as hyper-heuristics with reflective evolution. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, 37:43571–43608, 2024.
16


--- Page 17 ---
R. Zhang, F. Liu, X. Lin, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, and Q. Zhang. Understanding the importance of
evolutionary search in automated heuristic design with large language models. In Inter-
national Conference on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature, pages 185–202. Springer,
2024.
S. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Shen, M. Ding, J. B. Tenenbaum, and C. Gan. Planning with large
language models for code generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.05510, 2023.
F. Zhao, T. Yang, T. Xu, N. Zhu, and H. Liang. A bayesian-based hyper-heuristic algorithm
for the integrated scheduling of distributed production assembly and delivery problem.
Applied Soft Computing, page 114313, 2025.
Q. Zhao, Q. Duan, B. Yan, S. Cheng, and Y. Shi.
Automated design of metaheuristic
algorithms: A survey, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.06532.
L. Zhu, Y. Zhou, S. Sun, and Q. Su. Surgical cases assignment problem using an efficient
genetic programming hyper-heuristic. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 178:109102,
2023.
17
