--- Page 1 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN
COMBINATORICS
GERGELY B´ERCZI
Abstract. Many open problems in combinatorics admit reformulations in which a global construc-
tion can be achieved by the repeated application of small, finite correcting steps. This paper presents
three computational case studies of this principle, carried out using AlphaEvolve as an experimental
engine for proposing and iteratively refining such certificates. The problems we studied are: re-
construction of bipartite and planar graphs from vertex-deleted subgraphs; the Alon-Tarsi parity
problem for Latin squares, approached via sign-reversing involutions built from local trades; Rota’s
Basis Conjecture, studied through local exchange policies on collections of bases. In these three
problems the correcting steps take the form of a reconstruction rule, a parity-reversing involution,
and a transversal family of bases, respectively.
For each problem, we describe the experimental setup, the scoring protocols, and the outcomes of
the searches, leading to concrete conjectures concerning the existence and structure of the relevant
correcting steps. The aim is not to claim proofs, but rather to produce explicit algorithms and to
reveal structural patterns that appear amenable to subsequent analysis by traditional mathematical
methods.
1. Introduction
This paper reports on a series of experiments centered around a common guiding idea: to
use the evolutionary search model AlphaEvolve [2, 1] as a construction-driven search engine for
exploring difficult constructive problems in combinatorics. These are problems that assert the
existence of objects subject to global constraints, but for which brute-force search is computationally
infeasible. The three problems we study are the reconstruction of graphs from their vertex-deleted
subgraphs (with an emphasis on bipartite and planar families), the Alon-Tarsi conjecture on the
parity imbalance of Latin squares, and Rota’s Basis Conjecture on rearranging matroid bases into a
basis-by-basis grid.
Although the Alon-Tarsi conjecture implies the Rota Basis Conjecture in certain cases, at first
look these problems belong to distinct areas of combinatorics. From the viewpoint adopted here,
however, they share a common structural feature: each induces an energy landscape on a vast
discrete space C of candidate certificates. Valid certificates correspond to global minima, while the
verifier assigns to each C ∈C a vector of nonnegative defect measures that quantify its distance
from validity. These defects, such as incorrect degrees or broken column conditions, define local
contributions to the energy and naturally suggest local moves that decrease it, thereby organizing
the search as a descent process on a highly structured combinatorial landscape.
Across the three projects we found it useful to treat the unknown certificate C as something
that should be built by a sequence of small correcting steps, much as a numerical optimizer builds
a minimizer by small descent steps. Concretely, one fixes a space C of candidate objects (graphs,
Latin squares, basis grids), together with a computable penalty or loss function L : C →R≥0 whose
zero set is precisely the set of valid certificates, and a family M of local moves m : C →C that
preserve the ambient combinatorial type (for instance degree sequences, Latin constraints) and the
loss function decreases at each move, that is L(m(C)) < L(C) holds for all m ∈M, C ∈C.
The guiding heuristic is that, if a conjecture is true for global reasons, then there should exist a
discrete Lyapunov trajectory, that is, a local repair dynamics that (typically) drives L downward
and avoids the main traps. AlphaEvolve is then used not to search directly for a single certificate
1
arXiv:2603.06692v1  [math.GM]  4 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
GERGELY B´ERCZI
C, but to search for python scripts implementing a good repair dynamics, that is, a policy that
repeatedly proposes moves in M that reduce L. This principle does not replace proof. Rather, it
serves as a generator of explicit hypotheses such as which local moves seem sufficient and which
deterministic tie-breaks prevent cycling.
The rest of this introduction presents the statements of the three conjectures we study in this
paper, with more detailed background in the corresponding sections.
1.1. Graph Reconstruction Conjecture. Let G be a finite simple undirected graph with vertex
set V (G) of size n. For v ∈V (G) we write G −v for the induced subgraph obtained by deleting v
and all incident edges. The deck of G is the multiset of vertex-deleted subgraphs
D(G) = {G −v : v ∈V (G)}.
Two graphs G, H on n vertices have the same deck if their decks agree as multisets of unlabeled
graphs. A graph G is reconstructible if every graph with the same deck is isomorphic to G.
Conjecture 1 (Graph Reconstruction Conjecture (Ulam-Kelly) [4, 5]). Every finite simple graph
on at least three vertices is reconstructible from its deck.
The conjecture is classical and has generated a large literature; survey-level entry points include
[6]. Many special families are known to be reconstructible (for example trees and regular graphs),
but no general proof is known. At the opposite extreme, calculations have verified reconstructibility
for all graphs up to modest size; see McKay’s tabulations and notes [7]. The deck forgets the
labeling of vertices, so the challenge is not merely to recover an adjacency relation but to recover it
up to isomorphism from unlabeled local views.
The experiments in this paper focus on two regimes in which the deck retains nontrivial combina-
torial rigidity while still admitting explicit computational checks. First, we study bipartite matrix
reconstruction. A bipartite graph G = (U ⊔V, E) with |U| = u and |V | = v can be encoded by its
0 −1 incidence matrix A ∈{0, 1}u×v. Deleting a vertex in U or V corresponds to deleting a row or
a column, so the deck becomes a multiset of (u −1) × v and u × (v −1) sub-matrices. This is a
concrete reconstruction model in which the unlabeled aspect can be simulated by independently
permuting rows and columns in each card.
After this we study reconstructibility of planar graphs. A basic structural question is whether
planarity of graphs is itself determined by the deck and, more broadly, which planar graph subclasses
are reconstructible or even recognizable. These issues are studied in substantial detail in [9]. In this
paper we study planar graphs of minimum degree at least 3 that are not maximal planar.
1.2. The Alon-Tarsi conjecture and the parity of Latin squares. A Latin square of order n is
an n×n matrix L = (Lr,c)r,c∈[n] with entries in [n] = {0, 1, . . . , n−1} such that each symbol appears
exactly once in each row and each column. Equivalently, each row and column is a permutation of
[n]. For a row r, define the permutation ρr ∈Sn in one-line notation by
ρr(c) = Lr,c
(c ∈[n]),
and for a column c define κc ∈Sn by
κc(r) = Lr,c
(r ∈[n]).
Definition 1 (Parity of Latin squares). For a Latin square L of order n, define
sgn(L) :=
n−1
Y
r=0
sgn(ρr) ·
n−1
Y
c=0
sgn(κc) ∈{+1, −1}.
Call L even if sgn(L) = +1 and odd if sgn(L) = −1.
Let En (resp. On) denote the set of even (resp. odd) Latin squares of order n and write En = |En|,
On = |On|.


--- Page 3 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
3
Conjecture 2 (Alon-Tarsi). If n is even, then
En −On ̸= 0,
equivalently
X
L∈Ln
sgn(L) ̸= 0.
A standard algebraic encoding explains why this is natural. Let X = (xi,j) be an n × n matrix.
Expanding det(X)n produces monomials that correspond to Latin squares, and the coefficient of
Q
i,j xi,j is precisely P
L∈Ln sgn(L). Thus the conjecture is equivalent to the nonvanishing of the
coefficient of Q
i,j xi,j. This viewpoint connects naturally to polynomial-method tools such as the
Combinatorial Nullstellensatz [11].
For odd n, there is a straightforward sign-reversing involution that forces En = On. Indeed,
swapping two rows (or two columns) is an involution on Ln. Under the sign convention above,
swapping two rows multiplies each column permutation by a transposition, so the product of column
signs picks up a factor (−1)n; for odd n this is −1 and hence sgn flips. Consequently, for odd n one
obtains a sign-reversing involution on all of Ln and thus En = On. For even n, the same row/column
swap is sign-preserving, and no such trivial cancellation is available.
The parity problem for Latin squares is part of a larger circle of ideas in which an algebraic identity
controls the existence of a combinatorial object. In their foundational work on the method now
called the Alon-Tarsi method, Alon and Tarsi related signed enumerations to coloring and orientation
problems in graphs [10]. Several related determinantal and hyperdeterminantal formulations have
also been developed; see for instance Zappa’s analysis of Cayley-type determinants in this context
[12].
The full Alon-Tarsi conjecture remains open, but nontrivial cases are known. Drisko proved the
conjecture for n = p + 1 when p is an odd prime [13], and Glynn proved it for n = p −1 when p
is an odd prime [15]. Further extensions and related parity questions are surveyed in the works
such as [16, 18]. For odd n the global parity difference vanishes by an elementary row or column
swap (as we have seen above), but fixed-diagonal and other constrained variants exhibit subtler
behaviour; see, for example, Drisko’s fixed-diagonal formulation [14] and more recent asymptotic
parity results [17].
If one can construct a map F : Ln →Ln such that F is an involution, that is, F(F(L)) = L),
F(L) ̸= L for most L (so it pairs objects), and sgn(F(L)) = −sgn(L) for those paired L, then the
signed sum collapses to the signed sum over the residual set
Res := {L ∈Ln : sgn(F(L)) = sgn(L) or F fails to pair L in some way}.
In that case
X
L∈Ln
sgn(L) =
X
L∈Res
sgn(L),
so any proof that P
L∈Res sgn(L) ̸= 0 would establish the conjecture. The experiments below are
best understood as algorithmic attempts to realize this philosophy: evolve a canonical local trade
that flips sign on most inputs and leaves a small residual with dominant sign.
1.3. Rota Basis Conjecture. Let M be a matroid of rank n on ground set E. Let B1, . . . , Bn be
pairwise disjoint bases of M. A transversal of (B1, . . . , Bn) is a set T ⊆S
i Bi that meets each Bi
in exactly one element. Equivalently, it is the image of a system of distinct representatives for the
partition (B1, . . . , Bn).
Conjecture 3 (Rota Basis Conjecture (matroid form)). Given n disjoint bases B1, . . . , Bn in a
rank-n matroid M, there exist n pairwise disjoint transversals T1, . . . , Tn of (B1, . . . , Bn) such that
each Tj is a basis of M.
In the linear case, one may take M to be the matroid of column-independence of vectors in an
n-dimensional vector space V . Then each Bi is a basis of V , and a transversal basis is a rainbow


--- Page 4 ---
4
GERGELY B´ERCZI
basis containing exactly one vector from each Bi. The conjecture asserts that one can partition the
multiset F
i Bi into n disjoint rainbow bases.
Rota formulated this conjecture in the late 1980s, and it has since become a central open problem
in matroid theory. Already in early work one sees strong links to determinant identities and to
Latin-square phenomena; for example, Onn exhibited a colorful determinantal identity that ties
the conjecture to Latin squares [20], and Huang-Rota connected the conjecture to Latin-square
straightening coefficients [19]. Chow later reduced Rota’s conjecture to a problem involving only
three bases [22], and Wild proved the conjecture for certain structured instances [21]. These
connections explain why Rota’s conjecture and the Alon-Tarsi conjecture are often discussed in the
same breath, and why parity-type information can be unexpectedly relevant (cf. [15]).
A number of matroid classes are known to satisfy the conjecture or strong variants. For example,
Geelen and Humphries proved Rota’s conjecture for paving matroids [23], and Geelen-Webb
obtained systematic packing and exchange results that guarantee many disjoint transversal bases
under additional hypotheses [24]. In the linear setting, substantial quantitative progress has been
made in recent years: Buci´c, Kwan, Pokrovskiy, and Sudakov proved a result guaranteeing about
n/2 disjoint rainbow bases [25], Sauermann established the conjecture for random bases in a
natural probabilistic model [27], and Pokrovskiy proved an asymptotic form of the conjecture
[28]. Montgomery and Sauermann obtained asymptotically tight packing and covering bounds
in related rainbow-base problems [29]. Algorithmic and computer-assisted approaches have also
entered the picture; for example, Kirchweger, Scheucher, and Szeider used SAT-based methods to
verify Rota-type statements in small ranks [26].
Our experiments focus on a small but instructive linear regime rank ≤13 over F2. The goal is
not to resolve the conjecture, but to use scored local-exchange search to find explicit policies that
reliably repair invalid columns and reach a full set of transversal bases on adversarially structured
test benchmarks.
1.4. How the experiments were run. This work follows an experimental rather than a traditional
theorem-proof methodology. For each of the three problems, the test sets were constructed in
advance using standard mathematical judgement and guidance from the literature, and were then
fixed as part of the AlphaEvolve evaluation harness. We tried to include difficult cases in the
test benchmarks: bipartite and planar graphs with hard reconstruction problems, Latin squares
with nontrivial parity structure, and collections of bases close to known obstructions for Rota’s
Basis Conjecture. The goal was to bias the search toward methods that handle a broad range of
challenging cases, rather than heuristics tuned to typical examples. As a geometer rather than
a specialist in these areas, I approached these problems somewhat outside my primary field of
expertise, and the topics therefore lie partially outside my usual comfort zone.
For each problem, approximately ten independent experiments were run, with durations ranging
from a few hours to two days. Running multiple shorter experiments, rather than a single long
run, proved essential for iteratively improving the test sets and scoring system, closing unintended
loopholes, and adjusting the search strategy in response to observed behavior.
AlphaEvolve includes a feature that produces a Gemini-generated AI summary of an experimental
run. Our runs typically last 15–24 hours and generate an evolutionary trace of more than 5000
candidate results and algorithms. The summary distills this trace into a compact narrative of the
search dynamics: the main stages of progress, key turning points and breakthroughs where genuinely
new ideas appear, and the detours or failure modes that consumed significant search effort.
In practice, these summaries are valuable both diagnostically and scientifically. They help us
quickly identify mistakes, dead ends, and other red flags, guiding redesign of the scoring rules, search
space, or constraints for subsequent runs. They also provide a structured, human-readable report of
how discoveries emerged. We include some of these AI-generated summaries for our runs in the
appendices.


--- Page 5 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
5
Declaration of use of AI. This is an experimental mathematics paper, and a variety of AI-based
tools were used extensively throughout the project. The AlphaEvolve user interface relies on
gemini-2.5-pro and gemini-3-pro models to generate summaries of the problem setup, describe
candidate strategies, suggest and write the evolve blocks and evaluation harnesses and also write AI
summaries of the experiments. These capabilities were used extensively during the exploratory and
iterative phases of the project. We also used code generation outside the AlphaEvolve system for
vibe-coding evaluation harnesses. AlphaEvolve automatically produces detailed, Gemini-generated
experiment reports, including performance summaries and qualitative analyses of evolved programs.
These reports served as a starting point for several sections of this paper; however, the mathematical
conclusions, conjectures, and counterexamples presented here arise from independent mathematical
analysis. Except as otherwise indicated, the contents of this paper are the work of the author.
Acknowledgements. I would like to thank the Google DeepMind AlphaEvolve team for the
opportunity to be part of the first Trusted Users group with early access to AlphaEvolve, and for
the continued support of the AlphaEvolve team throughout this project. I am especially grateful to
Adam Zsolt Wagner, who was my first point of contact and an exceptionally helpful guide to the
UI platform. I learned greatly from the many discussions and exchanges within the community of
AlphaEvolve testers and mathematicians.
2. AlphaEvolve as an experimental engine for mathematicians
The experiments in this paper were carried out by using the evolutionary search model AlphaEvolve
[2, 1]. In this model the object being optimized through an evolutionary process is not a numerical
parameter but a (short) Python program. The guiding idea is that many combinatorial existence
problems admit a checkable formulation: once a candidate certificate is proposed (a reconstruction,
an involution, a sequence of local moves), a fixed piece of code can decide whether it is correct
and can usually quantify how far it is from being correct through a numerical scoring system.
AlphaEvolve uses the scoring system to guide the search engine by repeatedly rewriting the code
that proposes candidates.
Fix a space P of short programs, for example Python functions of a prescribed signature. In each
experiment we distinguish two components.
(1) The first component is an evaluation harness, a fixed module H that encodes the mathematics
of the problem. Given a program p ∈P, the harness executes p on a prescribed collection
of instances and returns a structured report H(p) =
 s(p), aux(p)

, where s(p) ∈R is a
scalar score used for selection and aux(p) is auxiliary data (for example counters, plots, or
per-instance outcomes).
(2) The second component is an evolvable block, the part of the code that is allowed to change
between iterations; in our experiments this was typically a single function (often called
find best certificate) whose job is to propose a candidate object to be checked by H.
AlphaEvolve repeatedly proposes small modifications p 7→p′ to the evolvable block and retains
those modifications when the score improves. One can view this as a form of program search guided
by quantitative feedback: a reinforcement learning model on the state of python codes, where
actions are LLM generated and the value of states is determined by the primary score. A detailed
description of the AlphaEvolve model is given in [1, 2, 3].
2.1. Harnesses as mathematical specifications. For the purposes of mathematical work, it is
helpful to think of the harness as immutable mathematics. Changing the evolvable block changes
the search strategy; changing the harness changes the meaning of the experiment. In particular, the
harness specifies: (i) the instance distribution or fixed test set; (ii) the definition of validity (what
outputs are rejected as meaningless); (iii) the scoring system s(p) which guides the search through
the evolutionary process. .


--- Page 6 ---
6
GERGELY B´ERCZI
In all three problems, the underlying mathematical statement is invariant under a large symmetry
group (relabeling vertices, isotopys of Latin squares, change of basis in a vector space). A naive
score that evaluates only one representative per orbit encourages overfitting to arbitrary labels. For
that reason, the harnesses in this paper typically evaluate a candidate on several random symmetry
actions and then aggregate by a worst-case or near-worst-case statistic. Concretely, if σ1, . . . , σS are
independent random symmetry operations applied to the same underlying instance, we use scores of
the form
score(instance) = min
1≤t≤S score(scramble(t)),
or a closely related robust aggregate. This turns symmetry-invariance from a background fact into
an explicit pressure in the objective.
A second recurring feature is the use of hard constraints together with soft progress measures.
For example, in the Alon-Tarsi experiments we treat ”being a well-defined involution on the test
set” as non-negotiable; among such candidates we then optimize the sign-flip rate and secondary
diagnostics. In the Rota experiments, success is rare enough that we add intermediate rewards for
partial progress (such as increasing the number of valid columns) so that the score landscape is not
completely flat. These design choices are not cosmetic: without a shaped smooth scoring system,
iterative program search tends to either stagnate or exploit loopholes in the evaluator.
Although the three mathematical problems look different, in each case the experimental search
can be phrased as learning a sequence of small correcting steps. In graph reconstruction, one tries
to align unlabeled cards and incrementally fix a hypothesized adjacency matrix. In the Latin-square
setting, one applies local trades that change the parity while preserving the Latin property. In the
matroid setting, one performs local exchanges guided by short dependence certificates (circuits) in
order to repair invalid columns. At the level of the evolvable code, AlphaEvolve likewise proceeds
by a sequence of local edits to the proposal program. This local correction viewpoint was a practical
guide in designing harnesses: we aimed to score not only final success, but also whether a candidate
move makes a configuration more consistent with the constraints, so that incremental improvement
is visible to the search.
2.2. Toy AlphaEvolve experiment: packing equal circles in the unit square. To make
the above discussion concrete, consider the classical packing problem: place N equal-radius circles
in the unit square [0, 1]2 so as to maximize the common radius. This is an optimization problem
rather than a conjecture, but it has the same structure.
A natural harness represents a candidate by a list of centers c1, . . . , cN ∈[0, 1]2 and defines the
induced feasible radius
r(c1, . . . , cN) = min

min
i {xi, 1 −xi, yi, 1 −yi}, 1
2 min
i<j ∥ci −cj∥2

,
where ci = (xi, yi). The harness rejects malformed outputs, computes r, and returns s = r (or s = r
minus a small penalty for numerical instability). The evolvable block is then simply a function
that proposes centers; AlphaEvolve iteratively rewrites that function so as to increase the returned
radius.
The point of the example is that nothing in the loop depends on geometry in any special
way. Once the checker is correct, one is free to let the proposal code range from hard-coded
patterns to randomized local improvement heuristics, and the system will empirically discover which
modifications increase r on the test protocol. In the three problems of this paper, the certificate
objects are more discrete, but the experimental logic is the same.
2.3. What AlphaEvolve does and does not do. It is important to emphasize what AlphaEvolve
is not doing in these experiments. It is not proving theorems, and it is not replacing the mathematical
step of turning a finite test-set phenomenon into a general statement. What it provides is a way to
explore a large space of explicit, checkable constructions while keeping the meaning of success fixed


--- Page 7 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
7
in a harness. The role of the mathematician remains to (i) design harnesses whose scores genuinely
reflect the intended mathematics, (ii) interpret the resulting constructions as conjectures or proof
sketches, and (iii) supply the human arguments needed to pass from experiments to theorems.
3. The Graph Reconstruction Conjecture
The reconstruction problem asks when a finite simple graph G is determined up to isomorphism
by the multiset
D(G) = {G −v : v ∈V (G)}
of vertex-deleted subgraphs (the deck of G). This is the setting of the classical Reconstruction
Conjecture of Ulam and Kelly [4, 5]; see [6] for survey-level background.
In this section we we report on using AlphaEvolve to search for explicit reconstruction procedures
in two complementary regimes. The first is a bipartite matrix deck model, in which a bipartite
graph G = (U ⊔V, E) is represented by its 0-1 incidence matrix A ∈{0, 1}u×v and the deck consists
of all row- and column-deletions of A. The second is a planar regime, restricting to connected,
biconnected planar graphs of minimum degree at least three that are not maximal planar. In both
settings the goal is algorithmic: given an unlabeled deck, output a graph bG (or matrix bA) satisfying
bG ∼= G.
3.1. Experimental protocol and scoring. A central experimental issue is to prevent label
leakage. If the cards of the deck inherit a consistent vertex ordering, reconstruction can exploit
this hidden structure and does not address the genuine unlabeled problem. To avoid this, each
card is independently relabeled before being passed to the candidate reconstruction procedure. In
the bipartite setting we apply independent random permutations of rows and columns to each
card, and in the planar setting we apply an independent random permutation of vertices. Any
successful method must therefore be permutation-invariant, up to the intrinsic automorphisms of
the underlying graph.
Robustness is enforced by symmetrization. For each underlying instance the harness generates S
independent relabelings of the same deck and aggregates by the worst case. Thus if D(1), . . . , D(S)
are independent scramblings of the same deck and H is the candidate reconstruction, the instance
score is
Sinstance(H) = min
1≤s≤S S(H; D(s)).
This strongly penalizes procedures that accidentally depend on a particular labeling. The harness
additionally stores a buffer of hard failures and replays them in later generations, forcing the search
to deal with persistent hard cases instead of overfitting to the random generator.
We now describe the scoring functional S(H; D) for a fixed scrambled deck D. The score takes
values in [0, 1] and combines three normalized components.
The primary term is the deck-agreement score
sdeck(H; D) = 1
n
X
[F]
min
 multD([F]), multD(H)([F])

,
where the sum ranges over isomorphism classes [F] of (n −1)-vertex graphs and mult denotes
multiplicity in the corresponding multiset. Cards are compared up to graph isomorphism; in early
experiments this was approximated by fast canonicalization procedures, and later replaced by exact
isomorphism checks (for bipartite graphs via VF2-type backtracking with bipartition encoded as
vertex colors). The equality sdeck = 1 holds if and only if D(H) = D as multisets.
Two auxiliary terms provide partial credit when exact reconstruction has not yet been achieved.
The degree score sdeg compares the reconstructed degree multiset with that implied by the deck,
and the edge-count score sE compares total edge counts. Both are normalized to lie in [0, 1] by
linear absolute-error scaling. These invariants are reconstructible from the deck and correlate


--- Page 8 ---
8
GERGELY B´ERCZI
with correctness, but are not sufficient for reconstruction. Empirically they were essential in early
generations, when exact deck agreement was too sparse a signal to guide the search.
The combined score on a single scramble is
S(H; D) = wdecksdeck + wdegsdeg + wEsE,
with wdeck chosen dominant. Thus improvement of the deck-agreement term always outweighs
any gain in auxiliary terms, while the latter smooth the search landscape before the first perfect
reconstructions appear.
3.1.1. Results. After ≈2 days of running, AlphaEvolve arrived to a reconstruction algorithm that
achieved perfect reconstruction on the test benchmark of size 1420:
successful reconstructions = 1420/1420,
worst-of-5-scrambles deck score = 1.00 for all cases.
No hard-negative failures were retained in the final generation.
For a mathematical reformulation of the evolved bipartite algorithm the final evolved bipartite
method is best understood as a pipeline that begins by reconstructing global degrees and neighbor-
degree profiles from the deck, then aggregates vertices into types (deg, profile) and derives the
corresponding type-count constraints describing how many neighbors of each opposite type each
vertex must have. It then uses two-deletion compatibility signatures to score candidate adjacencies
and solves the resulting constrained assignment problem via min-cost flow separately on each type
block. We now attempt to formalize the key invariants it exploits.
(1) Edge and degree reconstruction Let n = u + v, and write m = |E(G)|. In the matrix model,
m equals the number of ones in A. Let the deck consist of matrices C1, . . . , Cu+v with
ones-counts |Ct|1. Each edge survives deletion of any vertex except its two endpoints, hence
appears in exactly n −2 cards. Therefore
m =
1
n −2
u+v
X
t=1
|Ct|1.
For a row-deletion card corresponding to ui ∈U, we have
deg(ui) = m −|C(ui)|1,
and similarly for vj ∈V .
(2) Neighbor-degree profile reconstruction (a key lemma) For a fixed u ∈U, define the multiset
P(u) = {deg(v) : v ∈N(u)}
(with multiplicity).
The evolved algorithm reconstructs P(u) by comparing the degree multiset of V in G with
the degree multiset of V in the card G −u.
Lemma 1 (Recovering neighbor-degree profiles from one deletion). Let G = (U ⊔V, E)
be bipartite. Fix u ∈U and let G′ = G −u. Let gk be the number of vertices v ∈V with
degG(v) = k, and let ck be the number of vertices v ∈V with degG′(v) = k. Let ak be the
number of neighbors v ∈N(u) with degG(v) = k. Then for all k ≥0,
ck = gk −ak + ak+1.
Consequently, knowing the sequences (gk)k≥0 and (ck)k≥0 determines (ak)k≥0 uniquely by
downward recursion.
Proof. Deleting u decreases the degree of a vertex v ∈V by 1 iff v ∈N(u), and leaves it
unchanged otherwise. Hence, among vertices in V of degree k in G, exactly ak drop to
degree k −1 in G′. This contributes −ak to the count at degree k in G′. Meanwhile, among
degree-(k + 1) vertices in G, exactly ak+1 drop into degree k in G′, contributing +ak+1. All
other vertices retain their degree. Thus ck = gk −ak + ak+1. If degrees are bounded by ∆,
set a∆+1 = 0 and solve backwards: a∆= g∆−c∆, then a∆−1 = g∆−1 + a∆−c∆−1, etc.
□


--- Page 9 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
9
The algorithm defines a type for each vertex as
τ(u) = (deg(u), P(u)).
This typically refines degrees substantially in generic random regimes.
(3) Type-count constraints and blockwise flow Let TU be the multiset of types of U vertices and
TV the multiset of types of V vertices. From a row-deletion card G −u, one can count how
many V -vertices of each type appear in that card. By Lemma 1, the algorithm can infer
how many V -vertices of each global type must have been adjacent to u (because adjacency
shifts the neighbor’s degree and neighbor-profile in the card in a predictable way).
This yields, for each u ∈U and each type t ∈TV , a requirement number
R(u, t) = #{v ∈V : τ(v) = t, (u, v) ∈E}.
Similarly one obtains R(v, s) for v ∈V and s ∈TU.
Given these constraints, reconstruction reduces to: for each pair of types (s, t), determine
a bipartite subgraph between Us = {u : τ(u) = s} and Vt = {v : τ(v) = t} such that each
u ∈Us has exactly R(u, t) neighbors in Vt and each v ∈Vt has exactly R(v, s) neighbors
in Us. This is a feasible transportation/degree-constrained bipartite realization problem,
solvable by flow when a feasible solution exists.
(4) Two-deletion compatibility scoring To select among multiple feasible realizations, the evolved
algorithm uses a ”compatibility” score for each candidate edge (u, v) computed from two-
deletion subcards:
G −u −v
viewed from both the u-deleted and v-deleted sides. Operationally it builds multisets of
signatures of (u, v)-double-deleted cards grouped by local types, and compares intersections
(a Jaccard/F1-like overlap) under the hypotheses ”edge” vs. ”non-edge.” The resulting
confidence scores become costs in the min-cost flow. Mathematically, this is an empirical
estimator for which adjacency hypothesis makes the induced multiset of two-deletion cards
most consistent across the deck.
We state a conjecture intentionally aligned with what the harness actually tested (2-connected,
non-regular, moderately dense bipartite graphs).
Conjecture 4 (Generic bipartite reconstruction by low-order type constraints). Let G be a bipartite
graph with parts (U, V ), |U| = u, |V | = v. Assume G is 2-connected, not regular, and has minimum
degree at least 6. Then, for generic such G (e.g. under moderate-density random models conditioned
on these constraints), the deck D(G) determines G uniquely up to bipartite isomorphism, and G can
be reconstructed in polynomial time from D(G) by recovering degrees and neighbor-degree profiles
from the deck, forming types τ = (deg, P) and type-count constraints R(·, ·), and selecting the unique
feasible adjacency by maximizing consistency of two-deletion cards (equivalently, minimizing a flow
cost derived from two-deletion compatibility).
Remark 1. This conjecture is not the full reconstruction conjecture for bipartite graphs. It is an
experimentally suggested mechanism: that in high-degree, 2-connected, non-regular bipartite graphs,
low-order invariants already pin down the graph with high probability, and the remaining ambiguity
is resolved by two-deletion consistency.
3.1.2. A conditional correctness statement for the bipartite algorithm. The evolved bipartite method
will be correct under sufficiently strong uniqueness conditions, namely that types τ = (deg, P)
separate vertices well enough that the type-count constraints R(·, ·) yield a small feasible set of
realizations, and that two-deletion signatures separate the remaining ambiguity by a strict objective
gap. One can formalize this as: if the induced transportation constraints admit a unique feasible
adjacency (up to permutations within identical types), then the algorithm reconstructs it. Proving


--- Page 10 ---
10
GERGELY B´ERCZI
such uniqueness for wide graph families is nontrivial but may be approachable for random bipartite
graphs (via concentration and collision bounds for degree/profile signatures).
3.2. Planar graph reconstruction. The planar experiments targeted graphs G that are planar,
connected and 2-connected (biconnected), have minimum degree δ(G) ≥3, and are not maximal
planar (so m < 3n −6 for n ≥3). For background on reconstruction and recognizability questions
in planar regimes, see [9, 6].
3.2.1. The evaluation harness. Early planar harnesses compared cards by Weisfeiler-Lehman hashing,
which is isomorphism-invariant but not complete (hash collisions possible). This creates the risk that
an evolved algorithm merely learns the evaluator’s equivalence relation. Accordingly, the harness
was hardened by scrambling each card by an independent random vertex permutation, by comparing
reconstructed decks to target decks via exact isomorphism or canonical-labeling equality, and by
evaluating each underlying graph under multiple independent scrambles and taking the worst-case
score.
The final planar harness constructed a bucketed test set (roughly 40% generic and 60% tar-
geted hard buckets), plus a persistent buffer of any failed instances for hard-negative mining.
Graphs were generated by first building an Apollonian triangulation (a maximal planar graph) via
iterative face subdivision and then deleting edges while maintaining planarity, biconnectedness,
and δ ≥3, with an explicit enforcement of non-maximality. The harness sampled across sizes
n ∈{12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26} and evaluated each instance under S = 5 independent scrambles,
taking worst-case performance.
3.2.2. The scoring system. The planar reconstruction harness follows the same mathematical
template as in §3, but the need for speed forced an explicit staging of the evaluator.
For a target planar graph G on n vertices and a proposed reconstruction bG, the fundamental
quantity is the deck-agreement score
sdeck( bG) ∈[0, 1],
which measures how well the multiset D( bG) matches the target deck D(G). In early experiments,
the harness compared cards using fast isomorphism-invariant surrogates (such as Weisfeiler-Lehman
hashes), which makes sdeck cheap but not logically complete. In later experiments, once evaluator-
exploitation became a realistic failure mode, the harness was hardened by switching to exact deck
equality up to isomorphism, at least on the smaller buckets of the test set. Throughout, robustness
to labeling was enforced by evaluating several independent scrambles of the same underlying instance
and taking the worst-case score across scrambles.
As in the bipartite setting, we supplemented sdeck with cheaper global diagnostics (degree data,
edge count, and small subgraph counts) to avoid a completely flat score landscape before any perfect
reconstructions appear. These auxiliary terms were kept subordinate to the deck term so that
improving the score could not systematically move a candidate away from true reconstruction.
Finally, the bucketed test-set design (see below) and hard-negative mining ensured that improvements
reflected genuine generalization across structurally distinct planar graphs rather than specialization
to a single easy regime.
3.2.3. Results. A striking outcome was that AlphaEvolve quickly found very simple exact-verification
algorithms that achieved perfect reconstruction on the hardened test set. A representative evolved
method proceeds by using Kelly-style counting to reconstruct m = |E(G)| and then computing
degrees from the cards via deg(v) = m −|E(G −v)|. Let δ = minv deg(v) and choose a card G −v⋆
with deg(v⋆) = δ. It then enumerates candidate neighbor sets S ⊆V (G −v⋆) of size δ such that
adding v⋆adjacent to S yields the correct global degree multiset. Add an additional filter using


--- Page 11 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
11
triangle counts, reconstructible via
T(G) =
1
n −3
X
v
T(G −v),
and noting that new triangles created by adding v⋆equal the number of edges induced by S. For
each candidate, build bG and accept it if D( bG) = D(G) under exact deck equality.
The key structural reason this is fast for planar graphs is Euler’s bound: every planar graph has
a vertex of degree at most 5, so δ ≤5 in the connected planar regime. Hence the neighborhood
enumeration step is O(n5) in the worst case and is typically far smaller in practice.
With the hardened planar harness, the user reports perfect reconstruction in about an hour of
evolution:
successful reconstructions = 896/896,
worst-of-5-scrambles deck score = 1.00 globally.
In a stronger, ”tricky planar set” variant, AlphaEvolve again found a perfect exact-verification
algorithm in minutes. A conjecture suggested by the planar experiments is the following.
Conjecture 5 (Biconnected planar δ ≥3 non-maximal reconstruction by bounded-degree search).
Let G be a planar biconnected graph with δ(G) ≥3 that is not maximal planar.
Then G is
reconstructible from its deck. Moreover, there exists a reconstruction algorithm that recovers m and
the degree multiset from the deck, selects a minimum-degree vertex v (with deg(v) ≤5 by planarity),
identifies a small set of candidate neighborhoods for v in some card G −v using degree and triangle
constraints, and verifies the correct candidate by exact deck equality, running in time polynomial in
n (with dependence dominated by O(n5) neighborhood search and deck isomorphism checks).
Remark 2. The literature on reconstruction in planar regimes is extensive, and the experiments
here should be read as computational probes rather than as substitutes for structural theory. For
discussion of reconstructibility and recognizability questions within planar graph classes, see [9] and
the general survey [6].
3.2.4. A bounded-degree reconstruction route for planar graphs. For planar graphs, Conjecture 5 is
plausible because there always exists a vertex v with deg(v) ≤5, the degree multiset constraints
drastically restrict candidate neighborhoods of v in G−v, triangle counts and higher small-subgraph
counts add further restrictions, and exact deck equality provides a definitive verification step.
A proof strategy would require showing that for every G in the target class, there exists at least
one vertex v such that its neighborhood in some card is uniquely identifiable by reconstructible
invariants of bounded order, or at least that the number of consistent candidates is always bounded
by a polynomial so that exact verification yields a polynomial-time reconstruction procedure.
4. The Alon-Tarsi conjecture
The Alon-Tarsi conjecture asserts that for even order n the signed enumeration of Latin squares is
nonzero, equivalently that En −On ̸= 0 where En and On denote the numbers of even and odd Latin
squares under the standard Alon-Tarsi sign convention. A classical approach to such statements is
to construct a sign-reversing involution on most Latin squares, leaving a residual set whose signed
sum can be analyzed. Our experiments follow this philosophy: the evolvable code block specifies a
deterministic map F : Ln →Ln, and the harness scores F by how well it behaves like a canonical
sign-reversing involution.
Across all experiments, validity of Latin squares and involutions are treated as hard constraints,
checked by the harness. Given a test set Tn ⊆Ln, the harness checks that F(L) ∈Ln for every
L ∈Tn and that F(F(L)) = L; candidates failing these conditions receive negligible fitness. Among
valid involutions, the primary objective is the sign-flip rate
pflip(F) :=
1
|Tn|
X
L∈Tn
1

sgn(F(L)) = −sgn(L)

,


--- Page 12 ---
12
GERGELY B´ERCZI
together with the non-identity rate (to discourage the trivial fixed-point map). To align the search
with the involution philosophy, the harness also tracks the residual set
Res(F) := {L ∈Tn : sgn(F(L)) = sgn(L)} ∪{L ∈Tn : F fails a hard constraint on L},
and computes a residual bias statistic b(F) =
1
|Res(F)|
P
L∈Res(F) sgn(L) (reported as b(F)2). A
residual bias close to 1 indicates that the unpaired objects are overwhelmingly of a single sign, which
is precisely the signature one would hope to prove in a residual-set approach.
Although it is conceptually cleaner to think of (pflip, q, b2, . . . ) as a multi-criterion report, AlphaE-
volve ultimately needs a scalar value to decide whether a code modification is better. In practice
the harness uses a tiered (effectively lexicographic) scalarization: hard-constraint violations are
assigned a very low score, so that any candidate that is not a well-defined involution on the test set
is immediately dominated. Among valid involutions, the dominant contribution comes from pflip,
with secondary terms (nontriviality, residual bias, locality, and symmetry robustness, depending
on the experiment) used only for tie-breaking and for gently shaping the landscape. This design
choice is important for mathematical interpretability: improving the score can be read as improving
a specific quantitative feature of an otherwise well-formed combinatorial map.
Experiment 2 adds an explicit locality term in order to prefer proof-shaped involutions built from
small trades. Writing supp(F; L) for the number of cells modified by F on L, the harness defines a
quality score
q(F) :=
1
|T succ
n
|
X
L∈T succ
n
exp

−supp(F; L)
2n

,
where T succ
n
denotes the subset on which F is valid, involutive, and sign-flipping.
Experiment 3 adds a decisive anti-overfitting stress test: before applying F, each input L is
conjugated by a deterministic pseudorandom isotopy (permutations of rows, columns, and symbols).
For even n the Alon-Tarsi sign is invariant under isotopy, so this preserves the true value of the
sign-flip condition while destroying any reliance on fixed coordinates. In effect, the scoring protocol
forces AlphaEvolve to discover selection rules that are canonical under the full isotopy group.
4.1. Experiment 1: evolving a nontrivial sign-flipping involution with biased residual set.
Experiment 1 evaluated candidate maps F on precomputed test sets for orders n ∈{8, 10, 12, 14, 26}
(with runtime sanitization to reject malformed outputs). AlphaEvolve found a near-perfect sign-
flipping involution: the residual bias squared equaled 1 in all tested orders, meaning the residual set
(though small) was completely one-sided in sign on the test data.
4.1.1. Results and analysis. The evolved code constructs many candidate two-line trades (on row
pairs and column pairs) and applies the first trade that is stable under a canonical-order check.
The core primitive is a two-line cycle trade. It proceeds by choosing a pair of rows (or columns),
forming the induced permutation on indices obtained by matching equal symbols between the two
lines, decomposing this permutation into cycles, and then swapping the two lines exactly on the
positions belonging to a selected cycle (or union of cycles). An odd cycle yields a sign-flipping trade,
whereas an even cycle yields a sign-preserving trade.
The algorithm also introduced a rare sign-preserving ”sabotage” option (even-cycle trades accepted
by a deterministic hash filter), and a sign-preserving fallback (symbol swap 0 ↔1 for certain n, or
a row-symbol conjugation for others).
The reported metrics were:
Additionally, the harness printed residual samples showing |Res| extremely small (1 or 2) and
entirely even for n = 8, 10, 14, 26 and entirely odd for n = 12 on the test sets.
|Res8| = 1,
|Res10| = 1,
|Res12| = 2,
|Res14| = 1,
|Res26| = 1,


--- Page 13 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
13
n = 8
n = 10
n = 12
n = 14
n = 26
Validity rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Involution rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Sign-flip rate
0.98
0.90
0.89
0.89
0.75
Residual bias2
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Table 1. Experiment 1: summary of the reported per-n metrics.
and moreover all residual squares had the same sign within each order: sgn(L) = +1 for L ∈
Res8 ∪Res10 ∪Res14 ∪Res26, while sgn(L) = −1 for all L ∈Res12.
On the tested data, the evolved map behaves like a sign-reversing involution on almost all inputs;
the failures form a tiny residual set, but with maximal sign bias. This is exactly the involution
philosophy: a perfect sign-reversing involution would force En−On = 0, while a partial sign-reversing
involution leaves a residual sum equal to En −On restricted to the residual. Experiment 1 suggests
that a carefully chosen canonical cycle trade can pair most squares, while the leftover squares may
be forced into a single sign class.
4.1.2. Mathematical reformulation of the evolved algorithm. The evolved map searches for a two-line
Latin trade supported on cycles of a naturally associated permutation, and applies the first “stable”
trade found in a fixed scan order. We describe the row version; the column version is obtained by
transposing the roles of rows and columns.
Definition 2 (Row-matching permutation). Let L be a Latin square of order n, and fix two distinct
rows r1 ̸= r2. Define a permutation π = πr1,r2 ∈Sn of the column set {0, 1, . . . , n −1} by the rule:
for each column c, the value π(c) is the unique column c′ such that
Lr2,c′ = Lr1,c.
Equivalently, π sends c to the location in row r2 of the symbol appearing in row r1 at column c.
Definition 3 (Cycle trade on a row pair). Let C ⊆{0, 1, . . . , n −1} be a union of cycles of πr1,r2.
Define Tr1,r2,C(L) to be the array obtained by swapping the entries of rows r1 and r2 in exactly the
columns in C, leaving all other entries unchanged.
Lemma 2 (Validity and involution). If C is a union of cycles of πr1,r2, then Tr1,r2,C(L) is again a
Latin square. Moreover Tr1,r2,C is an involution:
Tr1,r2,C
 Tr1,r2,C(L)

= L.
Lemma 3 (Effect on the Alon-Tarsi sign for a single cycle). Assume C is a single cycle of πr1,r2 of
length ℓ. Then
sgn
 Tr1,r2,C(L)

= (−1)ℓsgn(L).
In particular, an odd cycle produces a sign flip, while an even cycle preserves the sign.
Proof. In each affected column c ∈C, the trade swaps the two entries in that column lying in rows
r1 and r2; this is a transposition in the column permutation and hence flips the sign of that column.
Thus the product of the column signs acquires the factor (−1)|C| = (−1)ℓ.
On the other hand, restricting to a single ℓ-cycle of πr1,r2, the operation replaces the r1-row
entries on C by the corresponding r2-row entries, which permutes the symbols on those ℓpositions
by an ℓ-cycle; this changes the sign of row r1 by (−1)ℓ−1, and similarly changes the sign of row r2
by (−1)ℓ−1. The product of row signs therefore acquires the factor (−1)2(ℓ−1) = +1. Multiplying
row and column contributions gives the stated formula.
□


--- Page 14 ---
14
GERGELY B´ERCZI
The evolved map fixes a finite deterministic sequence S of candidate two-line trades. Each element
of S specifies (i) whether to work in row mode or column mode, (ii) a pair of line indices, and (iii) a
selection rule for the support C: either the flip rule (choose the lexicographically first odd cycle
of π, and optionally adjoin the first even cycle), or the sabotage rule (choose the first even cycle,
but accept it only under a deterministic rarity filter, producing sign-preserving moves on a small
subfamily). In the implementation, S is generated using a pseudorandom number generator with
fixed seed, hence is deterministic.
Given L, the algorithm scans S in order and, whenever the specified rule produces a valid cycle
trade, forms the tentative output L′ = T(L). It accepts L′ only if it is stable with respect to the
scan order, meaning that no earlier candidate trade from S becomes available when tested on the
tentative output L′. If a stable trade is found, it is returned.
If no stable trade is found, the algorithm applies a fixed fallback involution depending on n: when
n/2 is odd it swaps the symbols 0 ↔1 (a sign-preserving involution for even n > 1), while when
n/2 is even it applies row-symbol conjugation (the S3-conjugate obtained by exchanging the column
and symbol coordinates).
Conjecture 6 (Residual-bias involution principle suggested by Experiment 1). For each even n,
there exists a deterministic scan order Sn of two-line cycle trades together with a deterministic
stability rule of the above no earlier trade becomes available type, such that the induced map
Fn : Ln →Ln is an involution and satisfies
sgn(Fn(L)) = −sgn(L)
for all L ∈Ln \ Resn,
where the residual set Resn is nonempty and has nonzero signed sum, for instance P
L∈Resn sgn(L) =
±|Resn|. In particular, P
L∈Ln sgn(L) ̸= 0, which would imply the Alon-Tarsi conjecture at order n.
4.2. Experiment 2. Experiment 2 strengthened the evaluation protocol in two directions: it
increased the size and adversarial nature of the test data (100 examples per fro each n for n ∈
{8, 10, 12, 14, 26}), and it refined the score to prefer local, analyzable trades.
4.2.1. Harness summary. A trial on an input L is counted as a success only if the candidate map is
valid on L, involutive on L (including non-identity), and flips sign on L. Beyond the binary success
indicator, the harness also computes a quality score that rewards locality. Writing support(F; L)
for the Hamming support size (the number of cells changed by the map on L), the per-instance
quality is
q(L) = exp

−support(F; L)
2n

,
and the reported quality is the average of q(L) over successful instances. The choice of an exponential
decay makes the score sensitive to multiplicative improvements in support size and naturally keeps
q(L) ∈(0, 1], while the 2n scaling reflects the fact that the simplest two-line trades have supports
proportional to n. In effect, the fitness function promotes ”proof-shaped” involutions that act by
small canonical trades rather than by large global rearrangements.
4.2.2. Results and analysis. The evolved algorithm generalizes the cycle-trade idea in three ways. It
searches not only row-pairs but also column-pairs and symbol-pairs (a conjugate view in which one
swaps symbols in selected columns by looking at where symbols occur). It tries several deterministic
pairing families (adjacent pairs, half-shifted pairs, pairs from a 1-factorization, and exhaustive
all-pairs). It chooses the smallest odd cycle available among the pairs considered at a given stage,
to bias toward local modifications.
Reported metrics:
The near-perfect success for n ≥10 and perfect success for n = 26 on this dataset strongly
suggests that odd-cycle trades are ubiquitous once one searches across conjugate views and pairing
families. The dip at n = 8 indicates either (i) genuine absence of an odd-cycle trade in the searched


--- Page 15 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
15
n = 8
n = 10
n = 12
n = 14
n = 26
Validity rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Success rate
0.85
0.98
0.98
0.97
1.00
Quality (avg)
0.69
0.73
0.77
0.80
0.89
Table 2. Experiment 2: reported success and locality (quality) by order.
families for some inputs, or (ii) a determinism/involution interaction where applying a trade creates
an earlier trade and breaks F(F(L)) = L in a minority of cases. The quality score increasing with n
is consistent with the existence of relatively small supports (on a 2n scale) among successful trades.
4.2.3. Mathematical reformulation of the evolved algorithm. Let L be a Latin square of order n.
The algorithm operates in three conjugate line families:
• Row view. Lines are rows r ∈[n]; a trade swaps two rows on a selected set of columns.
• Column view. Lines are columns c ∈[n]; a trade swaps two columns on a selected set of
rows.
• Symbol view. Lines are symbols s ∈[n]; in each column c, each symbol occurs in a unique
row. Swapping symbols s1, s2 in a chosen set of columns means swapping their positions
within those columns.
In each view, for a chosen pair of lines (ℓ1, ℓ2) one defines the induced permutation on the
complementary index set (columns for the row and symbol views; rows for the column view),
decomposes it into cycles, and observes that any odd cycle yields a sign-flipping two-line trade. The
algorithm found by AlphaEvolve can be describes as follows.
Fix an order of conjugate types (rows, columns, symbols) and an order of pairing strategies
(adjacent, half-shifted, 1-factorization, exhaustive). For each conjugate type in that order, and for
each pairing strategy in that order: enumerate candidate pairs (ℓ1, ℓ2) in the strategy’s canonical
order; for each pair, compute the induced permutation and list its odd cycles. Among all odd cycles
found, choose one minimizing cycle length, breaking ties deterministically by the pair’s ordinal
position and then by lexicographic cycle data. Apply the corresponding cycle trade and return. If
no odd cycle is found in any view, apply a fixed fallback involution (in the evolved code: swap rows
0 and 1).
Experiment 2 suggests the following conjecture.
Conjecture 7. Fix even n. Every Latin square L ∈Ln admits an odd-cycle two-line trade in at
least one of the three conjugate views (row, column, symbol). Moreover, such a trade can always be
found among pairs belonging to a fixed canonical 1-factorization of the n lines in that view.
A proof of this conjecture, together with a stability/canonicalization argument ensuring involutivity
under repeated application, would provide a direct path to a sign-reversing involution on a large
subset of Ln.
4.3. Experiment 3: a stabilized deterministic sign-flipping involution. Experiment 3
introduced a decisive stress test: before the evolved map F was applied, each input Latin square L
was transformed by a deterministic but pseudorandom isotopy: a permutation of rows, columns,
and symbols. For even n, the Alon-Tarsi sign is invariant under isotopy, so this does not change the
truth of sgn(F(L)) = −sgn(L) but prevents any method that relies on memorizing specific instances
or rigid coordinate positions.
The reported metrics were the validity rate, the involution rate, the sign-flip rate, and the
non-identity rate.


--- Page 16 ---
16
GERGELY B´ERCZI
4.3.1. Results and analysis. The evolved algorithm is substantially more proof-shaped than the
earlier ones. It combines a tiered search for trades (starting with disjoint adjacent row pairs, then
adjacent column pairs, then a global exhaustive search), with a robust canonical cycle representative
that is stabilized under reversal and rotation so that the same cycle is selected after applying the
trade. It also enforces a stability predicate rejecting trades whose application would create the
selection rule changes on the second application failure mode, and it adds a further canonical isotopy
layer: if no stable trade exists in the current coordinates, the algorithm applies a deterministic
pseudorandom isotopy and searches again, but only when no simpler tier would have worked on the
resulting square. This is an explicit realization of the paradigm
F(L) = P −1 ◦T ◦P(L),
with P chosen canonically and with stability checks engineered so that the same P is chosen for L
and F(L).
Reported metrics:
n = 8
n = 10
n = 12
n = 14
n = 26
Validity rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Involution rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Non-identity rate
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Flip rate
0.98
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
Table 3. Experiment 3: reported per-n metrics under isotopy randomization.
The evolved map is always valid, always an involution, always nontrivial, and flips sign essentially
always on the dataset (perfect for n ≥10 and 98% for n = 8).
This is a good evidence that the stabilized odd-cycle trade and canonical isotopy framework is
close to a genuine combinatorial involution.
4.3.2. Mathematical reformulation of the evolved algorithm. We extract the mathematical skeleton.
Step A: stable trade selector T(L). Define T(L) to be the result of applying the first available
odd-cycle trade in the priority list: One first searches adjacent disjoint row pairs (0, 1), (2, 3), . . .
for the lexicographically smallest stabilized odd cycle. If none is available, one searches adjacent
disjoint column pairs (0, 1), (2, 3), . . . with the further restriction that the chosen trade does not
create a tier-1 row-pair trade after application. Otherwise, among all row-pair and column-pair
odd-cycle trades, one selects the minimal trade key (cycle length, stabilized cycle data, indices, and
mode) but accepts it only if (i) the output is stable (admits the same trade on reapplication) and
(ii) no strictly smaller trade key would become stable after application.
If no such stable trade exists, declare T(L) undefined.
Step B: canonical isotopy layer. Let P1 be the set of row transpositions (r1r2) in lexicographic order,
and P2 the set of column transpositions (c1c2) in lexicographic order. Define F(L) by: We define
F(L) by a deterministic cascade. If T(L) is defined, set F(L) = T(L). Else, find the first P ∈P1
such that T(P(L)) is defined; let L′ := P −1(T(P(L))) and accept it only if T(L′) is undefined (no
simpler tier-0 solution). If accepted, set F(L) = L′. Else, find the first P ∈P2 such that T(P(L)) is
defined; let L′ := P −1(T(P(L))) and accept it only if neither T(L′) nor any row-transposition tier
yields a solution. If accepted, set F(L) = L′. Else, apply a fixed fallback involution (the evolved
code uses a symbol transposition).
By construction, each accepted move is an involutive trade conjugated by an involutive isotopy,
so it is involutive provided the selection is stable under reapplication. The extensive stability checks
are precisely what enforces this.
A conjecture suggested by Experiment 3 is the following.


--- Page 17 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
17
Conjecture 8 (Stable odd-cycle trade conjecture with bounded isotopy depth). Fix even n. For
every Latin square L ∈Ln, there exists a stable odd-cycle two-line trade in L or in a conjugate P(L)
where P is a single transposition of two rows or two columns, such that the stabilized canonical
selection rule chooses the same (P, trade) for L and for F(L). Consequently, the resulting map
F : Ln →Ln is a sign-reversing involution on all of Ln except possibly a residual set Resn handled
by a final canonical rule; moreover P
L∈Resn sgn(L) ̸= 0.
This conjecture is a concrete, algorithmically precise strengthening of the residual-bias involution
idea. If established, it would yield a constructive proof strategy for the Alon-Tarsi conjecture.
5. Rota’s Basis Conjecture
Rota’s Basis Conjecture (RBC) asks whether n disjoint bases of a rank-n matroid can always be
rearranged into an n × n grid whose columns are also bases. The experiments in this part restrict
to linear matroids over F2 and aim to construct n disjoint transversal bases by a sequence of local
moves. The evolvable block in these experiments is not a direct output construction but a policy for
a greedy local-exchange engine: at each step, given the current partially filled grid, the policy scores
all legal insert and repair moves and the engine executes a move of maximal score.
The evaluation harness converts the qualitative goal ”find a full transversal-basis grid” into
a scalar fitness that both rewards success and shapes the intermediate dynamics. For a rollout
producing a trajectory (At)T
t=0 of assignment matrices, the primary term is the success indicator
1[all columns are full bases at termination]. To avoid sparse all-or-nothing feedback, the harness
also tracks progress and damage: it rewards completing full columns, penalizes breaking a column
that was already full, penalizes the use of explicit repair moves, and grants partial credit for the
number of valid (independent) columns at the end of the rollout. A small time penalty proportional to
the number of steps discourages policies that solve instances only by wandering for long trajectories.
The concrete fitness scalar in the experiments below has the form displayed in Experiment A, with
fixed weights chosen so that success dominates all secondary terms.
Robustness is enforced by evaluating each instance under multiple randomized rollouts and
aggregating by majority vote, and by sampling both generic and deliberately structured trap
instances from circuit-rich pools.
5.1. Common formalism. Fix n ≥2. We work in a linear matroid over F2 of rank n with n given
bases.
Definition 4 (State as an assignment matrix). Let B1, . . . , Bn be bases, where Bi = {vi,1, . . . , vi,n}
(elements are distinguished by their row-index even if vectors coincide). A state is an n × n matrix
A = (Aij) with entries in {−1, 1, . . . , n} such that, for each row i, the non-−1 entries are all distinct.
The column set is
Tj(A) = {vi,Aij : Aij ̸= −1}.
Column j is valid if Tj(A) is independent, and full if it is valid and |Tj(A)| = n.
Definition 5 (Deficit and duplicates). For a column set T ⊆Fn
2, define its rank deficit
def(T) = |T| −rank(T) ∈{0, 1, . . . }.
Define dup(T) as the number of repeated vector values in T (parallel elements), i.e. the number of
elements whose value has already appeared earlier in the list representation. Both quantities are 0 if
T is a partial independent set with distinct vectors.
Definition 6 (Moves). Two move types are used.
• Insert: choose an empty slot (i, j) with Aij = −1 and an unused index k in row i; set
Aij ←k.


--- Page 18 ---
18
GERGELY B´ERCZI
• Repair (row-swap exchange): choose a dependent source column js, a target column jt ̸= js,
and a row i with Aijs ̸= −1; swap row-i assignments between the two columns:
(Aijs, Aijt) ←(Aijt, Aijs).
In the experiments, repair moves are only proposed for rows i corresponding to elements of a circuit
returned by the oracle on Tjs(A).
When a column is dependent, a circuit oracle returns a minimal dependent subset C ⊆Tj(A)
and the circuit size |C|. In the fixed-rank experiments (n = 5, 7) the oracle brute-forces minimal
dependent subsets among ≤n vectors; in the variable-rank benchmark, the oracle searches only
for small circuits of size 2, 3, 4 (for speed) and otherwise returns the entire dependent set, so the
reported circuit size may be an upper bound rather than minimal.
A policy is a scoring function S mapping move features to a real score. At each step, the
engine enumerates legal moves, computes post-move features, evaluates S, and applies a move with
maximum score (ties broken arbitrarily). Some policies add small random noise to the score, making
the algorithm a randomized greedy procedure.
5.2. Experiment A: Rank 5 circuit-rich pool benchmark.
5.2.1. Evaluation harness and instance distribution. This benchmark sets n = 5 and works over F2.
The instance distribution is intentionally circuit rich: each basis is sampled from a small pool with
many short dependencies.
A pool P ⊂F5
2 \ {0} is generated from a basis b1, . . . , b5 by adding structured sums:
P = {bi}5
i=1 ∪{bi + bi+1}4
i=1 ∪{bi + bi+2}3
i=1,
deduplicated and padded if necessary to reach size 12.
Two variants appear in the user’s experiments:
(1) Fixed pool: bi = ei is the standard basis, producing a fixed 12-vector pool.
(2) Randomized pool: bi are columns of a random invertible 5 × 5 matrix over F2, i.e. a random
element of GL(5, 2), producing a fresh pool per instance seed.
A generic instance samples each row basis Bi as a random independent 5-subset of P. A structured
trap instance first samples a dependent 5-set D ⊂P, then biases each row basis to contain a forced
element from D while maintaining row-independence.
The rollout fitness has the form
fit = 1[success] + βfull −γbreak −δrepair + ε#valid columns at end
n
−α
steps
step limit,
with (α, β, γ, δ, ε) = (0.10, 0.06, 0.12, 0.02, 0.03).
The individual terms were chosen so that the score reads naturally to a combinatorialist. The
indicator 1[success] is the true objective: producing n disjoint transversal bases. The auxiliary
count cfull rewards reaching a state in which many columns are already valid transversal bases,
even if the final few columns still fail. The counters cbreak and crepair penalize thrashing behaviour
(destroying a good column and repeatedly attempting repairs without net progress), and the final
normalized valid columns term provides a smooth gradient when success is rare. Finally, the step
penalty discourages policies that succeed only by wandering for a long time. The robust evaluation
over several random seeds is a practical way to suppress brittle policies that exploit accidental
ordering effects in the rollout.
In the robust variant, each instance is evaluated over three rollouts with different RNG seeds and
counted successful if at least two succeed.


--- Page 19 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
19
Table 4. Experiment A (rank 5) harness parameters.
Parameter
Value
Rank n
5
Pool size
12
Step limit
200 (robust variant)
Instances
200
Rollouts/instance
3 (majority success)
Fitness weights (α, β, γ, δ, ε)
(0.10, 0.06, 0.12, 0.02, 0.03)
5.2.2. Results and analysis. We have run two experiments, each for rank 5, with multiple iteration.
In the first experiment we worked with a fixed pool (ID 0 9751). We achieved average score
≈1.06, with fitness generic ≈1.11 and fitness structured ≈1.07, and overall success rate 1.00.
In the second experiment we worked with randomized pools with hold-out seeds (ID 0 9774).
Here we found fitness generic ≈1.0810, fitness structured ≈1.0481, overall success rate 1.00 (under
majority-vote over three rollouts).
The randomized-pool, multi-rollout evaluation is a substantial robustness check: it disrupts
any policy that relies on fixed coordinate artifacts, and it penalizes policies that succeed only
with low probability due to score noise. The slight drop in mean fitness between fixed-pool and
randomized-pool runs is consistent with a harder generalization setting: the policy still solves all
instances but may require more repairs/steps when the pool is resampled.
5.2.3. Mathematical algorithm extracted from the evolved policy. Let Policy5 denote the evolved
rank-5 scoring rule (Appendix C.1). At a high level, it implements a lexicographically weighted
objective: At a high level, it implements a lexicographically weighted objective. It begins with
hard vetoes, forbidding inserts that reduce the number of valid columns or that break a full column.
Subject to these vetoes it adds strong progress incentives, heavily rewarding moves that increase
the number of valid columns and especially moves that complete a full column. When a dependent
column exists, it activates trap-resolution logic that uses circuit information and deficit/duplicate
counts to prioritize repairs, strongly penalizing moves that leave small circuits unresolved. Finally,
it uses controlled noise only in late stages or when trapped, to help escape local optima without
sacrificing determinism on easy instances.
Algorithm 1 Greedy local-exchange construction (as used in all experiments)
1: Initialize assignment matrix A ←−1.
2: for t = 1 to step limit do
3:
if #{full columns} = n then
4:
return success
5:
end if
6:
Enumerate legal insert moves and legal repair moves.
7:
for all legal moves m do
8:
Compute post-move features ϕ(A, m).
9:
Score s(m) ←S(ϕ(A, m)).
10:
end for
11:
Choose m⋆∈arg maxm s(m) and apply m⋆to A.
12: end for
13: return failure


--- Page 20 ---
20
GERGELY B´ERCZI
Conjecture 9 (Rank-5 toy RBC for circuit-rich pools). On the rank-5 circuit-rich instance class
generated from the pool template above (including trap instances, and including arbitrary conjugation
by GL(5, 2)), the de-randomized version of Policy5 succeeds: Algorithm 1 terminates with five full
columns (five disjoint transversal bases).
5.3. Experiment B: Rank 7 circuit-rich pool benchmark.
5.3.1. Evaluation harness. This experiment sets n = 7 and uses an analogous pool template
in GF(2)7, producing a pool of size about 2n + 2 = 16.
The evaluation uses MAX STEPS =
350, NUM INSTANCES = 100, and ROLLOUTS PER INSTANCE = 3, with the same fitness weights
(0.10, 0.06, 0.12, 0.02, 0.03).
Table 5. Experiment B (rank 7) harness parameters.
Parameter
Value
Rank n
7
Pool size
≈16
Step limit
350
Instances
100
Rollouts/instance
3
Fitness weights (α, β, γ, δ, ε)
(0.10, 0.06, 0.12, 0.02, 0.03)
5.3.2. Reported results and analysis (ID 0 7176). Reported metrics:
fitness generic ≈1.05,
fitness structured ≈0.88,
overall success rate = 1.00,
average score ≈0.98.
Interpretation. The policy solves all tested instances, but structured fitness drops, suggesting
that trap instances at rank 7 require more repairs, more temporary validity breaks, and/or more
steps. This is plausible given that: (i) each column has more possible near-dependencies, and (ii)
each repair move potentially propagates a constraint across two columns.
5.3.3. Mathematical algorithm extracted from the evolved rank-7 policy. The rank-7 policy (Appen-
dix C.2) retains the same core structure but replaces explicit circuit-tiering by an adaptive critical
threshold τ depending on progress and a ”desperation” indicator. It also introduces two nonstandard
exploration devices: (i) additive score noise in late game, and (ii) a deterministic ”state signature”
congruence bias (”numerology”) to perturb tie-breaking in mid-to-late stages. Mathematically, these
are best viewed as randomized/biased tie-breaking mechanisms in the greedy step.
Explicit score decomposition. Introduce the shorthand variables (computed from features)
U = 1 + 5.8
full
7
2.5
,
T = 1 + 4.0
full
7
2.2
,
and the critical circuit threshold
τ = 3 + 1[full ≥4] + 1[full ≥6] + 1[desperate endgame].
Let c be the (oracle-provided) circuit size after the move, and let crit = 1[c > 0 and c ≤τ]. The
policy assigns −∞to any insert that breaks a full column or creates a critical trap. Otherwise,
it builds an additive score in several pieces. It begins with a large progress term 120,000 · ∆valid
(scaled up in the endgame). It then adds move-specific rewards/penalties (notably +300,000 if a
repair eliminates a trap, and large penalties if a repair leaves a critical trap). It includes a quality
penalty of the form
Squality = T ·
 2000def(Ttarget) + 1500def(Tsource) + 3500dup(Ttarget)

,


--- Page 21 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
21
.
Finally, it adds exploration perturbations (late-game noise, and a deterministic congruence
signature bonus/penalty).
Finally, the entire score is multiplied by U (favoring decisive moves in late progress states).
Conjecture 10 (Rank-7 toy RBC and de-randomization). On the rank-7 circuit-rich instance
class generated from the pool template above (including trap instances and GL(7, 2) conjugation),
the evolved policy succeeds with probability 1 over its internal randomness. Moreover, there exists
a deterministic de-randomization (removing noise and replacing the state-signature heuristic by
deterministic tie-breaking) that succeeds on the same class.
5.4. Experiment C: Variable rank benchmark (ranks 5-13).
5.4.1. Evaluation harness. This benchmark mixes ranks n ∈{5, 7, 9, 11, 13}. For each instance, a
pool of size ⌈2.2n⌉is created by the same recipe (basis vectors and low-complexity sums), then
n row-bases are sampled (generic vs. trap). The step limit is step limit = 20n. The evaluator
uses NUM INSTANCES = 60 and ROLLOUTS PER INSTANCE = 1. The penalty for breaking validity is
increased to γ = 0.20 in this benchmark.
Table 6. Experiment C (variable rank) harness parameters.
Parameter
Value
Ranks
{5, 7, 9, 11, 13}
Pool size
⌈2.2n⌉
Step limit
20n
Instances
60
Rollouts/instance
1
Fitness weights (α, β, γ, δ, ε)
(0.10, 0.06, 0.20, 0.02, 0.03)
The final metrics are:
fitness generic ≈0.87,
fitness structured ≈0.81,
overall success rate = 1.00,
average score ≈0.89.
Relative fitness decreases compared to fixed-rank experiments because: (i) one policy must
generalize across five ranks, (ii) the step budget is tight (20n), and (iii) break-valid events are more
heavily penalized (γ = 0.20).
5.4.2. Mathematical algorithm extracted from the evolved scale-aware policy. The variable-rank policy
(Appendix C.3) defines scale-dependent quantities: trap energy E(C) ∝1/(|C| −1) (higher for
smaller circuits); pressure P increasing with progress and ”columns remaining”, with an exponential
endgame component; barrier porosity for breaking full columns during repairs inside deep traps;
and a singularity avoidance penalty discouraging moves that create high deficit and high duplicates
in the presence of a circuit.
Conceptually, these define a piecewise potential function that trades off (a) making columns full,
(b) keeping columns independent, and (c) reducing structural degeneracy, while allowing carefully
controlled sacrifices when doing so sharply decreases trap complexity.
Explicit scaling definitions. Let n = rank, ρ = progress ratio = full/n, and s = n/5. Let c be the
(oracle-provided) circuit size after the candidate move. Define the trap energy
E(c) =





0,
c = 0,
20
max(c, 1.5) −1s,
c > 0,
I = min

1, E(c)
10s

.
A ”pressure” parameter P ≥1 is computed from ρ and the number of columns remaining n −full,
with a linear mid-game ramp and an exponential endgame surge (see code in Appendix C.3). The


--- Page 22 ---
22
GERGELY B´ERCZI
policy then defines a precision multiplier Π scaling penalties on deficits and duplicates, increasing
with P and with ρ, a barrier B for breaking a full column, B ≈100,000s but made porous (reduced)
during repairs in high trap intensity states when the post-move structure improves, and a singularity
penalty activated when a move creates simultaneously positive deficit, positive duplicates, and a
circuit.
Insert moves are vetoed if they break a full column or decrease validity. Repairs receive a
dominant reward when they remove a circuit (c = 0) and are penalized otherwise by an amount
proportional to E(c) and P. A small adaptive noise term of magnitude ≈3500s is added, increasing
with trap/stagnation and decreasing with pressure.
Conjecture 11 (Scale-invariant toy RBC on circuit-rich pools). For n ∈{5, 7, 9, 11, 13} and
instances generated as above with pool size ⌈2.2n⌉, the evolved scale-aware policy succeeds within
O(n2) steps. More ambitiously, there exists a constant c > 2 such that for all n ≥5, on pool size
⌈cn⌉generated by the same recipe, a deterministic de-randomization of the policy succeeds.
Appendix A. Graph reconstruction
A.1. Bipartite graph reconstruction.
A.1.1. AI summary of the experiment. We present the Gemini-generated summary of the experiment
first, which we find very informative and useful. It provides hints and insights about the attempted
methods and their evolution.
Gemini-generated summary
The problem involves reconstructing a hidden bipartite graph’s adjacency matrix by analyzing
a ”deck” of its vertex-deleted subgraphs, requiring the algorithm to deduce the original
topology from the structural invariants preserved in these partial views.
Global Statistics and Degree Constraints
The initial approach focused on recovering the most basic graph properties using Kelly’s
Lemma, a fundamental theorem in graph reconstruction that allows for the calculation of
the original graph’s total edge count and vertex degree sequence from the deck of subgraphs.
Programs like 0 1 and 0 7 used these recovered global statistics to attempt reconstruction
via greedy bipartite realization algorithms (such as variants of Havel-Hakimi or Gale-Ryser).
These methods failed to produce high scores because they only satisfied the degree constraints,
resulting in graphs that were ”degree-equivalent” to the target but topologically distinct
(isomorphic ambiguity).
Local Connectivity via Degree Classes
A significant breakthrough occurred with Program 0 128, which shifted the strategy from
simply satisfying global degree sequences to inferring local connectivity constraints. Instead
of treating all vertices with the same degree as interchangeable, this algorithm compared the
degree distributions within specific cards against the global sequence to deduce the exact
number of edges connecting a vertex to specific degree-based equivalence classes (e.g., ”how
many connections does this vertex have to vertices of degree 5?”). This effectively partitioned
the reconstruction problem into smaller, constrained blocks, drastically reducing the search
space and increasing the score from 1.15 to 85.9.
Weisfeiler-Lehman Refinement and Signature Flow
The next major leap in performance came with Program 0 220, which introduced Weisfeiler-
Lehman (WL) signature refinement. While the previous approach grouped vertices only by
their immediate degree, WL refinement iteratively classifies vertices based on the structural


--- Page 23 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
23
Gemini-generated summary (continued)
properties of their neighbors, creating highly specific isomorphism-invariant signatures. Subse-
quent programs (e.g., 0 336, 0 621) utilized these signatures to model the graph reconstruction
as a flow-based system of equations. By calculating the ”flow” of signatures between the
global graph and the local cards, the algorithms could mathematically deduce the precise
number of edges required between different structural vertex types, pushing the score over
330.
Spectral Fingerprinting and 2-Card Voting
Program 0 2458 introduced a new paradigm by incorporating Spectral Graph Theory alongside
structural refinement. This approach utilized Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to generate
rotation-invariant spectral signatures for subgraphs. The algorithm inferred the existence
of ”2-cards” (subgraphs with two vertices removed) and used a voting mechanism based on
these spectral signatures to assign confidence scores to individual edges. This allowed the
system to move beyond deterministic deduction into probabilistic reconstruction, where edge
placement was guided by the consensus of structural evidence across the deck.
Reconstruction as Min-Cost Max-Flow Optimization
The final evolution in strategy, exemplified by programs like 0 7568 and the top-performing
0 17333, abandoned greedy heuristics in favor of global optimization. These algorithms
framed the matrix reconstruction as a Minimum-Cost Maximum-Flow problem. By assigning
”costs” based on the compatibility of WL-derived neighbor profiles and spectral fingerprints,
the algorithms could solve for the entire adjacency matrix simultaneously. This ensured that
the final graph not only satisfied global degree constraints but also minimized the structural
”disagreement” between the reconstructed vertices and the empirical evidence found in the
card deck.
A.1.2. The evolved algorithm. The following is the final evolved reconstruction function for (u, v)-
bipartite graphs. It implements type-based constraints and min-cost flow selection using two-deletion
WL-style compatibility signatures.
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
import numpy as np
from collections import Counter, defaultdict
import networkx as nx
MCMF_COST_SCALE = 1_000_000
def _compute_node_features(
degrees: np.ndarray,
n_sums: np.ndarray,
n_sq_sums: np.ndarray,
nn_sums: np.ndarray,
nn_sq_sums: np.ndarray,
nnn_sums: np.ndarray,
n_distinct_deg_counts: np.ndarray
) -> list[tuple]:
return list(zip(
degrees.tolist(), n_sums.tolist(), n_sq_sums.tolist(),
nn_sums.tolist(), nn_sq_sums.tolist(), nnn_sums.tolist(),
n_distinct_deg_counts.tolist()
))


--- Page 24 ---
24
GERGELY B´ERCZI
def get_neighbor_profile_of_removed_vertex(global_degs_counts: Counter, card_degs: np.
ndarray) -> tuple:
c_counts = Counter(card_degs)
neighbors = []
all_degs_keys = set(global_degs_counts.keys()) | set(c_counts.keys())
if not all_degs_keys: return ()
max_deg = max(all_degs_keys)
current_shift = 0
for k in range(max_deg, -1, -1):
x_k = global_degs_counts[k] + current_shift - c_counts[k]
if x_k > 0: neighbors.extend([k] * x_k)
current_shift = x_k
return tuple(sorted(neighbors))
def remove_from_profile(profile: tuple, val: int) -> tuple:
p_list = list(profile)
if val in p_list: p_list.remove(val)
return tuple(p_list)
def get_matrix_profiles(matrix: np.ndarray, axis: int) -> list:
if axis == 0:
other_degs = np.sum(matrix, axis=1).astype(int)
return [tuple(sorted(other_degs[matrix[:, j] == 1].tolist())) for j in range(
matrix.shape[1])]
else:
other_degs = np.sum(matrix, axis=0).astype(int)
return [tuple(sorted(other_degs[matrix[i, :] == 1].tolist())) for i in range(
matrix.shape[0])]
def get_matrix_signature_components(matrix: np.ndarray):
if matrix.size == 0:
return (np.array([], dtype=np.int64),) * 14
r_d = np.sum(matrix, axis=1, dtype=np.int64)
c_d = np.sum(matrix, axis=0, dtype=np.int64)
r_n_sum = matrix.dot(c_d)
r_n_sq_sum = matrix.dot(c_d ** 2)
c_n_sum = matrix.T.dot(r_d)
c_n_sq_sum = matrix.T.dot(r_d ** 2)
r_nn_sum = matrix.dot(c_n_sum)
r_nn_sq_sum = matrix.dot(c_n_sq_sum)
c_nn_sum = matrix.T.dot(r_n_sum)
c_nn_sq_sum = matrix.T.dot(r_n_sq_sum)
r_nnn_sum = matrix.dot(c_nn_sum)
c_nnn_sum = matrix.T.dot(r_nn_sum)
r_n_distinct = np.zeros(matrix.shape[0], dtype=np.int64)
for i in range(matrix.shape[0]):
nbs = np.nonzero(matrix[i])[0]
if len(nbs) > 0: r_n_distinct[i] = len(set(c_d[j] for j in nbs))


--- Page 25 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
25
c_n_distinct = np.zeros(matrix.shape[1], dtype=np.int64)
for j in range(matrix.shape[1]):
nbs = np.nonzero(matrix[:, j])[0]
if len(nbs) > 0: c_n_distinct[j] = len(set(r_d[i] for i in nbs))
return r_d, r_n_sum, r_n_sq_sum, r_nn_sum, r_nn_sq_sum, r_nnn_sum, r_n_distinct, \
c_d, c_n_sum, c_n_sq_sum, c_nn_sum, c_nn_sq_sum, c_nnn_sum, c_n_distinct
def _cosine_sim(t1: tuple, t2: tuple) -> float:
if not t1 and not t2: return 1.0
if not t1 or not t2: return 0.0
c1, c2 = Counter(t1), Counter(t2)
common = c1.keys() & c2.keys()
dot = sum(c1[k] * c2[k] for k in common)
n1 = sum(v**2 for v in c1.values())
n2 = sum(v**2 for v in c2.values())
return dot / (np.sqrt(n1) * np.sqrt(n2)) if n1 and n2 else 0.0
def get_2card_signature(matrix: np.ndarray, wl_steps: int = 3) -> tuple:
rows, cols = matrix.shape
if rows == 0 or cols == 0: return ((), (), matrix.shape)
comps = get_matrix_signature_components(matrix)
r_colors = _compute_node_features(*comps[:7])
c_colors = _compute_node_features(*comps[7:])
for _ in range(wl_steps):
next_r = [0] * rows
for i in range(rows):
nbs = tuple(sorted(c_colors[j] for j in np.nonzero(matrix[i])[0]))
next_r[i] = hash((r_colors[i], nbs))
next_c = [0] * cols
for j in range(cols):
nbs = tuple(sorted(r_colors[i] for i in np.nonzero(matrix[:, j])[0]))
next_c[j] = hash((c_colors[j], nbs))
r_colors, c_colors = next_r, next_c
return (tuple(sorted(r_colors)), tuple(sorted(c_colors)), matrix.shape)
def reconstruct(deck: list[np.ndarray], u: int, v: int) -> np.ndarray:
if u == 0 or v == 0: return np.zeros((u, v), dtype=int)
if u == 1 and v == 1: return np.zeros((1, 1), dtype=int)
sum_card_edges = sum(int(np.sum(c)) for c in deck)
m = sum_card_edges // (u + v - 2)
u_indices = [i for i, c in enumerate(deck) if c.shape == (u - 1, v)]
v_indices = [i for i, c in enumerate(deck) if c.shape == (u, v - 1)]
if len(u_indices) != u or len(v_indices) != v: return np.zeros((u, v), dtype=int)
d_u = [m - int(np.sum(deck[i])) for i in u_indices]
d_v = [m - int(np.sum(deck[j])) for j in v_indices]


--- Page 26 ---
26
GERGELY B´ERCZI
d_v_counts, d_u_counts = Counter(d_v), Counter(d_u)
def get_types(indices, degrees, global_opp_counts, is_u_card):
types = []
for i, idx in enumerate(indices):
card = deck[idx]
axis = 0 if is_u_card else 1
local_degs = np.sum(card, axis=axis).astype(np.int64)
prof = get_neighbor_profile_of_removed_vertex(global_opp_counts, local_degs)
types.append((degrees[i], prof))
return types
u_types = get_types(u_indices, d_u, d_v_counts, True)
v_types = get_types(v_indices, d_v, d_u_counts, False)
u_type_counts, v_type_counts = Counter(u_types), Counter(v_types)
dist_u_types = sorted(list(u_type_counts.keys()), reverse=True)
dist_v_types = sorted(list(v_type_counts.keys()), reverse=True)
def compute_reqs(indices, degrees, dist_opp_types, opp_type_counts, is_u_card):
reqs_list = []
for i, idx in enumerate(indices):
card = deck[idx]
axis = 0 if is_u_card else 1
prof_local = get_matrix_profiles(card, axis=axis)
d_local = np.sum(card, axis=axis).astype(int)
observed = Counter(zip(d_local, prof_local))
reqs = {}
shifted_in = Counter()
remover_deg = degrees[i]
for T in dist_opp_types:
d, prof = T
needed = opp_type_counts[T] - (observed[T] - shifted_in[T])
if needed > 0:
reqs[T] = needed
shifted_in[(d - 1, remove_from_profile(prof, remover_deg))] += needed
reqs_list.append(reqs)
return reqs_list
u_reqs = compute_reqs(u_indices, d_u, dist_v_types, v_type_counts, True)
v_reqs = compute_reqs(v_indices, d_v, dist_u_types, u_type_counts, False)
u_2card_sigs, v_2card_sigs = [], []
for i, idx in enumerate(u_indices):
card = deck[idx]
local_v_types = list(zip(np.sum(card, axis=0).astype(int), get_matrix_profiles(
card, axis=0)))
sub_sigs = defaultdict(list)
for c_idx in range(v):
sub_sigs[local_v_types[c_idx]].append(get_2card_signature(np.delete(card,
c_idx, axis=1)))
u_2card_sigs.append({k: tuple(sorted(v)) for k, v in sub_sigs.items()})


--- Page 27 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
27
for j, idx in enumerate(v_indices):
card = deck[idx]
local_u_types = list(zip(np.sum(card, axis=1).astype(int), get_matrix_profiles(
card, axis=1)))
sub_sigs = defaultdict(list)
for r_idx in range(u):
sub_sigs[local_u_types[r_idx]].append(get_2card_signature(np.delete(card,
r_idx, axis=0)))
v_2card_sigs.append({k: tuple(sorted(v)) for k, v in sub_sigs.items()})
all_card_sigs = [get_2card_signature(c) for c in deck]
sim_matrix = np.zeros((u + v, u + v))
for i in range(u + v):
sim_matrix[i, i] = 1.0
for j in range(i + 1, u + v):
s1, s2 = all_card_sigs[i], all_card_sigs[j]
sim = (_cosine_sim(s1[0], s2[0]) + _cosine_sim(s1[1], s2[1])) / 2.0
sim_matrix[i, j] = sim_matrix[j, i] = sim
u_sort_keys = {i: (all_card_sigs[u_indices[i]], tuple(np.sort(sim_matrix[u_indices[i
], :]))) for i in range(u)}
v_sort_keys = {j: (all_card_sigs[v_indices[j]], tuple(np.sort(sim_matrix[v_indices[j
], :]))) for j in range(v)}
u_ranks = {idx: r for r, idx in enumerate(sorted(range(u), key=lambda i: u_sort_keys[
i]))}
v_ranks = {idx: r for r, idx in enumerate(sorted(range(v), key=lambda j: v_sort_keys[
j]))}
rows_by_type = defaultdict(list)
for i, t in enumerate(u_types): rows_by_type[t].append(i)
for t in rows_by_type: rows_by_type[t].sort(key=lambda x: u_sort_keys[x])
cols_by_type = defaultdict(list)
for j, t in enumerate(v_types): cols_by_type[t].append(j)
for t in cols_by_type: cols_by_type[t].sort(key=lambda x: v_sort_keys[x])
adj = np.zeros((u, v), dtype=int)
for r_type in dist_u_types:
dr, prof_r = r_type
for c_type in dist_v_types:
dc, prof_c = c_type
r_idxs, c_idxs = rows_by_type[r_type], cols_by_type[c_type]
if not r_idxs or not c_idxs: continue
target_v_conn = (dc - 1, remove_from_profile(prof_c, dr))
target_u_conn = (dr - 1, remove_from_profile(prof_r, dc))
target_v_non = c_type
target_u_non = r_type
G_flow = nx.DiGraph()
source, sink = "S", "T"
candidates = []
for r_i in r_idxs:


--- Page 28 ---
28
GERGELY B´ERCZI
cap = u_reqs[r_i].get(c_type, 0)
if cap <= 0: continue
G_flow.add_edge(source, f"R_{r_i}", capacity=cap, weight=0)
u_conn = Counter(u_2card_sigs[r_i].get(target_v_conn, ()))
u_non = Counter(u_2card_sigs[r_i].get(target_v_non, ()))
for c_j in c_idxs:
if v_reqs[c_j].get(r_type, 0) <= 0: continue
v_conn = Counter(v_2card_sigs[c_j].get(target_u_conn, ()))
v_non = Counter(v_2card_sigs[c_j].get(target_u_non, ()))
sc_conn = (2.0 * sum((u_conn & v_conn).values()) / (sum(u_conn.values
()) + sum(v_conn.values()))) if (u_conn or v_conn) else 0
sc_non = (2.0 * sum((u_non & v_non).values()) / (sum(u_non.values())
+ sum(v_non.values()))) if (u_non or v_non) else 0
candidates.append((sc_conn - sc_non, r_i, c_j))
for c_j in c_idxs:
cap = v_reqs[c_j].get(r_type, 0)
if cap > 0: G_flow.add_edge(f"C_{c_j}", sink, capacity=cap, weight=0)
candidates.sort(key=lambda x: (-x[0], u_ranks[x[1]], v_ranks[x[2]]))
for conf, r_i, c_j in candidates:
cost = int(-conf * MCMF_COST_SCALE) - (u_ranks[r_i] * v + v_ranks[c_j])
G_flow.add_edge(f"R_{r_i}", f"C_{c_j}", capacity=1, weight=cost)
try:
flow = nx.max_flow_min_cost(G_flow, source, sink)
for r_i in r_idxs:
for c_j in c_idxs:
if flow.get(f"R_{r_i}", {}).get(f"C_{c_j}", 0) == 1:
adj[r_i, c_j] = 1
except nx.NetworkXError:
pass
return adj
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
A.2. Planar evolved block. The following is the final representative evolved planar reconstruction
function achieving perfect reconstruction under the hardened planar harness (exact deck equality
verification).
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
import numpy as np
import networkx as nx
import math
from collections import Counter
from itertools import combinations, product
def reconstruct(deck: list[np.ndarray], n: int) -> np.ndarray:
# 1. Kelly’s Lemma for edge count
sum_card_edges = sum(np.sum(card) // 2 for card in deck)
if n > 2:
m = sum_card_edges // (n - 2)


--- Page 29 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
29
elif n == 2:
return np.array([[0, 1], [1, 0]], dtype=int)
else:
return np.zeros((n, n), dtype=int)
# 2. Derive Degree Sequence of G
card_edges = [np.sum(card) // 2 for card in deck]
removed_degrees = [m - ce for ce in card_edges]
G_deg_counts = Counter(removed_degrees)
candidates = []
# 3. Analyze each card to find valid re-attachment configurations
for i, card in enumerate(deck):
deg_v = removed_degrees[i]
C_degrees = np.sum(card, axis=1).astype(int)
C_deg_counts = Counter(C_degrees)
target_rem = G_deg_counts.copy()
target_rem[deg_v] -= 1
if target_rem[deg_v] == 0:
del target_rem[deg_v]
req_conn = {}
carry = 0
possible = True
all_degs = set(C_deg_counts.keys()) | set(target_rem.keys())
if not all_degs:
sorted_degs = []
else:
sorted_degs = range(min(all_degs), max(all_degs) + 2)
for x in sorted_degs:
n_c = C_deg_counts[x]
n_g = target_rem[x]
next_carry = carry + n_c - n_g
if next_carry < 0 or next_carry > n_c:
possible = False
break
if next_carry > 0:
req_conn[x] = next_carry
carry = next_carry
if possible and carry == 0:
if sum(req_conn.values()) == deg_v:
ambiguity = 1
for x, count in req_conn.items():
ambiguity *= math.comb(C_deg_counts[x], count)
candidates.append({
’ambiguity’: ambiguity,
’card_idx’: i,
’req’: req_conn,
’card_degs’: C_degrees


--- Page 30 ---
30
GERGELY B´ERCZI
})
candidates.sort(key=lambda x: x[’ambiguity’])
# 5. Try to reconstruct from best candidates
for cand in candidates:
if cand[’ambiguity’] > 2000:
continue
card_idx = cand[’card_idx’]
req = cand[’req’]
card = deck[card_idx]
C_degrees = cand[’card_degs’]
deg_to_indices = {}
for idx, d in enumerate(C_degrees):
deg_to_indices.setdefault(d, []).append(idx)
choice_pools = []
for d, count in req.items():
pool = list(combinations(deg_to_indices[d], count))
choice_pools.append(pool)
for p in product(*choice_pools):
neighbors = [idx for group in p for idx in group]
A_hat = np.zeros((n, n), dtype=int)
A_hat[:-1, :-1] = card
A_hat[neighbors, n-1] = 1
A_hat[n-1, neighbors] = 1
# exact_deck_equal and get_deck_from_adj are provided by harness
if exact_deck_equal(get_deck_from_adj(A_hat), deck):
return A_hat
return nx.to_numpy_array(nx.gnm_random_graph(n, m), dtype=int)
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
Appendix B. Alon-Tarsi conjecture
B.1. Experiment 1: evolving a nontrivial sign-flipping involution with biased residual
set.
B.1.1. AI summary of the experiment. The following is the short description of the evolution process
generated by Gemini
Gemini-generated summary
The problem is to create a deterministic algorithm that transforms any Latin square of even
order into a different valid Latin square with the opposite mathematical sign (parity), such
that applying the transformation twice returns the original square.
Deterministic Transpositions


--- Page 31 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
31
Gemini-generated summary (continued)
The initial approach, represented by 0 1, attempted to solve the problem by partitioning
the input space using hashes and applying different deterministic strategies based on the
input’s hash. While this ensured the involution property (the function is its own inverse), the
sign-flipping capability was inconsistent. The strategy improved significantly with 0 5, which
abandoned hash-based randomness in favor of size-specific elementary swaps. By applying a
fixed swap of rows or columns depending on the order nn, the program leveraged the algebraic
property that an odd permutation of rows negates the sign of a Latin square.
Local Cycle Decompositions
A major mathematical breakthrough occurred with 0 53, which moved beyond simple row/col-
umn swaps to internal structural manipulation. This algorithm introduced odd-cycle trades,
identifying odd-length cycles in the permutation defined by two rows and swapping symbols
only along those cycles. This exploits the insight that swapping values along a single odd
cycle acts as a localized transposition, guaranteeing a sign flip while preserving the Latin
square constraints. Subsequent iterations like 0 62 and 0 134 refined this by targeting disjoint
row pairs and ensuring the total number of performed trades remained odd, thereby strictly
enforcing the sign-reversal requirement.
Global Symmetries and Conjugation
Program 0 175 introduced a different class of transformation based on global algebraic sym-
metry, specifically row-symbol conjugation. By mapping the Latin square triple (r,c,v)(r,c,v)
to (r,v,c)(r,v,c), the algorithm utilized the geometric properties of the square (parastrophy)
rather than local swaps. 0 324 further refined this by employing row-symbol swapping
(r,c,v)→(v,c,r)(r,c,v)→(v,c,r). These approaches proved highly effective because conjugation
acts as a structural involution that, for specific orders of nn, consistently reverses the sign of
the square.
Conflict Resolution for Invertibility
As the algorithms began attempting more complex searches for cycle trades, ensuring the
map remained a perfect involution (applying it twice returns exactly the original input)
became difficult. 0 275 addressed this by introducing backtracking conflict verification. This
mechanism ensures that a high-priority rule is only applied if it does not interfere with
the ability of the reverse transformation to identify the same rule, essentially checking that
the move is a locally stable maximum in the transition graph. 0 796 expanded this into
a prioritized search with recursive checks, allowing the system to explore diverse row and
column matchings to find a valid sign-reversing move that is guaranteed to be reversible.
Hybrid Strategies and Modulo Arithmetic
A significant leap in performance came with 0 817, which recognized that the mathematical
properties of Latin squares differ depending on their order modulo 4. This program imple-
mented a bifurcated strategy: it applies global conjugation for orders n ≡2 (mod 4) and
a prioritized search for odd-cycle trades for orders n ≡0 (mod 4). This hybrid approach
acknowledges that while conjugation is a powerful tool, it does not universally flip signs for
all even orders, necessitating different algebraic techniques for different dimensions.
Optimizing Residual Bias via ”Sabotage”
The final evolution in strategy focused on the ”Residual Bias” metric—optimizing the score
even when a perfect sign flip was not found. 0 946 and 0 1026 introduced the concept of
sign-preserving ”sabotage”. When the algorithm encounters a difficult case where a sign-
reversing move cannot be cleanly resolved, it intentionally performs an even-cycle trade or
a specific symbol swap. While this fails the sign-flip objective, it forces the failure into a
known parity state, maximizing the squared sign bias of the residual set. Programs 0 2052


--- Page 32 ---
32
GERGELY B´ERCZI
Gemini-generated summary (continued)
and 0 9094 perfected this by combining cycle decomposition, priority-based conflict checking,
and deterministic sabotage, creating a highly robust system that flips signs whenever possible
and fails gracefully and consistently when not.
B.1.2. The evolved algorithm. The final evolve block (run 9094 after 13.6 hours running) is the
following.
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# The following code is the part that AlphaEvolve can modify.
# Its goal is to implement a map F: L -> L’ on Latin squares.
# Ideally, F should be a sign-reversing involution for most inputs L.
import numpy as np
def _find_trade(S, n, idx1, idx2, mode, strategy):
if mode == 0:
# Row mode
elem1, elem2 = S[idx1], S[idx2]
elem2_pos = np.argsort(elem2)
perm = elem2_pos[elem1]
else:
# Column mode
elem1, elem2 = S[:, idx1], S[:, idx2]
elem2_pos = np.argsort(elem2)
perm = elem2_pos[elem1]
visited = np.zeros(n, dtype=bool)
odd_cycles, even_cycles = [], []
for i in range(n):
if not visited[i]:
cycle = []
curr = i
while not visited[curr]:
visited[curr] = True
cycle.append(curr)
curr = perm[curr]
if len(cycle) > 1:
(odd_cycles if len(cycle) % 2 == 1 else even_cycles).append(cycle)
odd_cycles.sort(key=min)
even_cycles.sort(key=min)
trade_indices = []
if strategy == "flip":
if not odd_cycles:
return None
trade_indices = odd_cycles[0][:]
if even_cycles:
trade_indices.extend(even_cycles[0])
elif strategy == "sabotage":
# Goal: Sign-preserving trade (Even cycle)
if not even_cycles:
return None
candidate_cycle = even_cycles[0]
# Deterministic rarity check (accept approx 5%)
h_val = sum(x * (x + 13) for x in candidate_cycle)
if h_val % 20 != 0:
return None
trade_indices = candidate_cycle[:]
else:
return None


--- Page 33 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
33
S_new = S.copy()
if mode == 0:
S_new[idx1, trade_indices], S_new[idx2, trade_indices] = \
S_new[idx2, trade_indices], S_new[idx1, trade_indices]
else:
S_new[trade_indices, idx1], S_new[trade_indices, idx2] = \
S_new[trade_indices, idx2], S_new[trade_indices, idx1]
return S_new
def parity_switching_map(L: list[list[int]], n: int) -> list[list[int]]:
"""
Applies a sign-reversing involution to the Latin square L.
Strategies:
1. Search for a ’flip’ trade (odd cycle + optional even cycle) in rows/cols.
2. Search for a ’sabotage’ trade (even cycle) with rarity constraints.
3. Fallback to a conditional strategy for residual bias.
"""
L_np = np.array(L)
half_n = n // 2
ROW_MODE = 0
COL_MODE = 1
rng = np.random.RandomState(42) # Deterministic random state
# Flattened list of all candidate trades to check in order.
# Each entry is (mode, idx1, idx2, strategy)
all_candidate_trades_sequence = []
# Configuration for different orders
use_sabotage = (n > 8)
num_random_iters = 50
# 0. Sabotage Phase (Row mode) - Sign-preserving trades
if use_sabotage:
sab_perm = rng.permutation(n)
sab_pairs_to_check = [(sab_perm[0], sab_perm[1])]
if half_n >= 2:
sab_pairs_to_check.append((sab_perm[2], sab_perm[3]))
for idx1, idx2 in sab_pairs_to_check:
all_candidate_trades_sequence.append((ROW_MODE, idx1, idx2, "sabotage"))
# 1. Row Matchings (Flip strategy)
# Standard stride-based matching
for i in range(half_n):
all_candidate_trades_sequence.append((ROW_MODE, i, i + half_n, "flip"))
# Random matchings
for _ in range(num_random_iters):
perm = rng.permutation(n)
for k in range(half_n):
all_candidate_trades_sequence.append((ROW_MODE, perm[2*k], perm[2*k+1], "flip"))
# 2. Column Matchings (Flip strategy)
# Standard stride-based matching
for i in range(half_n):
all_candidate_trades_sequence.append((COL_MODE, i, i + half_n, "flip"))
# Random matchings
for _ in range(num_random_iters):
perm = rng.permutation(n)
for k in range(half_n):
all_candidate_trades_sequence.append((COL_MODE, perm[2*k], perm[2*k+1], "flip"))


--- Page 34 ---
34
GERGELY B´ERCZI
# Function to check for prior conflicts
def _has_prior_conflict(S, current_trade_index):
for i in range(current_trade_index):
mode, idx1, idx2, strategy = all_candidate_trades_sequence[i]
if _find_trade(S, n, idx1, idx2, mode, strategy) is not None:
return True
return False
# Main search for trades
for current_trade_index, (mode, idx1, idx2, strategy) in enumerate(all_candidate_trades_sequence):
L_tent_result = _find_trade(L_np, n, idx1, idx2, mode, strategy)
if L_tent_result is not None:
# A trade was found. Check if it conflicts with any earlier potential trade in the sequence.
if not _has_prior_conflict(L_tent_result, current_trade_index):
return L_tent_result.tolist()
# Fallback: Conditional strategy to ensure residual bias.
# The default ’conjugate_row_symbol’ operation (L_conj[rows, L_np] = cols)
# is sign-flipping if n/2 is odd (n=10, 14, 26).
# To ensure a biased residual set, we need a sign-preserving fallback in such cases.
# A symbol swap (0<->1) is always a sign-preserving involution for even n > 1.
if half_n % 2 == 1: # For n=10, 14, 26, ’conjugate_row_symbol’ flips sign.
# Use a sign-preserving symbol swap as fallback.
L_fallback = L_np.copy()
mask_0, mask_1 = (L_fallback == 0), (L_fallback == 1)
L_fallback[mask_0] = 1
L_fallback[mask_1] = 0
return L_fallback.tolist()
else: # For n=8, 12, ’conjugate_row_symbol’ preserves sign.
# Use ’conjugate_row_symbol’ as fallback.
L_conj = np.zeros_like(L_np)
rows, cols = np.indices((n, n))
# This performs row-symbol conjugation: L_conj[r, k] = c if L_np[r, c] = k.
L_conj[rows, L_np] = cols
return L_conj.tolist()
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
Experiment 2 EVOLVE block.
# ============================================================
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# ============================================================
import numpy as np
def _get_odd_cycles(arr1, arr2, n):
"""Helper: Find all odd cycles (length > 1) in the permutation between two arrays."""
inv2 = np.argsort(arr2)
perm = inv2[arr1]
visited = np.zeros(n, dtype=bool)
cycles = []
for i in range(n):
if visited[i]:
continue
c = []
cur = i
while not visited[cur]:
visited[cur] = True
c.append(cur)
cur = perm[cur]
if len(c) > 1 and len(c) % 2 == 1:
cycles.append(c)


--- Page 35 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
35
return cycles
def _get_1_factors(size):
"""
Generates a 1-factorization of K_size (size must be even).
Returns a list of lists of pairs. Each inner list is a perfect matching.
Construction based on the standard ’pattern’ method for K_2m.
Vertices are 0..2m-1.
"""
factors = []
# For K_n, vertices are 0, ..., n-1. We fix vertex n-1 (the "infinity" vertex).
# The other n-1 vertices (0, ..., n-2) are arranged in a regular (n-1)-gon.
m = size - 1 # This is the modulo base for the (n-1)-gon vertices.
inf_vertex = size - 1
for turn in range(m):
pairs = []
# Edge connected to the "infinity" vertex
pairs.append(tuple(sorted((turn, inf_vertex))))
# Other edges (between vertices in the (n-1)-gon)
for k in range(1, (size // 2)): # k goes from 1 to n/2 - 1
# Vertex a and b are symmetric around ’turn’ in the (n-1)-gon
a = (turn - k + m) % m # +m to handle negative results of modulo correctly in Python
b = (turn + k) % m
pairs.append(tuple(sorted((a, b))))
factors.append(pairs)
return factors
def _find_best_trade_in_conjugate_space(M: np.ndarray, n: int, pairs_to_check: list[tuple[int, int]]) -> tuple
| None:
"""
Helper to find the best odd cycle trade in a given matrix M,
considering specified pairs of indices.
Returns:
tuple: (key, idx1, idx2, cycle_elems) or None
"""
best_trade_info = None # Stores (key, idx1, idx2, cycle_elems)
for pair_idx_ordinal, (idx1, idx2) in enumerate(pairs_to_check):
arr1 = M[idx1]
arr2 = M[idx2]
odd_cycles = _get_odd_cycles(arr1, arr2, n)
for cyc in odd_cycles:
# Key for minimization: (length (asc), pair_idx_ordinal (asc), sorted_cycle (asc))
key = (len(cyc), pair_idx_ordinal, tuple(sorted(cyc)))
if best_trade_info is None or key < best_trade_info[0]:
best_trade_info = (key, idx1, idx2, cyc)
return best_trade_info
def parity_switching_map(L: list[list[int]], n: int) -> list[list[int]]:
"""
Multi-Perspective Local Trade Search across rows, columns, and symbols.
Deterministic, attempts to apply a smallest odd-cycle trade.
Fallback: swap rows 0 and 1.
"""
S = np.array(L, dtype=int)
# -- Define pairing strategies --


--- Page 36 ---
36
GERGELY B´ERCZI
def get_adjacent_pairs(size):
return [(i, i + 1) for i in range(0, size - 1, 2)]
def get_half_shifted_pairs(size):
if size % 2 != 0:
return []
return [(i, i + size // 2) for i in range(size // 2)]
def get_all_pairs(size):
pairs = []
for i in range(size):
for j in range(i + 1, size):
pairs.append((i, j))
return pairs
pairing_strategies = {
’adjacent’: get_adjacent_pairs,
’half_shifted’: get_half_shifted_pairs,
’one_factor_flat’: lambda size: sum(_get_1_factors(size), []),
’exhaustive’: get_all_pairs
}
ordered_strategies = [
’adjacent’,
’half_shifted’,
’one_factor_flat’,
’exhaustive’
]
conjugate_types = [’row’, ’col’, ’sym’]
for conjugate_type in conjugate_types:
for strategy_name in ordered_strategies:
get_pairs_func = pairing_strategies[strategy_name]
current_M = S
if conjugate_type == ’col’:
current_M = S.T
elif conjugate_type == ’sym’:
# S_sym where S_sym[v, c] = r (symbol v is at row r in column c)
current_M = np.argsort(S, axis=0)
pairs_to_check = get_pairs_func(n)
trade_info = _find_best_trade_in_conjugate_space(current_M, n, pairs_to_check)
if trade_info:
_, idx1, idx2, cycle_elems = trade_info
T = S.copy()
if conjugate_type == ’row’:
T[idx1, cycle_elems], T[idx2, cycle_elems] = T[idx2, cycle_elems], T[idx1, cycle_elems]
elif conjugate_type == ’col’:
T[cycle_elems, idx1], T[cycle_elems, idx2] = T[cycle_elems, idx2], T[cycle_elems, idx1]
elif conjugate_type == ’sym’:
for c_idx in cycle_elems:
r1 = current_M[idx1, c_idx]
r2 = current_M[idx2, c_idx]
T[r1, c_idx] = idx2
T[r2, c_idx] = idx1
return T.tolist()
# Fallback
T = S.copy()
T[[0, 1], :] = T[[1, 0], :]


--- Page 37 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
37
return T.tolist()
# ============================================================
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
# ============================================================
Experiment 3 EVOLVE block.
# ============================================================
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# ============================================================
import numpy as np
# -- Helper: Apply Symbol Swap --
def _apply_symbol_swap(matrix, s1, s2):
T = matrix.copy()
mask_s1 = (matrix == s1)
mask_s2 = (matrix == s2)
T[mask_s1] = s2
T[mask_s2] = s1
return T
# -- Helper: Fixed Row/Col Swaps (for meta-trades) --
def _fixed_row_swap(matrix_np, r1, r2):
M_copy = matrix_np.copy()
M_copy[[r1, r2]] = M_copy[[r2, r1]]
return M_copy
def _fixed_col_swap(matrix_np, c1, c2):
M_copy = matrix_np.copy()
M_copy[:, [c1, c2]] = M_copy[:, [c2, c1]]
return M_copy
# -- Helper: Canonical Cycle --
def _canonical_cycle(cyc: list[int]) -> list[int]:
if not cyc: return []
m = min(cyc)
k = cyc.index(m)
return cyc[k:] + cyc[:k]
def _stabilized_canonical_cycle(cyc: list[int]) -> list[int]:
"""
To ensure F(F(L))=L, the choice of cycle must be stable
under reversal. We use the lexicographically smaller of a
cycle and its reverse as the canonical representation.
"""
if not cyc: return []
c1 = _canonical_cycle(cyc)
if len(c1) <= 2:
return c1
rev_cyc = c1[:1] + c1[1:][::-1]
c2 = _canonical_cycle(rev_cyc)
return min(c1, c2)
# -- Helper: Get all odd cycles between two lines --
def _get_odd_cycles(matrix, idx1, idx2, n: int, axis_is_col=False):
if axis_is_col:
line1, line2 = matrix[:, idx1], matrix[:, idx2]
else:
line1, line2 = matrix[idx1], matrix[idx2]
inv2 = np.full(n, -1, dtype=int)
inv2[line2] = np.arange(n, dtype=int)
perm = inv2[line1]


--- Page 38 ---
38
GERGELY B´ERCZI
visited = np.zeros(n, dtype=bool)
cycles = []
for i in range(n):
if visited[i]: continue
path_trace = []
cur = i
while not visited[cur]:
visited[cur] = True
path_trace.append(int(cur))
cur = int(perm[cur])
if cur in path_trace:
start_idx = path_trace.index(cur)
cyc = path_trace[start_idx:]
if len(cyc) > 1 and (len(cyc) % 2 == 1):
cycles.append(_stabilized_canonical_cycle(cyc))
cycles.sort(key=lambda x: (len(x), x))
return cycles
# Helper: Collect all canonical trades
def _collect_all_trades(M, n: int):
trades = []
for r1 in range(n):
for r2 in range(r1 + 1, n):
cycles = _get_odd_cycles(M, r1, r2, n, axis_is_col=False)
for cyc in cycles:
key = (len(cyc), cyc, r1, r2, 0) # 0 for row trade
data = (cyc, False, r1, r2)
trades.append((key, data))
for c1 in range(n):
for c2 in range(c1 + 1, n):
cycles = _get_odd_cycles(M, c1, c2, n, axis_is_col=True)
for cyc in cycles:
key = (len(cyc), cyc, c1, c2, 1) # 1 for col trade
data = (cyc, True, c1, c2)
trades.append((key, data))
trades.sort(key=lambda x: x[0])
return trades
# -- Helper: Check for higher-priority trades --
def _has_tier1_trade(M_np, n: int):
for i in range(n // 2):
if _get_odd_cycles(M_np, 2 * i, 2 * i + 1, n, axis_is_col=False):
return True
return False
def _has_safe_tier2_trade(M_np, n: int):
for i in range(n // 2):
c1, c2 = 2 * i, 2 * i + 1
cycles = _get_odd_cycles(M_np, c1, c2, n, axis_is_col=True)
for cyc in cycles:
T_prime = M_np.copy()
ind = np.array(cyc, dtype=int)
T_prime[ind, c1], T_prime[ind, c2] = T_prime[ind, c2], T_prime[ind, c1]
if not _has_tier1_trade(T_prime, n):
return True
return False
# Helper: Check stability (No Tier 1 or Safe Tier 2 trades)
def _is_stable_matrix(M, n: int):
return (not _has_tier1_trade(M, n)) and (not _has_safe_tier2_trade(M, n))


--- Page 39 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
39
# -- NEW HELPER FUNCTION TO ENCAPSULATE TRADE FINDING LOGIC --
def _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(M_np, n: int):
# 1. Search for Row Trades in adjacent pairs
for i in range(n // 2):
r1, r2 = 2 * i, 2 * i + 1
cycles = _get_odd_cycles(M_np, r1, r2, n, axis_is_col=False)
if cycles:
cycle = cycles[0]
T = M_np.copy()
indices_to_swap = np.array(cycle, dtype=int)
T[r1, indices_to_swap], T[r2, indices_to_swap] = T[r2, indices_to_swap], T[r1, indices_to_swap]
return T
# 2. Search for Column Trades in adjacent pairs
for i in range(n // 2):
c1, c2 = 2 * i, 2 * i + 1
cycles = _get_odd_cycles(M_np, c1, c2, n, axis_is_col=True)
for cycle in cycles:
T = M_np.copy()
indices_to_swap = np.array(cycle, dtype=int)
T[indices_to_swap, c1], T[indices_to_swap, c2] = T[indices_to_swap, c2], T[indices_to_swap, c1]
if not _has_tier1_trade(T, n):
return T
# 3. Tier 3: Exhaustive Global Search with Canonical Verification.
all_candidates = _collect_all_trades(M_np, n)
for cand_key, cand_data in all_candidates:
cycle_to_apply, axis_is_col, idx1, idx2 = cand_data
T = M_np.copy()
indices = np.array(cycle_to_apply, dtype=int)
if axis_is_col:
T[indices, idx1], T[indices, idx2] = T[indices, idx2], T[indices, idx1]
else:
T[idx1, indices], T[idx2, indices] = T[idx2, indices], T[idx1, indices]
# 1. Stability Check
if not _is_stable_matrix(T, n):
continue
# 2. Canonical Verification
is_canonical = True
trades_in_T = _collect_all_trades(T, n)
for t_key, t_data in trades_in_T:
if t_key > cand_key:
break
if t_key == cand_key:
break
c_p, ax_p, i1_p, i2_p = t_data
T_prime = T.copy()
ind_p = np.array(c_p, dtype=int)
if ax_p:
T_prime[ind_p, i1_p], T_prime[ind_p, i2_p] = T_prime[ind_p, i2_p], T_prime[ind_p, i1_p]
else:
T_prime[i1_p, ind_p], T_prime[i2_p, ind_p] = T_prime[i2_p, ind_p], T_prime[i1_p, ind_p]
if _is_stable_matrix(T_prime, n):
is_canonical = False
break
if is_canonical:
return T


--- Page 40 ---
40
GERGELY B´ERCZI
return None
def parity_switching_map(L: list[list[int]], n: int) -> list[list[int]]:
"""
Deterministic involution on Latin squares.
Searches for the first available ’odd cycle trade’ in pairs of rows or columns.
"""
S = np.array(L, dtype=int)
result_S = _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(S, n)
if result_S is not None:
return result_S.tolist()
# CANONICAL ORDER TIER 1: Row Swaps
for r1 in range(n):
for r2 in range(r1 + 1, n):
S_transformed = _fixed_row_swap(S, r1, r2)
result_transformed = _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(S_transformed, n)
if result_transformed is not None:
T_final = _fixed_row_swap(result_transformed, r1, r2)
if _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(T_final, n) is None:
return T_final.tolist()
# CANONICAL ORDER TIER 2: Column Swaps
for c1 in range(n):
for c2 in range(c1 + 1, n):
S_transformed = _fixed_col_swap(S, c1, c2)
result_transformed = _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(S_transformed, n)
if result_transformed is not None:
T_final = _fixed_col_swap(result_transformed, c1, c2)
if _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(T_final, n) is not None:
continue
has_row_swap_solution = False
for r1_check in range(n):
for r2_check in range(r1_check + 1, n):
T_final_transformed = _fixed_row_swap(T_final, r1_check, r2_check)
if _apply_first_odd_cycle_trade_if_stable(T_final_transformed, n) is not None:
has_row_swap_solution = True
break
if has_row_swap_solution:
break
if not has_row_swap_solution:
return T_final.tolist()
# Fallback
if n > 1:
return _apply_symbol_swap(S, 0, 1).tolist()
return S.tolist()
# ============================================================
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
# ============================================================
Appendix C. Rota conjecture
C.1. Experiment A policy: rank-5 trap-avoidance and circuit-breaking. The evolved
evolved policy (evolve blocks) is the following.


--- Page 41 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
41
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# AlphaEvolve may modify ONLY this block.
# Goal: evolve a strong, interpretable policy scoring function.
def policy_function(features: dict[str, float]) -> float:
"""
A hybrid policy balancing robust trap avoidance with a highly focused repair strategy.
Key Principles:
1.
**Strict Insert Hygiene:** ‘Insert‘ moves are for safe progress. Any insert that
breaks a full column or creates a small, critical trap is vetoed.
2.
**High-Stakes Repairs:** ‘Repair‘ moves are for solving traps. They operate on a
high-risk, high-reward basis. Escaping a trap yields a massive bonus, while
breaking a full column incurs a massive penalty. A repair is only chosen if
the expected reward (trap escape) vastly outweighs the risk (breaking progress).
3.
**Dynamic Risk Assessment:** A "despair" metric allows the agent to be more
aggressive with repairs late in the game, but the fundamental cost/benefit
trade-offs for risky moves remain stark. This ensures that even desperate
actions are directed towards high-potential solutions.
"""
# Termination check
if features.get("is_terminate_move", 0.0) > 0.5:
return 1e9 if features.get("global_num_full_cols", 0.0) >= 5.0 else -1e9
# Import for stochastic element during "panic" and exponential calculations for ’girth singularity’.
import random
import math
score = 0.0
# Feature extraction
num_full = features.get("global_num_full_cols", 0.0)
delta_valid = features.get("delta_num_valid", 0.0)
becomes_full = features.get("target_col_becomes_full", 0.0) > 0.5
breaks_full = features.get("source_col_was_full_and_is_not_anymore", 0.0) > 0.5
is_repair = features.get("is_repair_move", 0.0) > 0.5
is_insert = features.get("is_insert_move", 0.0) > 0.5
target_deficit = features.get("target_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
source_deficit = features.get("source_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
circuit_size = features.get("circuit_size", 0.0)
target_dups = features.get("target_dup_count_after", 0.0)
# -- Adaptive Policy Modulators --
# Trap Severity Index: Assigns discrete severity levels to circuits based on their size.
trap_severity = 0.0
trap_penalty_amplifier = 1.0
if circuit_size > 0.0:
if circuit_size <= 2.0:
trap_severity = 10.0
trap_penalty_amplifier = 2.5
elif circuit_size <= 3.0:
trap_severity = 4.0
trap_penalty_amplifier = 1.5
elif circuit_size <= 4.0:
trap_severity = 1.5
trap_penalty_amplifier = 1.2
elif circuit_size <= 5.0:
trap_severity = 0.5
trap_penalty_amplifier = 1.05
is_critical_trap_after = (trap_severity >= 1.5)
has_trap = trap_severity > 0.0


--- Page 42 ---
42
GERGELY B´ERCZI
tension_factor = 1.0
if has_trap:
messiness = target_deficit + source_deficit + target_dups
tension_factor = 1.0 + (trap_severity * 0.08) * (1.0 + messiness)
tension_factor = min(tension_factor, 7.0)
PHASE_EXPANSION = (num_full < 3.0)
PHASE_STABILIZATION = (num_full >= 3.0 and num_full < 4.0)
PHASE_ENDGAME = (num_full >= 4.0)
urgency_factor = 1.0 + (num_full * 0.4)
despair_index = 0.0
if has_trap:
despair_index += trap_severity * 0.5
if is_critical_trap_after:
despair_index += 1.0
if is_repair:
despair_index += 1.5 * trap_severity
if is_critical_trap_after:
despair_index += 0.5
if delta_valid < 0:
despair_index += 2.5
elif (delta_valid == 0 and not becomes_full) and (PHASE_ENDGAME or has_trap):
despair_index += 1.5
despair_index = min(despair_index, 7.0)
if is_insert:
is_insert_vetoed = (
breaks_full or
is_critical_trap_after or
(PHASE_EXPANSION and has_trap) or
(has_trap and not becomes_full)
)
if is_insert_vetoed:
return -1e9
if has_trap:
score -= 80000.0 * trap_severity * trap_penalty_amplifier * urgency_factor
if not (becomes_full and delta_valid > 0):
unproductive_insert_penalty = 1500.0 * urgency_factor
unproductive_insert_penalty *= tension_factor
unproductive_insert_penalty *= (1.0 + despair_index * 0.2)
score -= unproductive_insert_penalty
elif is_repair:
base_repair_penalty = 3500.0 * urgency_factor
if has_trap:
raw_desperation_discount = base_repair_penalty * (despair_index * 0.5)
max_possible_discount = base_repair_penalty + 2000.0 * urgency_factor
actual_desperation_discount = min(raw_desperation_discount, max_possible_discount)
base_repair_penalty -= actual_desperation_discount
score -= base_repair_penalty
trap_was_resolved = not has_trap
if source_deficit > 0 and not trap_was_resolved:
score -= 1500.0 * source_deficit * urgency_factor
if is_critical_trap_after:


--- Page 43 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
43
penalty = 180000.0 * trap_penalty_amplifier * urgency_factor
if PHASE_STABILIZATION or PHASE_ENDGAME:
penalty *= 2.5
score -= penalty
elif has_trap:
penalty_multiplier = 1.0
if PHASE_STABILIZATION:
penalty_multiplier = 2.0
score -= trap_severity * 4500.0 * penalty_multiplier * trap_penalty_amplifier * urgency_factor
else:
trap_escape_reward = 300000.0 * urgency_factor
if PHASE_STABILIZATION:
trap_escape_reward *= 1.4
score += trap_escape_reward
if target_dups == 0:
clean_repair_bonus = 100000.0 * urgency_factor * (1.0 + despair_index * 0.7)
if PHASE_STABILIZATION or PHASE_ENDGAME:
clean_repair_bonus *= 1.6
score += clean_repair_bonus
is_endgame_gambit = PHASE_ENDGAME and becomes_full
is_circuit_breaker = (PHASE_STABILIZATION or despair_index > 1.0) and trap_was_resolved
if breaks_full and (is_endgame_gambit or is_circuit_breaker):
base_sacrifice_bonus = 160000.0 * urgency_factor
quality_multiplier = 1.0 if target_deficit == 0 else 0.8
sacrifice_bonus = base_sacrifice_bonus * quality_multiplier
sacrifice_bonus *= (1.0 + despair_index * 0.5)
score += sacrifice_bonus
elif breaks_full:
score -= 130000.0 * urgency_factor
phase_bonus_multiplier = 1.0
if PHASE_EXPANSION:
phase_bonus_multiplier = 1.5
elif PHASE_STABILIZATION:
phase_bonus_multiplier = 1.2
if target_deficit == 0:
score += 3500.0 * urgency_factor * phase_bonus_multiplier
if target_dups == 0:
score += 3000.0 * urgency_factor * phase_bonus_multiplier
if delta_valid > 0:
progress_reward = 120000.0 * urgency_factor
if is_repair:
progress_reward *= (1.5 + despair_index * 0.5)
if PHASE_ENDGAME:
progress_reward += 30000.0 * urgency_factor
score += progress_reward
elif delta_valid < 0:
regression_penalty = 100000.0 * urgency_factor
if is_repair:
regression_penalty *= (1.2 + despair_index * 0.3)
score -= regression_penalty
score -= 1500.0 * target_deficit * urgency_factor * tension_factor
score -= 1000.0 * source_deficit * urgency_factor * tension_factor
dup_penalty = 3000.0 * target_dups
if target_dups > 1.0:
dup_penalty *= 1.5


--- Page 44 ---
44
GERGELY B´ERCZI
score -= dup_penalty * urgency_factor * tension_factor
if PHASE_ENDGAME or (PHASE_STABILIZATION and is_repair) or despair_index > 1.0:
base_noise_mag = 400.0 * urgency_factor
despair_amplification = math.exp(despair_index * 0.35)
noise_mag = base_noise_mag * despair_amplification
score += random.uniform(-noise_mag, noise_mag)
return score
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
C.2. Experiment B policy: rank-7 endgame pressure and numerology exploration. The
evolved evolved policy (evolve blocks) is the following.
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# AlphaEvolve may modify ONLY this block.
# Goal: evolve a strong, interpretable policy scoring function for Rank 7.
def policy_function(features: dict[str, float]) -> float:
"""
A hybrid policy balancing robust trap avoidance with a highly focused repair strategy.
Adapted for Rank 7 (higher complexity, longer games).
"""
# Termination check: Threshold updated to 7.0 for Rank 7
if features.get("is_terminate_move", 0.0) > 0.5:
return 1e9 if features.get("global_num_full_cols", 0.0) >= 7.0 else -1e9
import random
score = 0.0
# Feature extraction
num_full = features.get("global_num_full_cols", 0.0)
delta_valid = features.get("delta_num_valid", 0.0)
becomes_full = features.get("target_col_becomes_full", 0.0) > 0.5
breaks_full = features.get("source_col_was_full_and_is_not_anymore", 0.0) > 0.5
is_repair = features.get("is_repair_move", 0.0) > 0.5
is_insert = features.get("is_insert_move", 0.0) > 0.5
target_deficit = features.get("target_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
source_deficit = features.get("source_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
circuit_size = features.get("circuit_size", 0.0)
target_dups = features.get("target_dup_count_after", 0.0)
# -- State & Phase Definitions --
PHASE_ENDGAME = (num_full >= 6.0)
is_desperate_endgame_state = (PHASE_ENDGAME and not becomes_full and delta_valid <= 0)
critical_circuit_threshold = 3.0 + \
(num_full >= 4.0) + \
(num_full >= 6.0) + \
is_desperate_endgame_state
has_trap_after = circuit_size > 0.0
is_critical_trap_after = has_trap_after and (circuit_size <= critical_circuit_threshold)
urgency_factor = 1.0 + (num_full / 7.0)**2.5 * 5.8
time_pressure_factor = 1.0 + (num_full / 7.0)**2.2 * 4.0
# 1. Primary Objective: Progress vs. Regression
if delta_valid > 0:
reward = 120000.0 * delta_valid
if PHASE_ENDGAME:


--- Page 45 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
45
reward *= 1.5
score += reward
elif delta_valid < 0:
score -= 100000.0 * abs(delta_valid)
# 2. Move-Specific Incentives
if is_insert:
if breaks_full or is_critical_trap_after:
return -1e9
if becomes_full:
score += 80000.0
if target_deficit == 0 and target_dups == 0:
score += 40000.0
elif delta_valid == 0:
if target_deficit <= 1.0 and target_dups == 0.0 and not has_trap_after:
score += 25000.0 * (1.0 + num_full / 7.0)
stalling_penalty_base = 2000.0
if has_trap_after:
stalling_penalty_base += 15000.0
if is_critical_trap_after:
stalling_penalty_base += 30000.0
stalling_penalty_base += 5000.0 * (target_deficit + target_dups)
if is_desperate_endgame_state:
is_messy_stall = has_trap_after or target_deficit > 1.0 or target_dups > 0
if is_messy_stall:
stalling_penalty_base += 40000.0
else:
stalling_penalty_base += random.uniform(6000.0, 22000.0)
if random.random() < 0.6:
score += random.uniform(7000.0, 18000.0)
endgame_multiplier = 2.0 if PHASE_ENDGAME else 1.0
stalling_penalty = stalling_penalty_base * endgame_multiplier * time_pressure_factor
score -= stalling_penalty
elif is_repair:
trap_was_resolved_by_this_move = not has_trap_after
if trap_was_resolved_by_this_move:
reward = 300000.0
if PHASE_ENDGAME:
reward *= 2.0
score += reward
trap_penalty = 0.0
if is_critical_trap_after:
trap_penalty = 200000.0
if PHASE_ENDGAME:
trap_penalty *= 3.0
elif has_trap_after:
trap_penalty = 50000.0
if PHASE_ENDGAME:
trap_penalty *= 1.5
score -= trap_penalty
if breaks_full:
penalty = 150000.0
if trap_was_resolved_by_this_move:
penalty = -25000.0
elif is_desperate_endgame_state:
is_clean_after = not has_trap_after and target_deficit == 0.0 and source_deficit == 0.0
if is_clean_after:
penalty = -15000.0


--- Page 46 ---
46
GERGELY B´ERCZI
else:
penalty *= 0.4
elif PHASE_ENDGAME:
penalty *= 1.5
score -= penalty
base_repair_cost = 4000.0
if trap_was_resolved_by_this_move:
base_repair_cost -= 2500.0
elif has_trap_after:
base_repair_cost += 1000.0 * circuit_size
if target_deficit <= 1.0 and target_dups == 0.0:
base_repair_cost -= 1500.0
if PHASE_ENDGAME and (is_critical_trap_after or is_desperate_endgame_state):
repair_cost_multiplier = 0.3
else:
repair_cost_multiplier = time_pressure_factor
score -= base_repair_cost * repair_cost_multiplier
# 3. State Quality Penalties
quality_penalty = 0.0
quality_penalty += 2000.0 * target_deficit
quality_penalty += 1500.0 * source_deficit
quality_penalty += 3500.0 * target_dups
quality_penalty *= time_pressure_factor
score -= quality_penalty
# 4. Exploration
if num_full >= 5.0:
score += random.uniform(-4000.0, 4000.0)
# 5. "Numerology" Heuristic
state_signature = int(num_full * 1e2) + \
int(target_deficit * 1e1) + \
int(source_deficit * 7) + \
int(target_dups * 5) + \
int(circuit_size)
is_fortunate = (state_signature % 13 == 0)
is_cursed = (state_signature % 19 == 0)
if num_full >= 4.0:
numerology_bonus = 0.0
if is_fortunate and not is_cursed:
numerology_bonus = 35000.0
elif is_cursed and not is_fortunate:
numerology_bonus = -45000.0
elif is_cursed and is_fortunate:
numerology_bonus = -80000.0
score += numerology_bonus
score *= urgency_factor
return score
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
C.3. Experiment C policy: scale-aware trap energy and pressure dynamics.
C.3.1. AI Summary of the experiment. The following is the short description of the evolution process
generated by Gemini


--- Page 47 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
47
Gemini-generated summary
The goal of these programs is to evolve a general-purpose constructive policy for Rota’s
Basis Conjecture that generalizes across variable vector space dimensions (Ranks 5 through
13) without hardcoding dimension-specific logic.
The solvers must balance rapid basis
construction in low dimensions with high-precision conflict resolution in high dimensions to
identify independent transversals and resolve ”trap” instances containing hidden dependency
circuits.
Phase-Dependent Heuristic Scaling
The initial successful strategies moved away from static logic, recognizing that different
stages of construction require different behaviors. Program 0 1 introduced phase-dependent
heuristic scaling, utilizing the progress ratio to increase the magnitude of rewards and
penalties as the solution neared completion. This created an ”Endgame” phase with higher
urgency. Program 0 15 refined this by adding a rank-relative urgency factor, ensuring that
the transition from exploration to precision was scaled appropriate to the dimension (nn)
of the problem, preventing the solver from being too aggressive in high-rank spaces where
precision is paramount.
Non-Linear Complexity and Chaotic Exploration
A significant performance jump occurred with the introduction of non-linear adjustments to
handle the exponential increase in search space difficulty as rank increases. Program 0 200
implemented non-linear rank-complexity scaling, allowing the policy to apply drastically
different move priorities for Rank 5 versus Rank 13. Simultaneously, to prevent stagnation in
local optima (traps), this program introduced a feature-seeded pseudo-chaotic exploration
oscillator. This mechanism injected structured noise into the decision-making process, allowing
the agent to shake loose from suboptimal configurations.
Strategic Sacrifice and Trap Resolution
As the solvers improved, the ability to resolve specific ”trap” instances (hidden low-girth
circuits) became the primary differentiator. Program 0 276 achieved a major score increase
by formalizing sacrificial repair moves. Instead of strictly preserving completed columns,
this strategy allowed the solver to break a full column if it resolved a dependency circuit.
This was coupled with non-linear trap severity mitigation, which weighted the penalty of a
dependency loop inversely to its size, prioritizing the destruction of tight, critical loops over
larger, looser dependencies.
Dynamic Policy Cohesion and Bio-Mimetic Regulation
Mid-tier programs focused on smoother transitions between search states. Program 0 1034
utilized Dynamic Policy Cohesion (DPC), using a tanh-modulated signal to transition flu-
idly from expansion to consolidation rather than using hard thresholds. Later, programs
like 0 1882 and 0 5406 adopted a neurotransmitter-inspired dynamic regulation system.
This modeled internal states analogous to ”Dopamine” (reward sensitivity) and ”Cortisol”
(stress/urgency). These variables modulated the dynamic deficit exponent, enforcing increas-
ingly strict mathematical independence constraints as the ”stress” of the system (progress
and rank) increased.
Trap Energy and Barrier Tunneling
The final evolutionary leap abandoned simple penalties in favor of physics-inspired land-
scape navigation. Starting with 0 10675, the programs began modeling dependency loops
as trap energy. The key insight was the implementation of barrier porosity, which allowed
the agent to ”tunnel” through high-cost barriers. This logic mathematically incentivized
heroic sacrifices—intentionally breaking a valid basis configuration to escape a local energy
minimum—but only if the resulting reduction in trap energy was significant. The highest


--- Page 48 ---
48
GERGELY B´ERCZI
Gemini-generated summary (continued)
performing program, 0 14464, refined this by combining exponential progress-based pres-
sure with circuit-aware trap mitigation, enabling it to solve the highest rank instances by
strategically deconstructing its own progress to bypass deep structural traps.
C.3.2. The evolved algorithm. After 21.5 hours we arrived to the following evolved block (run 14464).
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-START
# AlphaEvolve may modify ONLY this block.
# Goal: evolve a policy that generalizes across Ranks 5-13.
def policy_function(features: dict[str, float]) -> float:
"""
A general-purpose policy for Rota’s Basis Conjecture.
Scales logic based on ’rank’ and ’progress_ratio’.
"""
rank = features.get("rank", 5.0)
num_full = features.get("global_num_full_cols", 0.0)
progress_ratio = features.get("progress_ratio", 0.0) # 0.0 to 1.0
# Dynamic Termination: Only terminate if we have ALL columns full
if features.get("is_terminate_move", 0.0) > 0.5:
return 1e12 if num_full >= rank else -1e12
import random
import math
score = 0.0
delta_valid = features.get("delta_num_valid", 0.0)
becomes_full = features.get("target_col_becomes_full", 0.0) > 0.5
breaks_full = features.get("source_col_was_full_and_is_not_anymore", 0.0) > 0.5
is_repair = features.get("is_repair_move", 0.0) > 0.5
is_insert = features.get("is_insert_move", 0.0) > 0.5
target_deficit = features.get("target_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
source_deficit = features.get("source_rank_deficit_after", 0.0)
circuit_size = features.get("circuit_size", 0.0)
target_dups = features.get("target_dup_count_after", 0.0)
# -- Common Penalty Coefficients --
C_DEFICIT_BASE = 4000.0
C_DUP_BASE = 3000.0
# -- Rank & Pressure Scaling --
rank_scaler = rank / 5.0
# -- Trap Physics --
trap_energy = 0.0
if circuit_size > 0.0:
trap_energy = 20.0 / (max(circuit_size, 1.5) - 1.0) * rank_scaler
trap_intensity = 0.0
if trap_energy > 0.0:
trap_intensity = min(1.0, trap_energy / (10.0 * rank_scaler + 1e-6))
progress_intensity = progress_ratio
early_midgame_intensity = 1.0 - progress_ratio
# -- Stagnation Physics: For non-circuit structural issues --
stagnation_intensity = 0.0


--- Page 49 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
49
if circuit_size == 0.0 and (target_deficit > 0.0 or target_dups > 0.0 or (is_repair and source_deficit >
0.0)):
stagnation_score = target_deficit * 2.0 + target_dups * 2.0
if is_repair:
stagnation_score += source_deficit * 1.0
stagnation_intensity = min(1.0, (stagnation_score / (rank * 2.0 + 1e-6)) * 0.6)
# -- Pressure Engine --
pressure = 1.0
columns_remaining = max(1.0, rank - num_full)
exponential_rate = (8.0 * math.sqrt(rank_scaler)) * (1.0 - trap_intensity * 0.6 - stagnation_intensity *
0.3)
mid_game_start = 0.5
end_game_start = 0.75
if progress_ratio > mid_game_start:
linear_progress = (progress_ratio - mid_game_start) / (end_game_start - mid_game_start + 1e-6)
pressure += 0.5 * linear_progress * rank_scaler
if progress_ratio > end_game_start:
pressure += math.exp(exponential_rate * (progress_ratio - end_game_start)) - 1.0
remaining_ratio = columns_remaining / rank
if progress_ratio > 0.8 or columns_remaining <= 3:
singularity_imminence_factor = 20.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 - trap_intensity * 0.7 - stagnation_intensity
* 0.3)
singularity_pressure = math.exp(-singularity_imminence_factor * remaining_ratio)
pressure += singularity_pressure * max(0.0, 1.0 - trap_intensity - stagnation_intensity * 0.5)
pressure = max(1.0, pressure * ((1.0 + rank_scaler / 2.0) * (1.0 - trap_intensity * 0.2 -
stagnation_intensity * 0.1)))
# -- Barrier for breaks_full --
barrier_porosity = 1.0
if is_repair and trap_energy > 0.0:
reduction_from_trap = min(0.8, trap_intensity * 0.8)
improvement_signal = 0.0
if target_deficit == 0.0 and target_dups == 0.0:
improvement_signal = 1.0
elif target_deficit < rank / 5.0 or target_dups < 2.0:
improvement_signal = 0.5
reduction_from_improvement = min(0.3, improvement_signal * math.sqrt(rank_scaler) * 0.5)
reduction_from_urgency_baseline = min(0.4, math.sqrt(rank_scaler) * 0.2)
total_reduction = reduction_from_trap + reduction_from_improvement + reduction_from_urgency_baseline
barrier_porosity = 1.0 - min(0.95, total_reduction)
current_barrier_height = (100000.0 * rank_scaler) * barrier_porosity
# -- Structural Instability Penalty (SIP) --
structural_instability_penalty = 0.0
crisis_signal_for_sip = max(trap_intensity, stagnation_intensity)
if crisis_signal_for_sip > 0.1:
degeneracy_term = target_deficit * target_dups
entanglement_term = 0.0
if is_repair:
entanglement_term = 0.5 * source_deficit * target_deficit
total_instability = degeneracy_term + entanglement_term
structural_instability_penalty = (100000.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 + pressure * 0.5)) * total_instability
* trap_intensity


--- Page 50 ---
50
GERGELY B´ERCZI
structural_instability_penalty = min(structural_instability_penalty, 750000.0 * rank_scaler)
# -- Precision Multiplier --
precision_multiplier = ((1.0 + pressure * 0.5) * rank_scaler) * (
1.0 + progress_intensity * 1.5 - trap_intensity * 0.75 - stagnation_intensity * 0.5
)
precision_multiplier = min(precision_multiplier, 10.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 + pressure * 0.5))
# -- Singularity Avoidance Penalty --
singularity_avoidance_penalty = 0.0
if target_deficit > 0.0 and target_dups > 0.0 and circuit_size > 0.0:
base_penalty = 1.5e6 * rank_scaler
progress_amplification = math.exp(5.0 * progress_ratio) - 1.0
singularity_avoidance_penalty = base_penalty * (1.0 + progress_amplification) * (1.0 + pressure)
singularity_avoidance_penalty *= (1.0 - trap_intensity * 0.5)
singularity_avoidance_penalty = min(singularity_avoidance_penalty, 5.0e6 * rank_scaler * (1.0 +
pressure))
# Heroic sacrifice
if is_repair and breaks_full and circuit_size == 0.0 and target_dups == 0.0 and target_deficit == 0.0:
meltdown_crisis_signal = max(trap_intensity, stagnation_intensity * 0.8)
meltdown_reward_magnitude = 250000.0 * rank_scaler * meltdown_crisis_signal * (1.0 + pressure)
min_perfect_resolution_reward = 50000.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 + pressure)
current_barrier_height = -max(meltdown_reward_magnitude, min_perfect_resolution_reward)
# Inserts
if is_insert:
if breaks_full:
return -1e9
if delta_valid > 0:
score += 80000.0 * delta_valid * (1.0 + pressure + early_midgame_intensity * 0.5 +
progress_intensity * 0.25)
elif delta_valid < 0:
return -1e9
if becomes_full:
score += 200000.0 * (1.0 + pressure + progress_intensity * 0.5)
if circuit_size > 0.0:
circuit_creation_penalty = 750000.0 * trap_energy * pressure * (1.0 - early_midgame_intensity *
0.3)
score -= circuit_creation_penalty
score -= C_DEFICIT_BASE * math.pow(target_deficit, 1.5) * precision_multiplier
score -= C_DUP_BASE * math.pow(target_dups, 1.2) * precision_multiplier
score -= structural_instability_penalty
score -= singularity_avoidance_penalty
if delta_valid == 0 and not becomes_full:
score -= 1000.0 * (1.0 + pressure + progress_intensity * 0.5)
# Repairs
elif is_repair:
score -= 2000.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 - trap_intensity * 0.5)
score -= C_DEFICIT_BASE * math.pow(target_deficit, 1.5) * precision_multiplier
score -= C_DUP_BASE * math.pow(target_dups, 1.2) * precision_multiplier
score -= C_DEFICIT_BASE * math.pow(source_deficit, 1.5) * precision_multiplier
score -= structural_instability_penalty
score -= singularity_avoidance_penalty
if delta_valid > 0:
score += 80000.0 * delta_valid * (1.0 + pressure + trap_energy * 0.4)
elif delta_valid < 0:


--- Page 51 ---
EVOLVING LOCAL CORRECTIONS FOR GLOBAL CONSTRUCTIONS IN COMBINATORICS
51
validity_decrease_penalty = 40000.0 * delta_valid * (1.0 + pressure)
leniency_reduction_factor = 1.0 - (trap_intensity * 0.75 * (1.0 - progress_ratio * 0.5))
validity_decrease_penalty *= leniency_reduction_factor
score += validity_decrease_penalty
score -= current_barrier_height
if circuit_size == 0.0:
circuit_break_reward = 800000.0 * rank_scaler * pressure * (1.0 + trap_intensity)
score += circuit_break_reward
else:
failed_repair_penalty = 40000.0 * trap_energy * pressure
score -= failed_repair_penalty
if target_deficit == 0:
score += 2000.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 + pressure * 0.5 + progress_intensity)
if target_dups == 0:
score += 1000.0 * rank_scaler * (1.0 + pressure * 0.5 + progress_intensity)
combined_frustration = trap_energy + (stagnation_intensity * 5.0 * rank_scaler)
noise_magnitude = 3500.0 * rank_scaler * min(3.0, combined_frustration / (1.0 + pressure * 0.25 + 1e-6))
score += random.uniform(-noise_magnitude, noise_magnitude)
return score
# EVOLVE-BLOCK-END
References
[1] A. Novikov et al. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
[2] Google DeepMind. AlphaEvolve: A Gemini-powered coding agent for designing advanced algorithms. Blog post
(May 14, 2025). Available online at the DeepMind blog.
[3] B. Georgiev, J. G´omez-Serrano, T. Tao, and A. Wagner. Mathematical exploration and discovery at scale.
arXiv:2511.02864, 2025.
[4] S. M. Ulam. A Collection of Mathematical Problems. Interscience Publishers, New York, 1960.
[5] P. J. Kelly. A congruence theorem for trees. Pacific Journal of Mathematics 7 (1957), 961-968.
[6] J. A. Bondy and R. L. Hemminger. Graph reconstruction-a survey. Journal of Graph Theory 1 (1977), 227-268.
[7] B. D. McKay, Reconstruction of small graphs and digraphs. arXiv:2102.01942, 2021.
[8] S. Monikandan and J. Balakumar. Reconstruction of bipartite graphs. Australasian Journal of Combinatorics 53
(2012), 141-150.
[9] P. Bili´nski, E. Kwon, and X. Yu. On the reconstruction of planar graphs. Journal of Combinatorial Theory,
Series B 97 (2007), 205-214.
[10] N. Alon and M. Tarsi. Colorings and orientations of graphs. Combinatorica 12 (1992), 125-134.
[11] N. Alon. Combinatorial Nullstellensatz. Combinatorics, Probability and Computing 8(1-2) (1999), 7-29.
[12] P. Zappa. The Cayley determinant of the determinant tensor and the Alon-Tarsi conjecture. Advances in Applied
Mathematics 19 (1997), 31-44.
[13] A. A. Drisko. On the number of even and odd Latin squares of order p + 1. Advances in Mathematics 128(1)
(1997), 20-35.
[14] A. A. Drisko. Proof of the Alon-Tarsi conjecture for n = 2rp. Electronic Journal of Combinatorics 5 (1998), R28.
[15] D. G. Glynn. The conjectures of Alon-Tarsi and Rota in dimension prime minus one. SIAM Journal on Discrete
Mathematics 24(2) (2010).
[16] D. S. Stones. On extensions of the Alon-Tarsi Latin square conjecture. Electronic Journal of Combinatorics 19(4)
(2012), P7.
[17] N. J. Cavenagh and I. M. Wanless. There are asymtotically the same number of Latin squares of each parity.
Bulletin of the Australian Mathematical Society 93(2) (2016), 263-267.
[18] B. Friedman and S. McGuinness. The Alon-Tarsi conjecture: a perspective on the main results. Discrete
Mathematics 342(8) (2019), 2234-2253.
[19] W.J. Huang and G.C. Rota. On the relations of various conjectures on Latin squares and straightening coefficients.
Discrete Mathematics 128 (1994), 225-236.
[20] S. Onn. A colorful determinantal identity, a conjecture of Rota, and Latin squares. The American Mathematical
Monthly 104(2) (1997), 156-159.
[21] M. Wild. On Rota’s problem about n bases in a rank n matroid. Advances in Mathematics 108(2) (1994), 336-345.


--- Page 52 ---
52
GERGELY B´ERCZI
[22] T. Y. Chow. Reduction of Rota’s basis conjecture to a conjecture on three bases. SIAM Journal on Discrete
Mathematics 23(1) (2009), 369-371.
[23] J. Geelen and P. Humphries. Rota’s basis conjecture for paving matroids. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics
20(4) (2006).
[24] J. Geelen and C. Webb. On Rota’s basis conjecture. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 21 (2007).
[25] M. Buci´c, M. Kwan, A. Pokrovskiy, and B. Sudakov. Halfway to Rota’s basis conjecture. International Mathematics
Research Notices 2020(21), 8007–8026
[26] M. Kirchweger, M. Scheucher, and S. Szeider. A SAT attack on Rota’s Basis Conjecture. 25th International
Conference on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (SAT 2022)
[27] L. Sauermann. Rota’s basis conjecture holds for random bases of vector spaces. European Journal of Combinatorics
110 (2024), 103714.
[28] A. Pokrovskiy. Rota’s basis conjecture holds asymptotically. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society
153 (2025), 205-213.
[29] R. Montgomery and J. Sauermann. Asymptotically-tight packing and covering with transversal bases in Rota’s
basis conjecture. arXiv:2508.05601, 2025.
Aarhus University
Email address: gergely.berczi@math.au.dk
