--- Page 1 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Alexander D. Goldie * 1 Zilin Wang † 1 Adrian Hayler † 1 Deepak Nathani † 2 Edan Toledo † 3
Ken Thampiratwong † 2 Aleksandra Kalisz † 1 Michael Beukman ‡ 1 Alistair Letcher ‡ 1 Shashank Reddy ‡ 1
Clarisse Wibault ‡ 1 Theo Wolf ‡ 1 Charles O’Neill ‡ 1 Uljad Berdica ‡ 1 Nicholas Roberts ‡ 4 Saeed Rahmani ‡ 1 5
Hannah Erlebach ‡ 1 Roberta Raileanu § 3 Shimon Whiteson § 1 Jakob N. Foerster § 1
Abstract
Automating the development of machine learning
algorithms has the potential to unlock new break-
throughs. However, our ability to improve and
evaluate algorithm discovery systems has thus far
been limited by existing task suites. They suf-
fer from many issues, such as: poor evaluation
methodologies; data contamination; and contain-
ing saturated or very similar problems. Here, we
introduce DiscoGen, a procedural generator of
algorithm discovery tasks for machine learning,
such as developing optimisers for reinforcement
learning or loss functions for image classification.
Motivated by the success of procedural generation
in reinforcement learning, DiscoGen spans mil-
lions of tasks of varying difficulty and complexity
from a range of machine learning fields. These
tasks are specified by a small number of config-
uration parameters and can be used to optimise
algorithm discovery agents (ADAs). We present
DiscoBench, a benchmark consisting of a fixed,
small subset of DiscoGen tasks for principled eval-
uation of ADAs. Finally, we propose a number
of ambitious, impactful research directions en-
abled by DiscoGen, in addition to experiments
demonstrating its use for prompt optimisation of
an ADA. DiscoGen is released open-source.
1. Introduction
Automating the development of machine learning (ML)
algorithms with AI offers the potential to unlock new break-
throughs in research. Furthermore, since algorithm discov-
ery agents (ADAs) can alleviate the bottleneck of human
∗Lead Author, †Core Contributor, ‡Task Contributor, §Equal
Supervision 1University of Oxford 2University of California, Santa
Barbara 3University College London 4University of Wisconsin–
Madison 5Delft University of Technology. Correspondence to:
Alexander D. Goldie <goldie@robots.ox.ac.uk>.
Preprint. March 19, 2026.
ideation, implementation and experimentation, their utility
scales directly with computational resources.
However, existing ADA benchmarks (e.g., MLE-Bench
(Chan et al., 2025) and MLGymBench (Nathani et al.,
2025)) suffer from structural problems that inhibit princi-
pled evaluation. They generally fail to separate the discovery
(meta-train) and evaluation (meta-test) of algorithms, mean-
ing ADAs discover algorithms for the same problems they
are evaluated on. Additionally, they often require agents
to write entire codebases, effectively measuring software
engineering rather than research skills, or initialise from full
file systems, biasing agents away from discovering novelty
(Nathani et al., 2025). Finally, these benchmarks run the
risk of data contamination from pre-training (Dong et al.,
2024; Liang et al., 2025); ADAs may have learned from
the fixed task sets during pre-training, and thus change their
behaviour or use previously seen problem solutions to com-
pensate for poor research skills (Liang et al., 2025).
Furthermore, our ability to develop better ADAs for ML re-
mains limited, principally because there are too few different
algorithm discovery problems to learn from. These existing
suites of tasks for algorithm discovery are constrained due
to a reliance on manual creation. Therefore, developing new
approaches and architectures for existing suites, or training
ADAs on them, risks overfitting.
To address these issues, we introduce DiscoGen, a procedu-
ral generator of algorithm discovery tasks for ML. DiscoGen
supports >400 million different tasks, of varying difficulty,
for ADAs. DiscoGen tasks have distinct meta-train/meta-
test datasets, where meta-test datasets are hidden from the
ADA, ensuring principled evaluation and expanding the gen-
erator’s distribution. Furthermore, DiscoGen supports many
diverse ML subfields and uses a modular structure that de-
fines which components of an algorithm an ADA discovers,
meaning tasks vary over a number of axes.
DiscoGen enables the use of an ADA optimisation loop, as
shown in Figure 1. Thus, we establish our terminology as:
• Inner-loop: An algorithm optimises a specific model on a
single dataset’s train set. When the inner-loop finishes, the
model is evaluated on the dataset’s test set. For example,
1
arXiv:2603.17863v1  [cs.LG]  18 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Evaluate
Agent on
DiscoBench
ADA Evaluation
Evaluate
Algorithm
 On Meta-Test
Meta-Loop
Algorithm Discovery
DiscoBench
DiscoGen
On-Policy RL
Sample Domain
Image Classification
Language
Modelling
Continual Learning
Choose Datasets
Exclude
Meta-Train Meta-Test
Preprocessing
Optimiser
Loss
Network
Select Modules
Meta-Loop
Algorithm Discovery
Sample
New Tasks
Update ADA
Evaluate
Algorithm
 On Meta-Test
ADA Optimisation Loop
Figure 1. A typical DiscoGen setup. DiscoGen procedurally generates new algorithm discovery tasks. For every generated task,
an algorithm discovery agent iteratively develops new algorithms (the meta-loop) for training in the task’s meta-train datasets (the
inner-loops). The developed algorithm is evaluated on meta-test datasets, with the evaluation score used to optimise the agent (the ADA
optimisation-loop). Datasets that are available in a task domain can also be excluded from the task. After each step, DiscoGen can be
sampled for a new task. After ADA optimisation has completed, the agent is evaluated on DiscoBench, a set of ADA test tasks.
the inner loop could be training an image classifier on
the ImageNet train set (Russakovsky et al., 2015), and
evaluating it on the ImageNet test set.
• Meta-loop: The ADA iteratively improves the algorithm
based on inner-loop feedback from its meta-train set,
which contains many inner-loop datasets. When the meta-
loop finishes, the final algorithm is evaluated on a held-out
meta-test set. An example meta-loop could involve an
ADA developing image classifier loss functions, based
on feedback from ImageNet and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky
et al., 2009) (meta-train), and evaluating the loss by train-
ing an image classifier on CIFAR-100 (meta-test).
• Task: A single algorithm discovery problem, defining the
ADA’s objective and the meta-train and meta-test datasets.
• ADA Optimisation loop: The ADA is optimised for
meta-loop performance in DiscoGen tasks in a meta-meta-
loop (Schmidhuber, 1987). The ADA optimisation loop
produces an ADA for evaluation. ADA optimisation could
update ADA weights based on meta-test performance.
• ADA Evaluation: The ADA is evaluated on a set of
tasks that it has not been directly optimised for (in other
words, meta-meta-test). This could involve developing a
language model optimiser, for instance.
Much as procedural environment generation enabled train-
ing generalist reinforcement learning agents (Cobbe et al.,
2020; Stooke et al., 2021; Bauer et al., 2023; Matthews
et al., 2025), DiscoGen enables new research directions
in algorithm discovery. Further, ideas like autocurricula
(Leibo et al., 2019; Dennis et al., 2021; Parker-Holder et al.,
2022a) or recursive self-improvement (Clune, 2019) rely
on the ability to consistently sample new, interesting tasks
of varying difficulties to prevent overfitting. Given the vast
number of possible tasks in DiscoGen, it is a crucial tool
for enabling open-ended learning for algorithm discovery
(Stanley, 2019; Hughes et al., 2024).
We create DiscoBench, a set of hand-designed tasks from
DiscoGen, for ADA evaluation. Similar to Matthews et al.
(2025) or Samvelyan et al. (2021), which build benchmarks
in procedural environment generators, DiscoBench tasks
are in the support of DiscoGen but should not be intention-
ally optimised in ADA optimisation. While DiscoBench,
like other benchmarks, is susceptible to data contamination
issues, it benefits from the design decisions made in Disco-
Gen, such as a meta-train/meta-test distinction. Since it was
run prior to publication, our DiscoBench evaluation is not
subject to this contamination, and we propose mitigations
in Section 8 to overcome this issue in the future.
We provide further research proposals enabled by DiscoGen
in Section 6. Finally, as an example of ADA optimisation,
we use procedurally generated tasks from DiscoGen for
prompt tuning an ADA in Section 7. We explore how ADA
evaluation changes when their prompts are optimised over
different numbers of randomly generated tasks, finding that
prompts developed over a wider range perform better.
2. Related Work
Due to the depth of prior work in this field, we abridge our
related work discussion here and expand it in Appendix D.
2.1. Automated Research
Automated machine learning (Hutter et al., 2019, AutoML)
focuses on applying machine learning to new problems with-
out expert knowledge. Prior research generally augments
machine learning algorithms with methods like hyperparam-
eter tuning (e.g., (Li et al., 2018; Parker-Holder et al., 2021))
or data-cleaning (e.g., (Krishnan et al., 2016)). However,
whereas most AutoML research is limited to fitting human-
2


--- Page 3 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
designed solutions to new data, algorithm discovery has the
inverse goal: autonomously developing new algorithms.
That said, meta-learning is a subset of AutoML which aims
to learn algorithms from data (Schmidhuber, 1987; Real
et al., 2020; Beck et al., 2023). Often, meta-learned al-
gorithms train a neural network to replace a component
of a machine learning algorithm, such as the optimizer
(Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Metz et al., 2022b; Goldie et al.,
2024) or loss function (Kirsch et al., 2020; Bechtle et al.,
2021). Recently, using large language models (LLMs) to
propose new algorithms has proven fruitful (Lu et al., 2024a;
Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Novikov et al., 2025). How-
ever, optimising and evaluating these systems is difficult
due to a lack of diverse, interesting and well-designed tasks.
In this paper, we consider how procedural generation can be
used to create new algorithm discovery tasks to this end.
As language models have improved (METR, 2025; Chollet
et al., 2025), developing more complex research and coding
agents has emerged as an important pursuit. Agents aug-
ment language models with the ability to take actions, use
tools and run code (Wang et al., 2024a; Schick et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2024). AI research agents (Toledo et al., 2025)
use these tools to automate parts of the research process in
a ReAct loop (Yao et al., 2023), where they receive feed-
back from tools while developing solutions. Rather than
focusing on designing new agents, we build a framework
for sampling millions of tasks to aid their development.
Agents can be applied throughout the research pipeline. Ex-
amples include automating ideation (Si et al., 2024), imple-
menting research ideas with a human-in-the-loop (Gottweis
et al., 2025; Weston & Foerster, 2025), judging research
papers (Si et al., 2024; Thakkar et al., 2025), or automating
the entire research workflow (Lu et al., 2024b; Yamada et al.,
2025; Intology, 2025; Si et al., 2026). Specifically in algo-
rithm discovery, considerations include how agents should
search over new algorithms (Jiang et al., 2025; Toledo et al.,
2025) or when to run experiments (Yu et al., 2025; Nathani
et al., 2025). In this work, we provide a rigorous and scal-
able generator of tasks for optimising and evaluating ADAs.
2.2. Optimising Agents
Pretraining language models on more data leads to improved
performance (Kaplan et al., 2020), and large procedurally
generated environments have led to generalist reinforcement
learning (RL) policies (Section 2.3). Motivated by these
findings, we consider how ADAs can be optimised using
procedurally generated algorithm discovery tasks.
Optimising agents specifically for mathematics (e.g.,
(Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Trinh et al., 2024; Hubert et al.,
2025)) or coding (e.g., (Li et al., 2022; Rozière et al., 2024))
has led to significant gains. Underpinning these advances
are large, diverse and verifiable problem sets to research
for or train models on (Shao et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2025).
For example, there are many suites of mathematical prob-
lems (e.g., (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021b)) or
open-source code repositories (Jimenez et al., 2024; Chen
et al., 2021). However, developing similarly large sets of
algorithm discovery tasks has proven difficult, as manual
curation requires expert knowledge and, often, adaptation to
integrate different data. Additionally, developing superhu-
man algorithms requires measuring ‘how good’ algorithms
are, rather than correctness. Here, we mitigate these limita-
tions of manual task creation using procedural generation.
2.3. Procedural Generation
Procedural content generation (PCG) involves creating lev-
els or environments algorithmically, according to rules,
rather than manually (Togelius et al., 2013). To do so, PCG
environments are defined as Contextual Markov Decision
Processes (Hallak et al., 2015, Contextual MDPs) or Under-
specified Partially Observable MDPs (Dennis et al., 2021)
which define levels by a small number of configuration vari-
ables. In deep RL, PCG has proven effective for training
agents to generalise over a smooth distribution of levels,
rather than solving specific levels only. Such approaches
have been applied to environments of ranging complexity,
from gridworlds (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023) to physics
engines (Matthews et al., 2025) or 3-dimensional worlds
(Stooke et al., 2021). Procedural generation enables new
research directions, such as autocurricula (e.g., (Jiang et al.,
2021b; Dennis et al., 2021)) or large scale meta-learning
(e.g., (Bauer et al., 2023; Nikulin et al., 2024)). We explore
how to apply similar principles to algorithm discovery.
3. The Problems With Algorithm Discovery
Task Suites
ADA improvement is bottlenecked by current algorithm dis-
covery task suites. They are heavily limited in scale due
to a reliance on manual task creation. Benchmarks like
MLGym-Bench (Nathani et al., 2025, 13 tasks), MLAgent-
Bench (Huang et al., 2024, 13 tasks), MLE-Bench (Chan
et al., 2025, 75 tasks), AIRSBench (Lupidi et al., 2026, 20
tasks) and REBench (Wijk et al., 2025, 7 tasks) assess ADA
performance, but none provide enough tasks to optimise
ADAs over, nor separate ADA evaluation from optimisation.
Ideally, as in PCG for RL, we want to optimise ADAs over
a smooth distribution of tasks to robustly develop algorithm
discovery capabilities. Furthermore, these benchmarks suf-
fer from flaws which limit their value for evaluation.
3.1. Issues With Existing Task Designs
Beyond limited scope, we believe task design in these bench-
marks is insufficient. Here, we discuss a number of their
structural flaws, which DiscoGen rectifies (Section 4.4).
Poor Evaluation
Proper evaluation in machine learning
relies on a distinct train/test split (Goodfellow et al., 2016)
3


--- Page 4 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
to avoid overestimating performance. Algorithm discovery
is no different; despite not fitting a model to test data in the
inner-loop, hill-climbing algorithms on meta-train datasets
is susceptible to the same flawed evaluation as humans us-
ing validation signals to design methods (Langford, 2005;
Whiteson et al., 2011). However, existing benchmarks miss
the proper train-test boundary. Rather than measuring algo-
rithm transfer from meta-train to unseen meta-test datasets,
they evaluate the performance of inner-loop trained mod-
els on the test set of the (known) meta-train datasets (e.g.,
(Nathani et al., 2025; Chan et al., 2025)). In effect, testing
an algorithm on the dataset it was developed on, rather than
how well it generalises. Whilst this can be valid evaluation
in certain settings, it is not generally the objective in algo-
rithm discovery (Goldie et al., 2025). We demonstrate the
importance of meta-test evaluation in Section 5.2, where
algorithms often perform worse in meta-test over meta-train.
Limited Diversity
Due to their limited scale, benchmarks
are often restricted to similar types of problem, such as
small Kaggle-style challenges (Chan et al., 2025) or quick-
to-run problems (Nathani et al., 2025). As such, rather
than understanding the general performance of ADAs, they
measure their ability in specific types of problem only.
Limiting Initialisation
While in-context examples help
elicit reasoning in LLMs (Wei et al., 2023), they can limit
output diversity (Turpin et al., 2023). Many benchmarks
only initialise tasks from full implementations, potentially
limiting the creativity of agents; in Nathani et al. (2025),
agents devolve to hyperparameter tuning. Furthermore, this
hampers our ability to understand ADA capabilities; when
starting from a full implementation, an ADA could submit
a working solution without making its own edits. Despite
being a shortcoming of ADAs, we believe tools to analyse
this can be provided at the task level.
Slow Manual Expansion
Adding every new task to these
suites is manual, meaning scaling their quantity is inherently
limited by the number of human-hours available.
Data Contamination
Data contamination, where evalua-
tion data leaks into training, is an issue in LLM benchmarks
due to large-scale pretraining (Dong et al., 2024). It can
be especially problematic in ‘challenge-based’ benchmarks,
like MLE-Bench. Since agents can often use the internet, or
may have pre-trained on challenges, ADAs can reproduce
public solutions to boost their score (Hamin & Edelman,
2025). Such logic can be extended to other contamination
types, like agents seeing open-sourced dataset labels. While
limiting internet access is a mitigation, it is advantageous to
design benchmarks that are as robust as possible instead.
Floor and Ceiling Effects
Many suites include saturated
or solved problems (e.g., (Huang et al., 2024)) with hard-to-
change difficulties, limiting their signal for optimisation.
4. DiscoGen
DiscoGen generates tasks; modular algorithm discovery
problems consisting of an objective and meta-train and meta-
test datasets. Each task is defined by seven components.
1. Task Domain
The task domain establishes which area
of machine learning a task pertains to (e.g., On-Policy RL or
Image Classification). It defines the initial codebase, agent
objective, and which datasets and modules are available.
2. Editable Modules
For each task domain, we identify
important building blocks, or modules, of an algorithm that
can be set as editable or fixed. Whereas fixed modules use
standard implementations (e.g., a conventional loss function
or optimiser), editable modules specify the interface for an
agent’s code only (i.e., inputs, outputs and generic function
names). This reduces the bias of agents, while ensuring
their implementation fits the rest of the codebase. There can
be many modules per domain, combinatorially expanding
the number of possible tasks that can be generated.
3. Meta-Training Datasets
Meta-training datasets are the
problems which an agent can run experiments on during
algorithm discovery. They are known to the agent.
4. Meta-Test Datasets
Meta-test datasets are used to test
the agent’s discovered algorithm after the meta-loop has
completed. They test how well algorithms transfer to held-
out problems, and are not known to the agent.
5. (Optional) Backend
For some task domains, we im-
plement additional backends that provide new tasks without
warranting their own domain. For example, in On-Policy
RL, a user can specify whether to use a feed-forward or re-
current policy, providing a new search space for algorithms.
6. Evaluation Type
Each task can use one of a number
of meta-learning objectives, which the ADA must optimise.
Currently, DiscoGen supports three evaluation types for al-
gorithms: its final score (maximise performance); the energy
used to reach some proportion of the baseline’s score (max-
imise efficiency); or the time taken to reach a proportion
of the baseline’s score (maximise speed), like Zhao et al.
(2025) or Jordan et al. (2024). In this paper we focus on
evaluating for performance only, due to resource constraints.
Expanding DiscoGen to other evaluation types is trivial.
7. Initialisation
DiscoGen supports task generation using
either ‘empty’ initialisations, in which only the interface
of each editable module is provided, or ‘baseline’ initiali-
sations, where editable modules start from full implemen-
tations of baseline algorithms (as in Nathani et al. (2025)).
Our experiments use ‘empty’ initialisations in this paper.
4


--- Page 5 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
4.1. An Example Task
1 task_domain = "OnPolicyRL"
2 meta_train = ["Breakout", "Freeway"]
3 meta_test = ["Asterix", "SpaceInvaders"]
4 backend = "recurrent"
5 change_optim = False
6 change_loss = True
7 change_networks = True
8 change_train = False
9 eval_type = "performance"
10 initialisation = "empty"
Example 1. An example task configuration. A task is defined by its
task domain, meta-train/meta-test datasets, backend and modules.
We use Example 1 to demonstrate the task interface. For this
on-policy RL task, the ADA will work in JAX (Bradbury
et al., 2018) to maximise the performance of an RL agent.
The majority of the codebase is fixed: domain-specific code
like wrapper functions and environment creation, as well
as the optimiser (which uses Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017))
and training loop modules. While an agent can interact
with these files, any changes will be overwritten prior to
meta-testing to prevent evaluation hacking.
The ADA must work with two editable files: the loss, which
starts as an empty function mapping inputs like collected
data batches to a scalar loss; and the network architecture,
which maps environment observations to an RL policy, value
function and recurrent state and also includes no logic. The
ADA can make arbitrary code edits, such as writing addi-
tional functions, importing missing packages, and filling the
templates. The agent can run inner-loop training and evalu-
ation for both meta-train environments. To ensure security
during agent execution, the ADA operates in a container-
ised environment. If one editable module is only called by
another, the ADA could also edit its interface, expanding
the search-space of algorithms in DiscoGen tasks further.
4.2. Procedural Task Generation
DiscoGen is a procedural generator of ML tasks. As a
procedural generator, it is designed for improving ADAs,
manually or automatically in an ADA optimisation loop
(Figure 1). A task is specified by a small configuration file,
like Example 1, which takes the same role as the parameters
in other PCG environments (Cobbe et al., 2020; Stooke et al.,
2021). This can be randomly generated, user-specified,
or sampled using autocurricula. The technical details of
sampling tasks in DiscoGen are described in Appendix F.1.
DiscoGen creates tasks in a two-stage process to reduce the
risk of meta-test leakage. The meta-train portion of the task
is generated first; only after the meta-loop is complete does
DiscoGen create the meta-test codebase. As such, the agent
is never given any details of the meta-test datasets.
PCG involves creating levels, or tasks, programmatically.
DiscoGen is no different; the number of tasks for a domain
is combinatorial with respect to how many modules and
datasets it supports. Specifically, for a task domain with
m modules, d datasets, and b backends, and our currently
supported 3 evaluation types and 2 task initialisations,
Ntasks = 2 · 3 · b · (2m −1) ·

3d −2(d+1) + 1

.
(1)
Derived in Appendix F.2, this assumes at least one editable
module and assigns each dataset to either meta-train, meta-
test or unused (with at least one meta-train and meta-test).
4.3. Available Task Domains
Table 1 provides a snapshot of the domains in DiscoGen,
which represent diverse fields ranging from simple applied
problems to complex foundational ones, spanning super-
vised to reinforcement learning. We expect this collection
to grow with open-source community contributions. We
describe each domain, its modules and datasets in Appendix
A. We describe a small number of additional domains and
editable modules which are not analysed in this paper, due
to computational limitations, in Appendix B, and the asso-
ciated full task count (∼100B) in Appendix C. Creating
new domains is simple, needing only mild adaptation of
existing codebases. Due to imbalanced task counts, we rec-
ommend uniformly sampling domains to reduce bias; such
functionality is supported within the DiscoGen library.
Table 1. Overview of domains and their number of supported tasks.
Task Domain
m
d
b
Ntasks
Bayesian Optimisation
6
11
1
65,413,656
Brain Speech Detection
3
7
1
81,144
Computer Vision Classification
4
9
1
1,679,400
Continual Learning
5
3
3
6,696
Greenhouse Gas Prediction
2
4
1
900
Language Modelling
3
4
2
4,200
Model Unlearning1
1
3
1
85,176
Off-Policy RL
7
4
1
38,100
On-Policy RL
4
13
3
426,043,800
Unsupervised Environment Design
3
4
1
2,100
Total
493,355,172
Median
59,622
DiscoGen exhibits useful diversity across these millions
of tasks; in Section 7, we show that ADA optimisation
improves as more DiscoGen tasks are experienced. The
domains supported in DiscoGen span a range of machine
learning fields, incorporate datasets of varying complexity
and difficulty, and are built upon codebases of differing
scales. Most task domains include unique modules, and
when there is overlap, implementations are domain-specific.
In Appendix G, we explore how ADA performance changes
in on-policy RL for all 15 possible module combinations.
Our analysis reveals that increasing the number of editable
modules lowers the ADA’s success rate, but the increased
flexibility raises its achievable performance ceiling.
1Model unlearning entails finetuning pretrained models. For n
models, Ntasks = 2·3·b·(2m−1)·
 (2n + 1)d −2(n + 1)d + 1

5


--- Page 6 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
We further validate this diversity through rank correlation
analysis over the performance of different ADAs in Dis-
coBench (Section 5.2), a subset of DiscoGen tasks, in Fig-
ures 2 & 3 (Appendix I). Hierarchical clustering of the cor-
relation matrix reveals distinct patterns; while correlation is
often high between similar modules in different domains or
different modules in the same domain, there are also anti-
correlations where strong performance in one task implies
poor performance in another, including within the same do-
main. The Fisher-Z transformed mean Spearman correlation
is ∼0.4; high enough to indicate non-random signal, while
sufficiently small to show low redundancy in DiscoGen.
Notably, we also find that clustering patterns are distinct
between meta-train and meta-test, demonstrating how the
same algorithm can rank differently across datasets.
Per-dataset analysis in each task reinforces the meaning-
fulness of DiscoGen’s large task space. Considering Ap-
pendix M, the ranking of the discovered algorithms changes
across datasets within the same task. This is intuitive, given
prior literature suggests optimal algorithms differ between
datasets or RL environments (e.g., in reinforcement learning
(Goldie et al., 2024; Jackson et al., 2025), computer vision
(Rodrigo et al., 2024; Takahashi et al., 2024) or language
modelling (Dao & Gu, 2024; Jelassi et al., 2024)).
4.4. Advantages of DiscoGen
Individual task design in DiscoGen also overcomes the many
flaws of previous task definitions raised in Section 3.1.
Principled Evaluation & Contamination Resistance
DiscoGen tasks clearly distinguish between meta-train and
meta-test. Since DiscoGen is procedural, and there is no
knowledge of the meta-test datasets in meta-training, the po-
tential for test leakage is limited. Even as DiscoGen enters
pre-training datasets, this is a step towards fairer evalua-
tion, ensuring DiscoGen remains pertinent for a long time.
Furthermore, DiscoGen supports different evaluation types,
enabling discovery for factors other than performance.
High Diversity
DiscoGen generates highly diverse tasks.
As demonstrated in Section 4.2, DiscoGen supports a range
of domains with different data structures, filesystem com-
plexities and modules. Since DiscoGen tasks are parame-
terised combinatorially, its tasks represent a range of difficul-
ties from “implement a single module for one easy dataset”
to “implement many modules for many hard datasets”.
Different Initialisations
Agents need not implement full
codebases, and the initialisation of editable modules can be
set to just the inputs and outputs of the module only (empty)
or fully functioning baseline implementations. In essence,
tasks can involve either ‘improvement from a baseline’ or
‘de novo discovery’. This allows us to better analyse the
biases elicited by ADAs, can be used to make tasks easier or
harder by changing the level of guidance, and may enable
improved creativity in research agents.
Ease of Adding Tasks
Beyond our currently implemented
domains, adding many tasks to DiscoGen is significantly
easier than for other suites. For similar effort to adding one
task to, say, MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2025) or MLGym-
Bench (Nathani et al., 2025), DiscoGen can gain potentially
millions of new tasks in its support. When the base code for
a task domain is complete, adding more tasks is even easier;
isolating a new module effectively doubles the number of
possible tasks, and adding a new dataset near-triples it.
Unsaturated Problems
Since tasks can be made more or
less difficult by changing the module and dataset configu-
rations (Appendix G), DiscoGen tasks span a wide range
of difficulties. We find that the more modules there are to
implement, the harder the problem but the higher the poten-
tial ceiling. Additionally, almost all datasets currently in
DiscoGen have yet to be solved by humans, let alone agents,
and adding more, harder datasets is straightforward.
5. DiscoBench
Despite the contamination risk that arises from releasing
a public benchmark, there is still merit to evaluating ADA
performance over a fixed set of DiscoGen tasks that resolve
the other flaws from prior benchmarks (Section 3.1).
DiscoBench is an ADA evaluation suite akin to the hand-
designed levels built in PCG environments (e.g., (Matthews
et al., 2025; Nikulin et al., 2024)). For each task domain in
DiscoGen, we create m + 1 tasks; m tasks where one of the
m modules is active at a time (DiscoBench Single), and 1
where all modules are active simultaneously (DiscoBench
All). We do not include other module combinations to ensure
DiscoBench remains manageable and to enable principled
expansion of DiscoBench as domains are added. Meta-train
and meta-test sets are fixed across all tasks to enable compar-
ison, and are selected pseudo-randomly; very long-to-run
datasets are reserved for meta-testing, for computational
reasons. These splits are included in Appendix H. ADAs
should not be optimised on DiscoBench to ensure it is an
appropriate test suite (though the probability of sampling
tasks from DiscoBench is non-zero, as in other PCG environ-
ments). Since these tasks are not yet public, our evaluation
is not subject to contamination; however, this work entering
the public domain exposes it to pretraining or internet search
agents. As such, we plan to release a private ‘API’ version
of DiscoBench using datasets not mentioned publicly.
5.1. Experimental Setup
We explore the performance of different LLMs with the
MLGym ADA (Nathani et al., 2025), a ReAct agent (Yao
et al., 2023) which can run code, read files and submit the
final algorithm when ready, with a fixed action budget. Due
to resource constraints, and for reproducibility purposes, we
evaluate the performance of open-source language models:
Deepseek-v3.2 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025), Devstral2 (Mis-
tral AI, 2025) and GPT-OSS 120B (OpenAI et al., 2025).
6


--- Page 7 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Table 2. ADA evaluation performance in DiscoBench (Elo Scores with 95% CIs). Bold indicates best mean performance.
DiscoBench Single
DiscoBench Single (Until Success)
DiscoBench All
Model
Succ.
Meta-Train
Meta-Test
Succ.
Meta-Train
Meta-Test
Succ.
Meta-Train
Meta-Test
Baseline (All Fixed)
—
1104 [1077, 1136]
1177 [1144, 1211]
—
1076 [1038, 1108]
1149 [1113, 1184]
—
1409 [1297, 1682]
1377 [1212, 1595]
GPT-OSS 120B
68.2%
931 [900, 961]
962 [933, 993]
100.0%
888 [853, 914]
901 [871, 929]
11.4%
533 [-183, 700]
597 [-106, 799]
Devstral2
45.9%
886 [850, 922]
808 [771, 842]
100.0%
1000 [966, 1029]
964 [930, 991]
34.3%
873 [751, 1138]
1087 [971, 1322]
Deepseek-v3.2
80.0%
1079 [1050, 1108]
1053 [1020, 1082]
100.0%
1037 [1004, 1067]
987 [960, 1011]
25.7%
1184 [1069, 1397]
940 [831, 1176]
We include an ‘all fixed’ baseline (i.e., the code with no ed-
itable modules) for comparison; it is always possible for the
ADA to implement this. We provide experimental details
and hyperparameters in Appendix E, include our generic
ADA system prompt in Appendix N.1, and detail cost and
compute usage in Appendix E.4.
In both DiscoBench Single and DiscoBench All, we aggre-
gate scores over three seeds per task and model. We report
two per-model success-rates and Elo ratings (Elo, 1978)
based on same-dataset comparisons; one for meta-train, and
one for meta-test. We report 95% confidence intervals for
Elo, estimated using 100 bootstrap samples as in Appendix
E. Since agents frequently fail to consistently produce valid
solutions for many tasks2, we penalise failure such that a
model with more successful runs dominates one with fewer;
this penalty does not apply in baseline comparisons. We
also report the total success rate for each model.
To understand how each model could perform without fail-
ures, we run additional experiments on DiscoBench Single
until each model has three successful attempts. However,
due to low success rates, this was unaffordable for Dis-
coBench All and a small number of tasks in DiscoBench
Single as specified in Appendix M. This failure is expected;
in Nathani et al. (2025), many frontier closed source models
failed over their four attempts in MLGymBench tasks. As
such, we omit these tasks from the Until Success analysis.
5.2. Results
We report results in Table 2, and include a per-task break-
down in Appendix M. To demonstrate that agents can dis-
cover interesting and performant algorithms, we discuss two
hand-selected algorithms in Appendix K.
Firstly, success rates in DiscoBench All are significantly
lower than for DiscoBench Single, confirming the hypoth-
esis that including more editable modules increases task
difficulty. This is explored further in Appendix G, where
we sweep over all module combinations in On-Policy RL
and find that the success rates of ADAs consistently fall as
more editable modules are added. In fact, average success
rates for all three models are low. In contrast, we examine
Success@3 rates (i.e., what proportion of tasks had at least
one successful solution from 3 attempts) in Appendix L, and
find that they are 15-30 percentage points higher than the
2Since at least one model produced a valid solution for every
task, and the ‘all fixed’ baselines follow the same module interface,
we have existence proofs that all tasks are solvable.
aggregated rates. Considering this performance gap, and
that all baselines follow the same interface as the editable
modules, it is clear that agents struggle to robustly produce
even simple, well-known algorithms. We find that failures
are broadly driven by syntax errors or, often, code overfitting
to the meta-train datasets (e.g., hardcoded shapes).
Elo shows a similar pattern; the baseline has a much higher
score in DiscoBench All than in DiscoBench Single. Even
when agents have three successful solutions, no agent con-
sistently outperforms the baseline to the point of having
a higher Elo. Since ADAs do not yet match well-known
human algorithms, even though they could be implemented
and are often suboptimal algorithms for the datasets, there
is significant clear margin for ADAs to improve.
Deepseek-v3.2 performs well compared to other models in
DiscoBench Single, both in meta-train and meta-test, but
is considerably outperformed by Devstral2 in meta-test for
DiscoBench All. The relative baseline performance often in-
creases between meta-train and meta-test, suggesting ADAs
struggle to discover as generalisable algorithms.
It is important to ensure DiscoBench is diverse; a sin-
gle model being uniformly dominant would suggest Dis-
coBench only measures general ability. We explore this
using rank-correlation analysis in Appendix I and find high
variation in rankings between tasks. In fact, the per-task re-
sults (Appendix M) show that even the ranking over datasets
within the same task varies, demonstrating how different
algorithms are better for different datasets and justifying
claims of diversity in DiscoGen. Furthermore, this per-task
breakdown confirms the range of task difficulties; some-
times agents outperform the baseline, usually they produce
weak-but-valid solutions, and often they fail completely.
6. Enabling New Research
In addition to enabling discovery of better algorithms, by
extracting discovered artifacts, DiscoGen is a platform for a
plethora of new research directions. To serve as inspiration
to the wider research community, we propose some ideas
here. In Section 7, we show how DiscoGen can be used for
prompt optimisation, demonstrating one such use-case.
6.1. Understanding The Pathologies of ADAs
Given the finite task spaces of existing algorithm discovery
suites, analysis of the pathologies of algorithm discovery
systems is caveated by a limited evaluation scope. This in-
troduces questions over whether shortcomings are intrinsic
7


--- Page 8 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
to agents or simply artefacts of the tasks in which they are
evaluated. DiscoGen provides an expansive space in which
to run such analysis. If a pathology is exhibited across thou-
sands, rather than tens, of tasks, it becomes easier to under-
stand and mitigate. This research could seek to understand
the limitations of creativity (Haase et al., 2025; Franceschelli
& Musolesi, 2025), instruction-following (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Zeng et al., 2024) or mode collapse (such as hyper-
parameter tuning, as in (Nathani et al., 2025)). This would
enable a more scientific approach to ADA development.
6.2. Learning to Discover Algorithms
The problem-solving and reasoning ability of language mod-
els has significantly improved since the introduction of RL
(Ouyang et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024; Gehring et al., 2025;
Kazemnejad et al., 2025) or evolution (Sarkar et al., 2025;
Qiu et al., 2025) post-training. However, earlier works gen-
erally focus on mathematics or programming, where there
are many verifiable problems to learn from. Given it is
now possible to sample millions of unique algorithm discov-
ery tasks, the findings from these task-rich domains could
be transferred to train capable algorithm discovery mod-
els. This meta-meta-learning could focus on discovery of
efficient, quick, or performant algorithms, or all three.
6.3. Sampling Hard-Yet-Learnable Discovery Tasks
Prior work has shown how autocurricula (Dennis et al.,
2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2022a; Foster et al., 2025) can
sample hard-yet-learnable tasks to improve minimum ex-
pected performance bounds (Beukman et al., 2024) and
improve training efficiency (Foster et al., 2025). Since tasks
in DiscoGen are of varying difficulty, it is naturally suited
to curriculum methods, and their application could improve
the performance and efficiency over random task sampling.
This is especially important in ADA optimisation, where
task completion times can vary by orders of magnitude.
6.4. Algorithm World Models
Copet et al. (2025) mid-train an LLM to replicate a code
interpreter’s state as it ran. Such training promises to help an
LLM’s programming abilities; if it can replicate the outputs
of code, it should produce more correct implementations.
However their work necessitates vast amounts of data. Com-
bining DiscoGen with similar computational resources, a
large-scale, high quality dataset of algorithm-performance
pairs from different tasks could be collected. This could be
used to mid-train an ‘algorithm world model’ that predicts
how editing modules affects final performance. The model
could be used directly in ADAs to improve performance,
fine-tuned using the research proposals above, or serve as
the basis of an LLM-judge (Zheng et al., 2023) as below.
6.5. Training LLM-As-A-Judge in Tree-Search ADAs
“How to explore?” is an open question in algorithm dis-
covery and AI research (Toledo et al., 2025). Some agents
designed for automated research and algorithm discovery
use tree-search (Jiang et al., 2025; Toledo et al., 2025), but
evaluating a tree’s leaves requires running expensive inner-
loop trainings. Instead, using an LLM or otherwise trained
model to evaluate algorithms could act as a filter, selecting
promising leaves to run (Yu et al., 2025; Herr et al., 2025)
or acting as a value function (Wang et al., 2025b) to skip
inner-loop training and reduce the cost of search.
However, off-the-shelf judge performance would likely be
poor, since we ideally want to evaluate super-human (and
thus, out-of-distribution) algorithms. Using data generated
using DiscoGen, it would be possible to train either a full
model or a value prediction head that could be integrated
into Monte-Carlo Tree Search (Kocsis & Szepesvári, 2006).
6.6. Symbolic Evolution of Algorithms
Since DiscoGen provides templates for module (i.e., defin-
ing inputs and outputs), and the rest of an algorithm’s code
is pre-implemented, it is well-placed for working with non
LLM-based algorithm discovery methods; for example, sym-
bolic search or black-box meta-learning. This could include
developing methods using genetic programming, as in (Ra-
machandran et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2022; Chen et al.,
2023b; Goldie et al., 2025), or black-box evolution (e.g.,
(Lu et al., 2022; Metz et al., 2022b; Goldie et al., 2024)).
6.7. Self-Improving ADAs
An alternative to manually designing ADAs is letting them
build their own scaffolds (e.g., (Hu et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a)). Such open-ended self-
improvement offers data-driven agent improvements. How-
ever, optimising an agent’s scaffold on existing algorithm
discovery suites could lead to overfitting to specific prob-
lems. With DiscoGen, such systems could be run near-
indefinitely with low risk of overfitting to individual tasks,
aiding the automated discovery of super-human agents.
7. A Case Study: Prompt Optimisation
Given the power of prompting in maximising LLM per-
formance (Lester et al., 2021; Fernando et al., 2024), we
explore prompt refinement using DiscoGen. We query an
‘ADA-Optimisation’ LLM, separate to the ADA, to auto-
matically improve prompts in each iteration of the ADA
optimisation loop, based on past meta-train and meta-test
performance in sampled DiscoGen tasks. Since the ‘prompt-
ing’ LLM is queried infrequently, we use a more expensive
closed-source model for prompt optimisation; Claude Son-
net 4.5 (Anthropic, 2025b). As the best performing LLM
tested in DiscoBench, the ADA uses DeepSeek-V3.2.
Our experiment explores how task diversity correlates to
ADA optimisation performance over 30 steps. We control
task quantity, Ktasks, by sampling from DiscoGen at differ-
ent frequencies; when Ktasks = 1, we tune the prompt on
the same task 30 times, and when Ktasks = 30, we tune it in
different tasks every ADA optimisation iteration. To prevent
domain bias, we uniformly sample the task domain before
8


--- Page 9 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Table 3. ADA evaluation performance after prompt optimisation
(Elo Scores with 95% CIs). Bold indicates the best result.
DiscoBench Combined
Ktasks
Succ.
Meta-Train
Meta-Test
1
70.6%
956 [939, 978]
957 [927, 977]
5
75.3%
1014 [1000, 1033]
973 [947, 993]
10
72.0%
969 [949, 989]
1000 [980, 1022]
30
78.7%
1061 [1040, 1079]
1071 [1049, 1096]
the task configuration. We present results in Table 3, using
DiscoBench for ADA evaluation and the Elo methodology
from Section 5.2. DiscoBench tasks were not sampled in
ADA optimisation. For clarity, we combine DiscoBench Sin-
gle and DiscoBench All into a combined set; we expand this
in Appendix J. Further experimental details are in Appendix
E, and the discovered prompts in Appendix N.
We find a clear monotonic trend between Ktasks and prompt
performance in meta-test on DiscoBench; as Ktasks in-
creases, meta-test performance improves. Meta-train is less
consistent (Ktasks = 5 outperforms Ktasks = 10), but
the prompt optimised over the most tasks achieves the best
performance. This is intuitive; considering the prompts
themselves (Appendix N.3), the prompt for Ktasks = 30
emphasises general machine learning principles, unlike the
prompt for Ktasks = 1, which is overfit to optimising two
RL environments. Such a finding emphasises the value of
procedural generation for algorithm discovery, and under-
lines the potential of the research agenda in Section 6.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced DiscoGen, a procedural genera-
tor of algorithm discovery tasks. We motivated the design of
DiscoGen by the shortcomings of existing algorithm discov-
ery suites, such as poor evaluation methodology and limited
scale. We demonstrated that DiscoGen overcame many of
these flaws, and used it to establish DiscoBench, a set of
tasks for evaluating ADAs. We subsequently introduced a
number of possible research avenues enabled by DiscoGen.
To justify these, we used DiscoGen for ADA prompt optimi-
sation and showed that prompt performance improved with
the number of tasks it was optimised for.
Future Work
Beyond the research enabled by DiscoGen
(Section 6), there are a number of avenues to improve Disco-
Gen itself. Firstly, expanding the number of domains, mod-
ules and datasets supported by DiscoGen, via open-source
contributions, would enable even more diverse task genera-
tion. Additionally, we plan to develop a private DiscoBench
suite for ADA evaluation accessible by API only (i.e., using
datasets not available in DiscoGen). This would solve the
‘data contamination’ issue affecting all algorithm discov-
ery benchmarks, including DiscoBench moving forward.
Finally, exploring how agents perform for different initiali-
sation and evaluation regimes is a necessary next step.
Impact Statement
Considering the social, economic and safety effects of au-
tomated algorithm discovery is crucial due to the potential
magnitude of its impacts. In this work, we are consider-
ing not only how a specific algorithm can be meta-learned
(which has more limited impact), as in much prior work,
but how to optimise agents towards the development of new
machine learning algorithms. While we believe there are a
range of significant benefits that such work can lead to, we
are also wary and considerate of the risks.
It is often preferable to develop models with specialist capa-
bilities; consistently focusing on generalist improvements
can introduce safety concerns (Bommasani et al., 2022;
Weidinger et al., 2021), and may not even be the most ef-
fective way to enhance desired capabilities (Belcak et al.,
2025). We believe algorithm discovery provides a surgical
tool with which to automate research, offering a much more
specific objective than ‘automating science’, as in a lot of
automated AI scientist literature (Lu et al., 2024b; Intology,
2025; Yamada et al., 2025). Rather than giving black-box
agents the ability to decide what problems they work on
freely, algorithm discovery (and specifically, DiscoGen) is
designed to involve a human-in-the-loop; discovery agents
are only allowed to make changes to certain files, with all
other changes being overwritten at test time. Furthermore,
despite the massive task space available in DiscoGen, all
tasks are well-defined, scoped and based on human-selected
codebases, meaning they are constrained. Given the anal-
ysed suite of ten domains, we do not believe any tasks
deemed unsafe could be sampled from DiscoGen. However,
since we hope for community contributions in the future,
it is important to ensure that this remains the case moving
forward.
As we emphasise optimisation for algorithm discovery
only, DiscoGen provides a platform for AI-Human Co-
Improvement (Weston & Foerster, 2025). Crucially, rather
than training towards more generally-able agents (where
algorithm discovery capabilities are improved simultane-
ously with adverse capabilities), optimising on DiscoGen
improves performance directly for human-designed algo-
rithm discovery tasks. We believe this type of scoped optimi-
sation is a necessary path towards safe super-human agents;
it is safer to develop specifically super-human agents than
developing poorly understood general superintelligence.
It is important to recognise that development of automated
algorithm discovery systems can pose ethical and economic
issues. While we focus on general and beneficial task do-
mains, harmful actors could instead look to optimise agents
in unethical domains. Fully mitigating this misuse is be-
yond the scope of our paper, but it is important to ensure
DiscoGen is comprised only of broadly beneficial domains
to limit any negative behaviours. Similarly, discovering
better machine learning algorithms automatically enables
9


--- Page 10 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
them to be used for harmful datasets; while this is a risk of
all machine learning research, we must acknowledge that
DiscoGen accelerates their development. At the least, to
reduce the risk of directly meta-learning on these datasets,
it is important to ensure there is broad human-alignment
in foundation models, making it hard to optimise for mis-
aligned behaviour (Bai et al., 2022). A counter-measure to
these risks is to ensure DiscoGen supports AI safety tasks.
For example, discovering algorithms for the Model Unlearn-
ing task in DiscoGen (Yao et al., 2024) is one avenue for
reducing unwanted behaviours in foundation models.
Ensuring people from affected fields are kept in-the-loop as
these systems develop is necessary for ensuring automated
algorithm systems complement, rather than replace, humans.
The potential impact of AI on the labour market is signifi-
cant (Eloundou et al., 2024), and thus developing systems
which protect the role of humans is important. We believe
that automated algorithm discovery provides a strong bal-
ance of developing research breakthroughs using AI, while
maintaining the agency and empowerment of humans who
design the problem settings for it to operate in. In general,
this fulfils the idea that research agents are most effective
when provided as tools to humans (Gottweis et al., 2025;
Shneiderman, 2022), rather than acting to substitute them.
Moreover, the requirements for operating in this field are
high; running or querying large language models is expen-
sive, and optimising research agents is more so. This intro-
duces large financial (Chen et al., 2023a) and environmental
(Strubell et al., 2019; Faiz et al., 2024) costs, which should
be considered when experimenting with DiscoGen. One
high-impact area for future research would involve develop-
ing energy-efficient automated algorithm discovery systems;
in fact, these could be developed automatically, using a well-
defined objective in combination with the research proposal
of Section 6.7. Furthermore, using energy as the evalua-
tion criteria to discovery new, hyper-efficient algorithms
could offset the costs of running ADAs, given the potential
downstream savings enabled by such algorithms.
Democratisation of AI is one necessary tool for ensuring it
can act in the benefit of all, rather than a few major players.
We believe DiscoGen helps with this in two ways. Firstly,
in making a large-scale research environment for algorithm
discovery available, we believe that such research is made
more feasible outside of industrial frontier labs. Secondly,
by emphasising the development of specialist, rather than
generalist, agents, we hope to enable a landscape of research
using smaller models which require less pre-training data.
However, it would be naïve to suggest that research in auto-
mated science and algorithm discovery is not expensive, or
doesn’t require significant hardware resources. Moving for-
ward, it is necessary to ensure the development of these tools
is accessible to a wide range of researchers, from academia
through to small and large parts of industry.
Acknowledgements
AG is funded by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Train-
ing in Autonomous Intelligent Machines and Systems
EP/S024050/1. ZW is funded by a generous grant from
Waymo. AK is supported by Exscientia and the SABS
CDT. CW is funded by the EPSRC DTP Research Stu-
dentship. TW is funded by the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral
Training in Autonomous Intelligent Machines and Systems
EP/Y035070/1. UB is supported by the EPSRC Centre for
Doctoral Training in Autonomous Intelligent Machines and
Systems and the Rhodes Scholarship. NR is supported by
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA).
HE is supported by the Cooperative AI PhD Fellowship
from the Cooperative AI Foundation. Our experiments were
made possible by an equipment grant from NVIDIA. SR is
funded by the Transport and Mobility Institute at Delft Uni-
versity of Technology. JF is partially funded by the UKRI
grant EP/Y028481/1, which was originally selected for fund-
ing by the ERC. JF is also supported by the JPMC Research
Award and the Amazon Research Award. This project re-
ceived compute resources from a gracious grant provided
by the Isambard-AI National AI Research Resource, for the
project "Robustness via Self-Play RL".
The authors would like to thank Jonathan Cook and Edward
Hughes for their comments and advice in this project.
Contributions
Alexander D. Goldie led the project, created and designed
DiscoGen, ran all experiments, wrote the paper and imple-
mented the On-Policy RL task domain.
Zilin Wang contributed to the design of DiscoGen and
implemented the Computer Vision Classification and Brain
Speech Detection task domains.
Adrian Hayler contributed to the design of DiscoGen and
implemented the Language Modelling task domain.
Deepak Nathani contributed to the design of DiscoGen and
the structure of the DiscoGen repository.
Edan Toledo contributed to the design of DiscoGen and
helped edit the paper.
Ken Thampiratwong contributed to the design of Disco-
Gen.
Aleksandra Kalisz contributed to the design of DiscoGen.
Michael Beukman implemented the Unsupervised Envi-
ronment Design task domain and helped edit the paper.
Alistair Letcher implemented the Model Unlearning task
domain.
Shashank Reddy implemented the Off-Policy RL and
10


--- Page 11 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Multi-Agent RL task domains, and contributed additional
modules for the On-Policy RL task domain.
Clarisse Wibault implemented the Bayesian Optimisation
task domain.
Theo Wolf implemented the Greenhouse Gas Prediction
task domain.
Charles O’Neill implemented the Continual Learning task
domain.
Uljad Berdica implemented the Offline RL task domain.
Nicholas Roberts implemented the state-space model back-
end for the Language Modelling task domain.
Saeed Rahmani implemented the Trajectory Prediction task
domain.
Hannah Erlebach implemented the Neural Cellular Au-
tomata task domain.
Roberta Raileanu, Shimon Whiteson and Jakob N. Fo-
erster provided equal supervision over the course of the
project.
References
Abdin, M. I., Ade Jacobs, S., Awan, A. A., Aneja, J.,
Awadallah, A., Hassan Awadalla, H., Bach, N., Bahree,
A., Bakhtiari, A., Behl, H., Benhaim, A., Bilenko, M.,
Bjorck, J., Bubeck, S., Cai, M., Mendes, C. C. T., Chen,
W., Chaudhary, V., Chopra, P., Giorno, A. D., de Rosa,
G., Dixon, M., Eldan, R., Iter, D., Goswami, A., Gu-
nasekar, S., Haider, E., Hao, J., Hewett, R. J., Huynh, J.,
Javaheripi, M., Jin, X., Kauffmann, P., Karampatziakis,
N., Kim, D., Khademi, M., Kurilenko, L., Lee, J. R.,
Lee, Y. T., Li, Y., Liang, C., Liu, W., Lin, X. E., Lin,
Z., Madan, P., Mitra, A., Modi, H., Nguyen, A., Norick,
B., Patra, B., Perez-Becker, D., Portet, T., Pryzant, R.,
Qin, H., Radmilac, M., Rosset, C., Roy, S., Saarikivi, O.,
Saied, A., Salim, A., Santacroce, M., Shah, S., Shang, N.,
Sharma, H., Song, X., Ruwase, O., Wang, X., Ward, R.,
Wang, G., Witte, P., Wyatt, M., Xu, C., Xu, J., Xu, W.,
Yadav, S., Yang, F., Yang, Z., Yu, D., Zhang, C., Zhang,
C., Zhang, J., Zhang, L. L., Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., and
Zhou, X. Phi-3 Technical Report: A Highly Capable
Language Model Locally on Your Phone. Technical Re-
port MSR-TR-2024-12, Microsoft, August 2024. URL
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/pub
lication/phi-3-technical-report-a-highly-cap
able-language-model-locally-on-your-phone/.
Agarwal, R., Schwarzer, M., Castro, P. S., Courville, A.,
and Bellemare, M. G. Deep reinforcement learning at
the edge of the statistical precipice. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Alfano, C., Yuan, R., and Rebeschini, P. A Novel Frame-
work for Policy Mirror Descent with General Parametriza-
tion and Linear Convergence, February 2023. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2301.13139. arXiv:2301.13139 [cs,
math, stat].
Andrychowicz, M., Denil, M., Colmenarejo, S. G., Hoff-
man, M. W., Pfau, D., Schaul, T., Shillingford, B., and
de Freitas, N. Learning to learn by gradient descent
by gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 30th inter-
national conference on neural information processing
systems, NIPS’16, pp. 3988–3996, Red Hook, NY, USA,
2016. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 978-1-5108-3881-9.
Number of pages: 9 Place: Barcelona, Spain.
Anthropic. Claude code, 2025a. URL https://www.cl
aude.com/product/claude-code. Accessed: 2025-12-
08.
Anthropic. Introducing claude sonnet 4.5, September 2025b.
URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-s
onnet-4-5.
Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion, J.,
Jones, A., Chen, A., Goldie, A., Mirhoseini, A., McK-
innon, C., Chen, C., Olsson, C., Olah, C., Hernandez,
D., Drain, D., Ganguli, D., Li, D., Tran-Johnson, E.,
Perez, E., Kerr, J., Mueller, J., Ladish, J., Landau, J.,
Ndousse, K., Lukosuite, K., Lovitt, L., Sellitto, M.,
Elhage, N., Schiefer, N., Mercado, N., DasSarma, N.,
Lasenby, R., Larson, R., Ringer, S., Johnston, S., Kravec,
S., Showk, S. E., Fort, S., Lanham, T., Telleen-Lawton,
T., Conerly, T., Henighan, T., Hume, T., Bowman, S. R.,
Hatfield-Dodds, Z., Mann, B., Amodei, D., Joseph, N.,
McCandlish, S., Brown, T., and Kaplan, J. Constitu-
tional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback, December
2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08073.
arXiv:2212.08073 [cs].
Bauer, J., Baumli, K., Baveja, S., Behbahani, F., Bhoopc-
hand, A., Bradley-Schmieg, N., Chang, M., Clay, N., Col-
lister, A., Dasagi, V., Gonzalez, L., Gregor, K., Hughes,
E., Kashem, S., Loks-Thompson, M., Openshaw, H.,
Parker-Holder, J., Pathak, S., Perez-Nieves, N., Rakice-
vic, N., Rocktäschel, T., Schroecker, Y., Sygnowski, J.,
Tuyls, K., York, S., Zacherl, A., and Zhang, L. Human-
Timescale Adaptation in an Open-Ended Task Space, Jan-
uary 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.07608.
arXiv:2301.07608 [cs], Adaptive Agent Team.
Bechtle, S., Molchanov, A., Chebotar, Y., Grefenstette, E.,
Righetti, L., Sukhatme, G., and Meier, F. Meta learning
via learned loss. In 2020 25th international conference on
pattern recognition (ICPR), pp. 4161–4168. IEEE, 2021.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Beck, J., Vuorio, R., Liu, E. Z., Xiong, Z., Zintgraf, L., Finn,
C., and Whiteson, S. A Survey of Meta-Reinforcement
Learning, January 2023. arXiv: 2301.08028 [cs].
Belcak, P., Heinrich, G., Diao, S., Fu, Y., Dong, X., Mu-
ralidharan, S., Lin, Y. C., and Molchanov, P. Small Lan-
guage Models are the Future of Agentic AI, September
2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.02153.
arXiv:2506.02153 [cs].
Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J., and Bowling, M.
The arcade learning environment: An evaluation plat-
form for general agents. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 47:253–279, jun 2013.
Béna, G., Faldor, M., Goodman, D., and Cully, A. A path
to universal neural cellular automata. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference
Companion, pp. 2099–2107, 2025.
Beukman, M., Coward, S., Matthews, M., Fellows, M.,
Jiang, M., Dennis, M., and Foerster, J. Refining minimax
regret for unsupervised environment design. In Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning. PMLR, 2024.
Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R.,
Arora, S., Arx, S. v., Bernstein, M. S., Bohg, J., Bosse-
lut, A., Brunskill, E., Brynjolfsson, E., Buch, S., Card,
D., Castellon, R., Chatterji, N., Chen, A., Creel, K.,
Davis, J. Q., Demszky, D., Donahue, C., Doumbouya,
M., Durmus, E., Ermon, S., Etchemendy, J., Ethayarajh,
K., Fei-Fei, L., Finn, C., Gale, T., Gillespie, L., Goel,
K., Goodman, N., Grossman, S., Guha, N., Hashimoto,
T., Henderson, P., Hewitt, J., Ho, D. E., Hong, J., Hsu,
K., Huang, J., Icard, T., Jain, S., Jurafsky, D., Kalluri,
P., Karamcheti, S., Keeling, G., Khani, F., Khattab, O.,
Koh, P. W., Krass, M., Krishna, R., Kuditipudi, R., Ku-
mar, A., Ladhak, F., Lee, M., Lee, T., Leskovec, J., Lev-
ent, I., Li, X. L., Li, X., Ma, T., Malik, A., Manning,
C. D., Mirchandani, S., Mitchell, E., Munyikwa, Z., Nair,
S., Narayan, A., Narayanan, D., Newman, B., Nie, A.,
Niebles, J. C., Nilforoshan, H., Nyarko, J., Ogut, G., Orr,
L., Papadimitriou, I., Park, J. S., Piech, C., Portelance,
E., Potts, C., Raghunathan, A., Reich, R., Ren, H., Rong,
F., Roohani, Y., Ruiz, C., Ryan, J., Ré, C., Sadigh, D.,
Sagawa, S., Santhanam, K., Shih, A., Srinivasan, K.,
Tamkin, A., Taori, R., Thomas, A. W., Tramèr, F., Wang,
R. E., Wang, W., Wu, B., Wu, J., Wu, Y., Xie, S. M.,
Yasunaga, M., You, J., Zaharia, M., Zhang, M., Zhang,
T., Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Zheng, L., Zhou, K., and Liang,
P. On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation Models,
July 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07258.
arXiv:2108.07258 [cs].
Bradbury, J., Frostig, R., Hawkins, P., Johnson, M. J., Leary,
C., Maclaurin, D., Necula, G., Paszke, A., VanderPlas, J.,
Wanderman-Milne, S., and Zhang, Q. JAX: composable
transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018. URL
http://github.com/jax-ml/jax.
Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A. H., Vora, S., Liong, V. E.,
Xu, Q., Krishnan, A., Pan, Y., Baldan, G., and Beijbom,
O. nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous
driving. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
Cao, Y. and Yang, J.
Towards making systems forget
with machine unlearning. In Proceedings of the 2015
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, SP ’15, pp.
463–480, USA, 2015. IEEE Computer Society. ISBN
9781467369497.
doi: 10.1109/SP.2015.35.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1109/SP.2015.35.
Chan, J. S., Chowdhury, N., Jaffe, O., Aung, J., Sherburn, D.,
Mays, E., Starace, G., Liu, K., Maksin, L., Patwardhan,
T., Weng, L., and M ˛adry, A. MLE-bench: Evaluating
Machine Learning Agents on Machine Learning Engi-
neering, February 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2410.07095. arXiv:2410.07095 [cs].
Chen, L., Zaharia, M., and Zou, J. FrugalGPT: How to
Use Large Language Models While Reducing Cost and
Improving Performance, May 2023a. URL http://ar
xiv.org/abs/2305.05176. arXiv:2305.05176 [cs].
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., de Oliveira Pinto,
H. P., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y., Joseph, N.,
Brockman, G., Ray, A., Puri, R., Krueger, G., Petrov,
M., Khlaaf, H., Sastry, G., Mishkin, P., Chan, B., Gray,
S., Ryder, N., Pavlov, M., Power, A., Kaiser, L., Bavar-
ian, M., Winter, C., Tillet, P., Such, F. P., Cummings, D.,
Plappert, M., Chantzis, F., Barnes, E., Herbert-Voss, A.,
Guss, W. H., Nichol, A., Paino, A., Tezak, N., Tang,
J., Babuschkin, I., Balaji, S., Jain, S., Saunders, W.,
Hesse, C., Carr, A. N., Leike, J., Achiam, J., Misra,
V., Morikawa, E., Radford, A., Knight, M., Brundage,
M., Murati, M., Mayer, K., Welinder, P., McGrew, B.,
Amodei, D., McCandlish, S., Sutskever, I., and Zaremba,
W. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
2021.
Chen, X., Liang, C., Huang, D., Real, E., Wang, K., Liu,
Y., Pham, H., Dong, X., Luong, T., Hsieh, C.-J., Lu,
Y., and Le, Q. V. Symbolic Discovery of Optimization
Algorithms, May 2023b. URL http://arxiv.org/ab
s/2302.06675. arXiv:2302.06675 [cs].
Chen, Y., Li, J., Xiao, H., Jin, X., Yan, S., and Feng, J. Dual
path networks. In Proceedings of the 31st International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS’17, pp. 4470–4478, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2017.
Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.
12


--- Page 13 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Chevalier-Boisvert, M., Dai, B., Towers, M., Perez-Vicente,
R., Willems, L., Lahlou, S., Pal, S., Castro, P. S., and
Terry, J. Minigrid & miniworld: Modular & customizable
reinforcement learning environments for goal-oriented
tasks. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36, New Orleans, LA, USA, December 2023.
Chollet, F., Knoop, M., Kamradt, G., and Landers, B. ARC
Prize 2024: Technical Report, January 2025. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2412.04604. arXiv:2412.04604
[cs].
Chung, H. W., Hou, L., Longpre, S., Zoph, B., Tay, Y.,
Fedus, W., Li, Y., Wang, X., Dehghani, M., Brahma, S.,
Webson, A., Gu, S. S., Dai, Z., Suzgun, M., Chen, X.,
Chowdhery, A., Castro-Ros, A., Pellat, M., Robinson,
K., Valter, D., Narang, S., Mishra, G., Yu, A., Zhao, V.,
Huang, Y., Dai, A., Yu, H., Petrov, S., Chi, E. H., Dean,
J., Devlin, J., Roberts, A., Zhou, D., Le, Q. V., and Wei, J.
Scaling Instruction-Finetuned Language Models. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 25(70):1–53, 2024. URL
http://jmlr.org/papers/v25/23-0870.html.
Clevert, D.-A., Unterthiner, T., and Hochreiter, S. Fast and
Accurate Deep Network Learning by Exponential Linear
Units (ELUs), February 2016. URL http://arxiv.or
g/abs/1511.07289. arXiv:1511.07289 [cs].
Clune, J. AI-GAs: AI-generating algorithms, an alternate
paradigm for producing general artificial intelligence,
May 2019. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.1
0985v2.
Cobbe, K., Hesse, C., Hilton, J., and Schulman, J. Leverag-
ing Procedural Generation to Benchmark Reinforcement
Learning, July 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/19
12.01588. arXiv:1912.01588 [cs].
Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H.,
Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano,
R., Hesse, C., and Schulman, J. Training verifiers to solve
math word problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168,
2021.
Copet, J., Carbonneaux, Q., Cohen, G., Gehring, J., Kahn,
J., Kossen, J., Kreuk, F., McMilin, E., Meyer, M., Wei,
Y., Zhang, D., Zheng, K., Armengol-Estapé, J., Bashiri,
P., Beck, M., Chambon, P., Charnalia, A., Cummins, C.,
Decugis, J., Fisches, Z. V., Fleuret, F., Gloeckle, F., Gu,
A., Hassid, M., Haziza, D., Idrissi, B. Y., Keller, C., Kindi,
R., Leather, H., Maimon, G., Markosyan, A., Massa, F.,
Mazaré, P.-E., Mella, V., Murray, N., Muzumdar, K.,
O’Hearn, P., Pagliardini, M., Pedchenko, D., Remez, T.,
Seeker, V., Selvi, M., Sultan, O., Wang, S., Wehrstedt, L.,
Yoran, O., Zhang, L., Cohen, T., Adi, Y., and Synnaeve,
G. CWM: An Open-Weights LLM for Research on Code
Generation with World Models, September 2025. URL ht
tp://arxiv.org/abs/2510.02387. arXiv:2510.02387
[cs], FAIR CodeGen.
Cranmer, M., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Battaglia, P., Xu, R.,
Cranmer, K., Spergel, D., and Ho, S. Discovering Sym-
bolic Models from Deep Learning with Inductive Biases,
November 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2006
.11287.
Dao, T. and Gu, A. Transformers are ssms: generalized
models and efficient algorithms through structured state
space duality. In Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24. JMLR.org,
2024.
DeepSeek-AI, Liu, A., Mei, A., Lin, B., Xue, B., Wang,
B., Xu, B., Wu, B., Zhang, B., Lin, C., Dong, C., Lu, C.,
Zhao, C., Deng, C., Xu, C., Ruan, C., Dai, D., Guo, D.,
Yang, D., Chen, D., Li, E., Zhou, F., Lin, F., Dai, F., Hao,
G., Chen, G., Li, G., Zhang, H., Xu, H., Li, H., Liang,
H., Wei, H., Zhang, H., Luo, H., Ji, H., Ding, H., Tang,
H., Cao, H., Gao, H., Qu, H., Zeng, H., Huang, J., Li,
J., Xu, J., Hu, J., Chen, J., Xiang, J., Yuan, J., Cheng, J.,
Zhu, J., Ran, J., Jiang, J., Qiu, J., Li, J., Song, J., Dong,
K., Gao, K., Guan, K., Huang, K., Zhou, K., Huang, K.,
Yu, K., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Wang, L., Zhao, L., Yin,
L., Guo, L., Luo, L., Ma, L., Wang, L., Zhang, L., Di,
M. S., Xu, M. Y., Zhang, M., Zhang, M., Tang, M., Zhou,
M., Huang, P., Cong, P., Wang, P., Wang, Q., Zhu, Q.,
Li, Q., Chen, Q., Du, Q., Xu, R., Ge, R., Zhang, R., Pan,
R., Wang, R., Yin, R., Xu, R., Shen, R., Zhang, R., Liu,
S. H., Lu, S., Zhou, S., Chen, S., Cai, S., Chen, S., Hu,
S., Liu, S., Hu, S., Ma, S., Wang, S., Yu, S., Zhou, S.,
Pan, S., Zhou, S., Ni, T., Yun, T., Pei, T., Ye, T., Yue, T.,
Zeng, W., Liu, W., Liang, W., Pang, W., Luo, W., Gao,
W., Zhang, W., Gao, X., Wang, X., Bi, X., Liu, X., Wang,
X., Chen, X., Zhang, X., Nie, X., Cheng, X., Liu, X., Xie,
X., Liu, X., Yu, X., Li, X., Yang, X., Li, X., Chen, X.,
Su, X., Pan, X., Lin, X., Fu, X., Wang, Y. Q., Zhang, Y.,
Xu, Y., Ma, Y., Li, Y., Li, Y., Zhao, Y., Sun, Y., Wang, Y.,
Qian, Y., Yu, Y., Zhang, Y., Ding, Y., Shi, Y., Xiong, Y.,
He, Y., Zhou, Y., Zhong, Y., Piao, Y., Wang, Y., Chen, Y.,
Tan, Y., Wei, Y., Ma, Y., Liu, Y., Yang, Y., Guo, Y., Wu,
Y., Wu, Y., Cheng, Y., Ou, Y., Xu, Y., Wang, Y., Gong,
Y., Wu, Y., Zou, Y., Li, Y., Xiong, Y., Luo, Y., You, Y.,
Liu, Y., Zhou, Y., Wu, Z. F., Ren, Z. Z., Zhao, Z., Ren,
Z., Sha, Z., Fu, Z., Xu, Z., Xie, Z., Zhang, Z., Hao, Z.,
Gou, Z., Ma, Z., Yan, Z., Shao, Z., Huang, Z., Wu, Z.,
Li, Z., Zhang, Z., Xu, Z., Wang, Z., Gu, Z., Zhu, Z., Li,
Z., Zhang, Z., Xie, Z., Gao, Z., Pan, Z., Yao, Z., Feng,
B., Li, H., Cai, J. L., Ni, J., Xu, L., Li, M., Tian, N.,
Chen, R. J., Jin, R. L., Li, S. S., Zhou, S., Sun, T., Li,
X. Q., Jin, X., Shen, X., Chen, X., Song, X., Zhou, X.,
Zhu, Y. X., Huang, Y., Li, Y., Zheng, Y., Zhu, Y., Ma, Y.,
Huang, Z., Xu, Z., Zhang, Z., Ji, D., Liang, J., Guo, J.,
13


--- Page 14 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Chen, J., Xia, L., Wang, M., Li, M., Zhang, P., Chen, R.,
Sun, S., Wu, S., Ye, S., Wang, T., Xiao, W. L., An, W.,
Wang, X., Sun, X., Wang, X., Tang, Y., Zha, Y., Zhang, Z.,
Ju, Z., Zhang, Z., and Qu, Z. DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing
the Frontier of Open Large Language Models, December
2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02556.
arXiv:2512.02556 [cs].
Dennis, M., Jaques, N., Vinitsky, E., Bayen, A., Russell,
S., Critch, A., and Levine, S. Emergent Complexity
and Zero-shot Transfer via Unsupervised Environment
Design, February 2021. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2012.02096.
Dong, Y., Jiang, X., Liu, H., Jin, Z., Gu, B., Yang, M., and
Li, G. Generalization or memorization: Data contamina-
tion and trustworthy evaluation for large language models.
In Ku, L.-W., Martins, A., and Srikumar, V. (eds.), Find-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2024, pp. 12039–12050, Bangkok, Thailand, Au-
gust 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.findings-acl.716. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2024.findings-acl.716/.
Dorna, V., Mekala, A., Zhao, W., McCallum, A., Lipton,
Z. C., Kolter, J. Z., and Maini, P. OpenUnlearning: Ac-
celerating LLM unlearning via unified benchmarking of
methods and metrics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.12618,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.12618.
Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn,
D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer,
M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., and Houlsby,
N. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for
image recognition at scale. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2021. URL https://op
enreview.net/forum?id=YicbFdNTTy.
Eimer, T., Lindauer, M., and Raileanu, R. Hyperparameters
in Reinforcement Learning and How To Tune Them, June
2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01324.
arXiv:2306.01324 [cs].
Eldan, R. and Li, Y. Tinystories: How small can language
models be and still speak coherent english?, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.07759.
Ellis, B., Cook, J., Moalla, S., Samvelyan, M., Sun, M.,
Mahajan, A., Foerster, J. N., and Whiteson, S. SMACv2:
An improved benchmark for cooperative multi-agent rein-
forcement learning. In Thirty-seventh Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and
Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https://openrevi
ew.net/forum?id=5OjLGiJW3u.
Elo, A. E. The Rating of Chessplayers, Past and Present.
Arco Pub, 1978.
Eloundou, T., Manning, S., Mishkin, P., and Rock, D. Gpts
are gpts: Labor market impact potential of llms. Science,
384(6702):1306–1308, 2024. doi: 10.1126/science.adj0
998. URL https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1
126/science.adj0998.
Ettinger, S., Cheng, S., Caine, B., Liu, C., Zhao, H., Prad-
han, S., Chai, Y., Sapp, B., Qi, C. R., Zhou, Y., Yang,
Z., Chouard, A., Sun, P., Ngiam, J., Vasudevan, V., Mc-
Cauley, A., Shlens, J., and Anguelov, D. Large scale
interactive motion forecasting for autonomous driving:
The waymo open motion dataset. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pp. 9710–9719, October 2021.
Faiz, A., Kaneda, S., Wang, R., Osi, R., Sharma, P., Chen,
F., and Jiang, L. LLMCarbon: Modeling the end-to-end
Carbon Footprint of Large Language Models, January
2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2309.14393.
arXiv:2309.14393 [cs].
Faldor, M. and Cully, A. Cax: Cellular automata accelerated
in jax. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
Feng, L., Bahari, M., Amor, K. M. B., Zablocki, É., Cord,
M., and Alahi, A. Unitraj: A unified framework for scal-
able vehicle trajectory prediction. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pp. 106–123. Springer, 2024.
Fernando, C., Banarse, D., Michalewski, H., Osindero, S.,
and Rocktäschel, T. Promptbreeder: self-referential self-
improvement via prompt evolution. In Proceedings of
the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML’24. JMLR.org, 2024.
Feurer, M., Klein, A., Eggensperger, K., Springenberg, J.,
Blum, M., and Hutter, F. Efficient and Robust Automated
Machine Learning. In Cortes, C., Lawrence, N., Lee, D.,
Sugiyama, M., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, volume 28. Curran
Associates, Inc., 2015. URL https://proceedings.ne
urips.cc/paper_files/paper/2015/file/11d0e62
87202fced83f79975ec59a3a6-Paper.pdf.
Feurer, M., Eggensperger, K., Falkner, S., Lindauer, M.,
and Hutter, F. Auto-Sklearn 2.0: Hands-free AutoML via
Meta-Learning, October 2022. URL http://arxiv.or
g/abs/2007.04074. arXiv:2007.04074 [cs].
Foster, T., Sims, A., Forkel, J., and Foerster, J. N. LILO:
Learning to reason at the frontier of learnability. In The
Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025. URL https://openreview
.net/forum?id=8HYeWMf0W3.
14


--- Page 15 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Franceschelli, G. and Musolesi, M. On the Creativity of
Large Language Models. AI & SOCIETY, 40(5):3785–
3795, June 2025. ISSN 0951-5666, 1435-5655. doi:
10.1007/s00146-024-02127-3. URL http://arxiv.or
g/abs/2304.00008. arXiv:2304.00008 [cs].
Frans, K. and Isola, P. Powderworld: A Platform for Under-
standing Generalization via Rich Task Distributions, Oc-
tober 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13051.
arXiv:2211.13051 [cs].
Freeman, C. D., Frey, E., Raichuk, A., Girgin, S., Mordatch,
I., and Bachem, O. Brax - a differentiable physics engine
for large scale rigid body simulation, 2021. URL http:
//github.com/google/brax.
Gao, L., Madaan, A., Zhou, S., Alon, U., Liu, P., Yang, Y.,
Callan, J., and Neubig, G. PAL: Program-aided Language
Models, November 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2211.10435v2.
Gao, L., Tow, J., Abbasi, B., Biderman, S., Black, S., DiPofi,
A., Foster, C., Golding, L., Hsu, J., Le Noac’h, A., Li,
H., McDonell, K., Muennighoff, N., Ociepa, C., Phang,
J., Reynolds, L., Schoelkopf, H., Skowron, A., Sutawika,
L., Tang, E., Thite, A., Wang, B., Wang, K., and Zou, A.
The language model evaluation harness, 07 2024. URL
https://zenodo.org/records/12608602.
Garnett, R. Bayesian Optimization. Cambridge University
Press, 2023.
Gehring, J., Zheng, K., Copet, J., Mella, V., Carbonneaux,
Q., Cohen, T., and Synnaeve, G. RLEF: Grounding Code
LLMs in Execution Feedback with Reinforcement Learn-
ing, February 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/24
10.02089. arXiv:2410.02089 [cs].
Gideoni, Y., Tang, Y., Risi, S., and Gal, Y. Random base-
lines for simple code problems are competitive with code
evolution. In NeurIPS 2025 Fourth Workshop on Deep
Learning for Code, 2025. URL https://openreview.n
et/forum?id=rbVIpbmbTc.
Girgis, R., Golemo, F., Codevilla, F., Weiss, M., D’Souza,
J. A., Kahou, S. E., Heide, F., and Pal, C. Latent variable
sequential set transformers for joint multi-agent motion
prediction.
In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2022.
Goldie, A. D., Lu, C., Jackson, M. T., Whiteson, S., and Fo-
erster, J. N. Can Learned Optimization Make Reinforce-
ment Learning Less Difficult? In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 37, pp. 5454–
5497, 2024.
Goldie, A. D., Wang, Z., Cohen, J., Foerster, J. N., and
Whiteson, S. How Should We Meta-Learn Reinforcement
Learning Algorithms? May 2025. URL https://open
review.net/forum?id=jKzQ6af2DU#discussion.
Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. Deep Learning.
MIT Press, 2016. http://www.deeplearningbook.o
rg.
Google. URL https://gemini.google/overview/dee
p-research/. [Accessed 12-01-2026].
Gottweis, J., Weng, W.-H., Daryin, A., Tu, T., Palepu, A.,
Sirkovic, P., Myaskovsky, A., Weissenberger, F., Rong,
K., Tanno, R., Saab, K., Popovici, D., Blum, J., Zhang, F.,
Chou, K., Hassidim, A., Gokturk, B., Vahdat, A., Kohli,
P., Matias, Y., Carroll, A., Kulkarni, K., Tomasev, N.,
Guan, Y., Dhillon, V., Vaishnav, E. D., Lee, B., Costa,
T. R. D., Penadés, J. R., Peltz, G., Xu, Y., Pawlosky, A.,
Karthikesalingam, A., and Natarajan, V. Towards an AI
co-scientist, February 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/2502.18864. arXiv:2502.18864 [cs].
Gu, A. and Dao, T.
Mamba:
Linear-time sequence
modeling with selective state spaces.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Haase, J., Hanel, P. H. P., and Pokutta, S. Has the Creativity
of Large-Language Models peaked? An analysis of inter-
and intra-LLM variability, April 2025. URL http://ar
xiv.org/abs/2504.12320. arXiv:2504.12320 [cs].
Hafner, D. Benchmarking the spectrum of agent capabilities.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.06780, 2021.
Hallak, A., Castro, D. D., and Mannor, S.
Contextual
Markov Decision Processes, February 2015. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1502.02259. arXiv:1502.02259
[stat].
Hamin, M. and Edelman, B. Cheating on ai agent evalu-
ations. Technical report, Center for AI Standards and
Innovation (CAISI), 2025.
He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. Deep Residual Learn-
ing for Image Recognition, December 2015. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1512.03385. arXiv:1512.03385
[cs].
He, X., Zhao, K., and Chu, X. AutoML: A Survey of the
State-of-the-Art. Knowledge-Based Systems, 212:106622,
January 2021. ISSN 09507051. doi: 10.1016/j.knosys.2
020.106622. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1908.007
09. arXiv:1908.00709 [cs].
Hendrycks, D. and Dietterich, T. Benchmarking neural
network robustness to common corruptions and perturba-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.12261, 2019.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Basart, S., Zou, A., Mazeika, M.,
Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring Massive Multitask
Language Understanding, January 2021a. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2009.03300. arXiv:2009.03300
[cs].
Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., Arora, A., Basart,
S., Tang, E., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring math-
ematical problem solving with the math dataset. NeurIPS,
2021b.
Herr, N., Rocktäschel, T., and Raileanu, R. LLM-First
Search: Self-Guided Exploration of the Solution Space,
June 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.05213.
arXiv:2506.05213 [cs].
Hoffmann, J., Borgeaud, S., Mensch, A., Buchatskaya, E.,
Cai, T., Rutherford, E., Casas, D. d. L., Hendricks, L. A.,
Welbl, J., Clark, A., Hennigan, T., Noland, E., Millican,
K., Driessche, G. v. d., Damoc, B., Guy, A., Osindero,
S., Simonyan, K., Elsen, E., Rae, J. W., Vinyals, O., and
Sifre, L. Training Compute-Optimal Large Language
Models, March 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/22
03.15556. arXiv:2203.15556 [cs].
Hu, S., Lu, C., and Clune, J. Automated Design of Agentic
Systems, August 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2408.08435.
Huang, Q., Vora, J., Liang, P., and Leskovec, J. MLA-
gentBench: Evaluating Language Agents on Machine
Learning Experimentation, April 2024.
URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.03302. arXiv:2310.03302
[cs].
Huang, S., Dossa, R. F. J., Raffin, A., Kanervisto, A., and
Wang, W. The 37 implementation details of proximal
policy optimization. In ICLR Blog Track, 2022a. URL
https://iclr-blog-track.github.io/2022/03/2
5/ppo-implementation-details/. https://iclr-blog-
track.github.io/2022/03/25/ppo-implementation-details/.
Huang, S., Dossa, R. F. J., Ye, C., Braga, J., Chakraborty,
D., Mehta, K., and Araújo, J. G. Cleanrl: High-quality
single-file implementations of deep reinforcement learn-
ing algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
23(274):1–18, 2022b. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/
v23/21-1342.html.
Huang, S., Cheng, T., Liu, J. K., Hao, J., Song, L., Xu, Y.,
Yang, J., Liu, J., Zhang, C., Chai, L., Yuan, R., Zhang,
Z., Fu, J., Liu, Q., Zhang, G., Wang, Z., Qi, Y., Xu, Y.,
and Chu, W. Opencoder: The open cookbook for top-
tier code large language models, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2411.04905.
Huang, Y., Du, J., Yang, Z., Zhou, Z., Zhang, L., and Chen,
H. A survey on trajectory-prediction methods for au-
tonomous driving. IEEE transactions on intelligent vehi-
cles, 7(3):652–674, 2022c.
Hubert, T., Mehta, R., Sartran, L., Horváth, M. Z., Žuži´c,
G., Wieser, E., Huang, A., Schrittwieser, J., Schroecker,
Y., Masoom, H., Bertolli, O., Zahavy, T., Mandhane, A.,
Yung, J., Beloshapka, I., Ibarz, B., Veeriah, V., Yu, L.,
Nash, O., Lezeau, P., Mercuri, S., Sönne, C., Mehta, B.,
Davies, A., Zheng, D., Pedregosa, F., Li, Y., von Glehn,
I., Rowland, M., Albanie, S., Velingker, A., Schmitt, S.,
Lockhart, E., Hughes, E., Michalewski, H., Sonnerat,
N., Hassabis, D., Kohli, P., and Silver, D. Olympiad-
level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforcement
learning. Nature, pp. 1–3, November 2025. ISSN 1476-
4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09833-y. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09833-y.
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
Hughes, E., Dennis, M., Parker-Holder, J., Behbahani, F.,
Mavalankar, A., Shi, Y., Schaul, T., and Rocktaschel, T.
Open-Endedness is Essential for Artificial Superhuman
Intelligence, June 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2406.04268. arXiv:2406.04268 [cs].
Hutter, F., Kotthoff, L., and Vanschoren, J. (eds.). Auto-
mated Machine Learning - Methods, Systems, Challenges.
Springer, 2019.
Intology. Zochi technical report. arXiv, 2025.
Jackson, M., Lu, C., Kirsch, L., Lange, R., Whiteson, S., and
Foerster, J. Discovering temporally-aware reinforcement
learning algorithms. In Second agent learning in open-
endedness workshop, 2023. URL https://openreview
.net/forum?id=XUohU3mYQ5.
Jackson, M. T., Berdica, U., Liesen, J. L., Whiteson, S.,
and Foerster, J. N. A clean slate for offline reinforce-
ment learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=8P3QNSckMp.
Jelassi, S., Brandfonbrener, D., Kakade, S. M., and Malach,
E. Repeat after me: transformers are better than state
space models at copying. In Proceedings of the 41st In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’24.
JMLR.org, 2024.
Jiang, M., Dennis, M., Parker-Holder, J., Foerster, J. N.,
Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. Replay-guided ad-
versarial environment design. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, pp. 1884–1897, 2021a.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/202
1/hash/0e915db6326b6fb6a3c56546980a8c93-Abs
tract.html.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Jiang, M., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. Prioritized
Level Replay, June 2021b. URL http://arxiv.org/ab
s/2010.03934. arXiv:2010.03934 [cs].
Jiang, Z., Schmidt, D., Srikanth, D., Xu, D., Kaplan, I.,
Jacenko, D., and Wu, Y. AIDE: AI-Driven Exploration
in the Space of Code, February 2025. URL http://ar
xiv.org/abs/2502.13138. arXiv:2502.13138 [cs].
Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press,
O., and Narasimhan, K. SWE-bench: Can Language
Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues?, November
2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770.
arXiv:2310.06770 [cs].
Jones, D. R., Schonlau, M., and Welch, W. J. Efficient global
optimization of expensive black-box functions. Journal
of Global Optimization, 13(4):455–492, 1998.
Jordan,
K.,
Bernstein,
J.,
Rappazzo,
B.,
@fern-
bear.bsky.social, Vlado, B., Jiacheng, Y., Cesista, F.,
Koszarsky, B., and @Grad62304977. modded-nanogpt:
Speedrunning the nanogpt baseline. https://github
.com/KellerJordan/modded-nanogpt, 2024. GitHub
repository.
Joshi, M., Choi, E., Weld, D., and Zettlemoyer, L. TriviaQA:
A large scale distantly supervised challenge dataset for
reading comprehension. In Barzilay, R. and Kan, M.-Y.
(eds.), Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pp. 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada, July
2017. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/P17-1147. URL https://aclanthology
.org/P17-1147/.
Kaplan, J., McCandlish, S., Henighan, T., Brown, T. B.,
Chess, B., Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., Wu, J., and
Amodei, D. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models,
January 2020. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2001.083
61. arXiv:2001.08361 [cs].
Karpathy, A. autoresearch. https://github.com/karpa
thy/autoresearch, 2026.
Kazemnejad, A., Aghajohari, M., Portelance, E., Sordoni,
A., Reddy, S., Courville, A., and Roux, N. L. VinePPO:
Refining Credit Assignment in RL Training of LLMs,
June 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01679.
arXiv:2410.01679 [cs].
Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic
Optimization, January 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1412.6980.
Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Des-
jardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K., Quan, J., Ramalho,
T., Grabska-Barwinska, A., Hassabis, D., Clopath, C.,
Kumaran, D., and Hadsell, R. Overcoming catastrophic
forgetting in neural networks. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, 114(13):3521–3526, 2017.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1611835114. URL https://www.pn
as.org/doi/abs/10.1073/pnas.1611835114.
Kirsch, L., van Steenkiste, S., and Schmidhuber, J. Improv-
ing generalization in meta reinforcement learning using
learned objectives. In International conference on learn-
ing representations, 2020. URL https://openreview
.net/forum?id=S1evHerYPr.
Klissarov, M., Henaff, M., Raileanu, R., Sodhani, S., Vin-
cent, P., Zhang, A., Bacon, P.-L., Precup, D., Machado,
M. C., and D’Oro, P. Maestromotif: Skill design from
artificial intelligence feedback.
2025.
URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=or8mMhmyRV.
Kocsis, L. and Szepesvári, C.
Bandit based monte-
carlo planning.
In Proceedings of the 17th Euro-
pean Conference on Machine Learning, ECML’06, pp.
282–293, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006. Springer-Verlag.
ISBN 354045375X. doi: 10.1007/11871842_29. URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/11871842_29.
Komeili, M., Shuster, K., and Weston, J.
Internet-
Augmented Dialogue Generation, July 2021.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07566v1.
Krause, J., Stark, M., Deng, J., and Fei-Fei, L. 3d ob-
ject representations for fine-grained categorization. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) Workshops, June 2013.
Krishnan, S., Wang, J., Wu, E., Franklin, M. J., and Gold-
berg, K. Activeclean: interactive data cleaning for sta-
tistical modeling. Proc. VLDB Endow., 9(12):948–959,
August 2016. ISSN 2150-8097. doi: 10.14778/2994509
.2994514. URL https://doi.org/10.14778/2994509
.2994514.
Krizhevsky, A., Hinton, G., et al. Learning multiple layers
of features from tiny images. 2009.
Kumar, A., Hong, J., Singh, A., and Levine, S. When should
we prefer offline reinforcement learning over behavioral
cloning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05618, 2022.
Küttler, H., Nardelli, N., Miller, A. H., Raileanu, R.,
Selvatici, M., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T.
The NetHack Learning Environment, December 2020.
URL ht tp: // arx iv .o rg/ ab s/ 200 6. 13 760.
arXiv:2006.13760 [cs].
Lan, Q., Mahmood, A. R., Yan, S., and Xu, Z. Learning to
Optimize for Reinforcement Learning, June 2024. URL
http://arxiv.org/abs/2302.01470.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Lan, X. and Keeling, R. Trends in Atmospheric Carbon
Dioxide. NOAA Global Monitoring Laboratory. URL
https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends/data.html.
Accessed: 2026-01-13.
Landau, G., Özdogan, M., Elvers, G., Mantegna, F., So-
maiya, P., Jayalath, D., Kurth, L., Kwon, T., Shilling-
ford, B., Farquhar, G., et al. The 2025 pnpl competition:
Speech detection and phoneme classification in the libri-
brain dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10165, 2025.
Lange, R. T. <span class="nocase">gymnax</span>: A
JAX-based reinforcement learning environment library,
2022. URL http://github.com/RobertTLange/gymn
ax.
Langford, J.
Clever methods of overfitting.
Machine
Learning (Theory) Blog, February 2005. URL https:
//hunch.net/?p=22. Accessed: 2026-01-18.
LeCun, Y., Cortes, C., and Burges, C.
Mnist hand-
written digit database. ATT Labs [Online]. Available:
http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist, 2, 2010.
LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G.
Deep learning.
Nature, 521(7553):436–444, May 2015.
ISSN 1476-
4687.
doi: 10.1038/nature14539.
URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/nature14539.
Leibo, J. Z., Hughes, E., Lanctot, M., and Graepel, T. Au-
tocurricula and the Emergence of Innovation from Social
Interaction: A Manifesto for Multi-Agent Intelligence
Research, March 2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
1903.00742. arXiv:1903.00742 [cs].
Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., and Constant, N. The power of
scale for parameter-efficient prompt tuning. In Moens,
M.-F., Huang, X., Specia, L., and Yih, S. W.-t. (eds.), Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pp. 3045–3059, On-
line and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.243.
URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.243/.
Levine, S., Kumar, A., Tucker, G., and Fu, J. Offline rein-
forcement learning: Tutorial, review, and perspectives on
open problems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.01643, 2020.
Lewkowycz, A., Andreassen, A., Dohan, D., Dyer, E.,
Michalewski, H., Ramasesh, V., Slone, A., Anil, C.,
Schlag, I., Gutman-Solo, T., Wu, Y., Neyshabur, B., Gur-
Ari, G., and Misra, V. Solving Quantitative Reasoning
Problems with Language Models, July 2022. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2206.14858. arXiv:2206.14858
[cs].
Li, L., Jamieson, K., DeSalvo, G., Rostamizadeh, A.,
and Talwalkar, A.
Hyperband:
A Novel Bandit-
Based Approach to Hyperparameter Optimization, June
2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.06560.
arXiv:1603.06560 [cs].
Li, N., Pan, A., Gopal, A., Yue, S., Berrios, D., Gatti, A., Li,
J. D., Dombrowski, A.-K., Goel, S., Phan, L., Mukobi,
G., Helm-Burger, N., Lababidi, R., Justen, L., Liu, A. B.,
Chen, M., Barrass, I., Zhang, O., Zhu, X., Tamirisa,
R., Bharathi, B., Khoja, A., Zhao, Z., Herbert-Voss, A.,
Breuer, C. B., Marks, S., Patel, O., Zou, A., Mazeika,
M., Wang, Z., Oswal, P., Liu, W., Hunt, A. A., Tienken-
Harder, J., Shih, K. Y., Talley, K., Guan, J., Kaplan, R.,
Steneker, I., Campbell, D., Jokubaitis, B., Levinson, A.,
Wang, J., Qian, W., Karmakar, K. K., Basart, S., Fitz, S.,
Levine, M., Kumaraguru, P., Tupakula, U., Varadharajan,
V., Shoshitaishvili, Y., Ba, J., Esvelt, K. M., Wang, A.,
and Hendrycks, D. The wmdp benchmark: Measuring
and reducing malicious use with unlearning, 2024.
Li, Y., Choi, D., Chung, J., Kushman, N., Schrittwieser, J.,
Leblond, R., Eccles, T., Keeling, J., Gimeno, F., Lago,
A. D., Hubert, T., Choy, P., de Masson d’Autume, C.,
Babuschkin, I., Chen, X., Huang, P.-S., Welbl, J., Gowal,
S., Cherepanov, A., Molloy, J., Mankowitz, D. J., Rob-
son, E. S., Kohli, P., de Freitas, N., Kavukcuoglu, K.,
and Vinyals, O. Competition-level code generation with
alphacode. Science, 378(6624):1092–1097, 2022. doi:
10.1126/science.abq1158. URL https://www.science.
org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.abq1158.
Liang, S., Garg, S., and Moghaddam, R. Z. The SWE-
Bench Illusion: When State-of-the-Art LLMs Remember
Instead of Reason, December 2025. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2506.12286. arXiv:2506.12286 [cs] version:
4.
Lindauer, M., van Rijn, J. N., and Kotthoff, L. Open Al-
gorithm Selection Challenge 2017 Setup and Scenarios.
2017.
Lindauer, M., Eggensperger, K., Feurer, M., Biedenkapp,
A., Deng, D., Benjamins, C., Ruhkopf, T., Sass, R., and
Hutter, F. Smac3: A versatile bayesian optimization
package for hyperparameter optimization. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 23(54):1–9, 2022. URL
http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0888.html.
Liu, J., Wang, K., Chen, Y., Peng, X., Chen, Z.,
Zhang, L., and Lou, Y. Large Language Model-Based
Agents for Software Engineering: A Survey, December
2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02977.
arXiv:2409.02977 [cs].
18


--- Page 19 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Llama Team, A. . M. The Llama 3 Herd of Models, Novem-
ber 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783.
arXiv:2407.21783 [cs].
Löper, L. Boax: A bayesian optimization library for JAX,
2023. URL https://github.com/Lando-L/boax.
Lowe, R., Wu, Y., Tamar, A., Harb, J., Abbeel, P., and Mor-
datch, I. Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-
competitive environments. In Proceedings of the 31st In-
ternational Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, NIPS’17, pp. 6382–6393, Red Hook, NY, USA,
2017. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781510860964.
Lu, C., Kuba, J., Letcher, A., Metz, L., Schroeder de Witt,
C., and Foerster, J. Discovered policy optimisation. Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:
16455–16468, 2022.
Lu, C., Holt, S., Fanconi, C., Chan, A. J., Foerster, J., van der
Schaar, M., and Lange, R. T. Discovering Preference
Optimization Algorithms with and for Large Language
Models, September 2024a. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/2406.08414.
Lu, C., Lu, C., Lange, R. T., Foerster, J., Clune, J., and Ha,
D. The AI Scientist: Towards Fully Automated Open-
Ended Scientific Discovery, September 2024b. URL ht
tp://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06292. arXiv:2408.06292
[cs].
Luong, T., Hwang, D., Nguyen, H. H., Ghiasi, G., Cher-
vonyi, Y., Seo, I., Kim, J., Bingham, G., Lee, J., Mishra,
S., Zhai, A., Hu, C. H., Michalewski, H., Kim, J., Ahn,
J., Bae, J., Song, X., Trinh, T. H., Le, Q. V., and Jung,
J. Towards Robust Mathematical Reasoning, Novem-
ber 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.01846.
arXiv:2511.01846 [cs].
Lupidi, A., Gauri, B., Foster, T. S., Omari, B. A., Magka,
D., Pepe, A., Audran-Reiss, A., Aghamelu, M., Bald-
win, N., Cipolina-Kun, L., Gagnon-Audet, J.-C., Leow,
C. H., Lefdal, S., Mossalam, H., Moudgil, A., Nazir,
S., Tewolde, E., Urrego, I., Estape, J. A., Budhiraja,
A., Chaurasia, G., Charnalia, A., Dunfield, D., Ham-
bardzumyan, K., Izcovich, D., Josifoski, M., Mediratta,
I., Niu, K., Pathak, P., Shvartsman, M., Toledo, E., Pro-
topopov, A., Raileanu, R., Miller, A., Shavrina, T., Fo-
erster, J., and Bachrach, Y. AIRS-Bench: a Suite of
Tasks for Frontier AI Research Science Agents, Febru-
ary 2026. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2602.06855.
arXiv:2602.06855 [cs].
Ma, Y. J., Liang, W., Wang, G., Huang, D.-A., Bastani, O.,
Jayaraman, D., Zhu, Y., Fan, L., and Anandkumar, A.
Eureka: Human-Level Reward Design via Coding Large
Language Models, April 2024. URL http://arxiv.or
g/abs/2310.12931. arXiv:2310.12931 [cs].
Maini, P., Feng, Z., Schwarzschild, A., Lipton, Z. C., and
Kolter, J. Z. TOFU: A task of fictitious unlearning for
LLMs. In First Conference on Language Modeling, 2024.
Matthews, M., Beukman, M., Ellis, B., Samvelyan, M.,
Jackson, M., Coward, S., and Foerster, J. Craftax: a
lightning-fast benchmark for open-ended reinforcement
learning. In International conference on machine learn-
ing (ICML), 2024.
Matthews, M., Beukman, M., Lu, C., and Foerster,
J.
Kinetix:
Investigating the Training of General
Agents through Open-Ended Physics-Based Control
Tasks, March 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2410.23208. arXiv:2410.23208 [cs] version: 2.
Mesnard, T. and et al.
Gemma: Open models based
on gemini research and technology.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.08295, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2403.08295.
Meta AI. The llama 4 herd: The beginning of a new era
of natively multimodal ai innovation, April 2025. URL
https://ai.meta.com/blog/llama-4-multimoda
l-intelligence/.
METR. Measuring ai ability to complete long tasks. https:
//metr.org/blog/2025-03-19-measuring-ai-abi
lity-to-complete-long-tasks/, 03 2025.
Metz, L., Maheswaranathan, N., Cheung, B., and Sohl-
Dickstein, J. Meta-Learning Update Rules for Unsuper-
vised Representation Learning, February 2019. URL ht
tp://arxiv.org/abs/1804.00222. arXiv:1804.00222
[cs, stat].
Metz, L., Freeman, C. D., Harrison, J., Maheswaranathan,
N., and Sohl-Dickstein, J. Practical tradeoffs between
memory, compute, and performance in learned optimizers.
In Conference on lifelong learning agents, pp. 142–164.
PMLR, 2022a. URL http://github.com/google/le
arned_optimization.
Metz, L., Harrison, J., Freeman, C. D., Merchant, A., Beyer,
L., Bradbury, J., Agrawal, N., Poole, B., Mordatch, I.,
Roberts, A., and Sohl-Dickstein, J.
VeLO: Training
Versatile Learned Optimizers by Scaling Up, Novem-
ber 2022b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09760.
arXiv:2211.09760 [cs, math, stat].
Mistral AI. Introducing: Devstral 2 and Mistral Vibe CLI.
https://mistral.ai/news/devstral-2-vibe-cli,
2025. [Accessed 11-01-2026].
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Graves, A.,
Antonoglou, I., Wierstra, D., and Riedmiller, M. Play-
ing atari with deep reinforcement learning, 2013. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.5602.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Mnih, V., Kavukcuoglu, K., Silver, D., Rusu, A. A., Veness,
J., Bellemare, M. G., Graves, A., Riedmiller, M., Fidje-
land, A. K., Ostrovski, G., Petersen, S., Beattie, C., Sadik,
A., Antonoglou, I., King, H., Kumaran, D., Wierstra, D.,
Legg, S., and Hassabis, D. Human-level control through
deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533,
February 2015. ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature14
236. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14236.
Mordvintsev, A., Randazzo, E., Niklasson, E., and Levin,
M. Growing neural cellular automata. Distill, 5(2):e23,
2020.
Nair, V. and Hinton, G. E. Rectified linear units improve
restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the 27th
International Conference on International Conference on
Machine Learning, ICML’10, pp. 807–814, Madison, WI,
USA, 2010. Omnipress. ISBN 9781605589077.
Nakano, R., Hilton, J., Balaji, S., Wu, J., Ouyang, L., Kim,
C., Hesse, C., Jain, S., Kosaraju, V., Saunders, W., Jiang,
X., Cobbe, K., Eloundou, T., Krueger, G., Button, K.,
Knight, M., Chess, B., and Schulman, J.
WebGPT:
Browser-assisted question-answering with human feed-
back, December 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2112.09332v3.
Nathani, D., Madaan, L., Roberts, N., Bashlykov, N.,
Menon, A., Moens, V., Budhiraja, A., Magka, D.,
Vorotilov, V., Chaurasia, G., Hupkes, D., Cabral, R. S.,
Shavrina, T., Foerster, J., Bachrach, Y., Wang, W. Y., and
Raileanu, R.
Mlgym: A new framework and bench-
mark for advancing ai research agents, 2025.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.14499.
Neutatz, F., Chen, B., Alkhatib, Y., Ye, J., and Abedjan, Z.
Data Cleaning and AutoML: Would an Optimizer Choose
to Clean?
Datenbank-Spektrum, 22(2):121–130, July
2022. ISSN 1610-1995. doi: 10.1007/s13222-022-004
13-2. URL https://doi.org/10.1007/s13222-022
-00413-2.
Nikulin, A., Kurenkov, V., Zisman, I., Agarkov, A., Sinii,
V., and Kolesnikov, S. XLand-MiniGrid: Scalable Meta-
Reinforcement Learning Environments in JAX, Novem-
ber 2024. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.12044.
arXiv:2312.12044 [cs].
Nilsback, M.-E. and Zisserman, A. Automated flower clas-
sification over a large number of classes. In Indian Con-
ference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Pro-
cessing, Dec 2008.
Novikov, A., V˜u, N., Eisenberger, M., Dupont, E., Huang,
P.-S., Wagner, A. Z., Shirobokov, S., Kozlovskii, B., Ruiz,
F. J. R., Mehrabian, A., Kumar, M. P., See, A., Chaudhuri,
S., Holland, G., Davies, A., Nowozin, S., Kohli, P., and
Balog, M. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific
and algorithmic discovery, June 2025. URL http://ar
xiv.org/abs/2506.13131. arXiv:2506.13131 [cs].
Oh, J., Hessel, M., Czarnecki, W. M., Xu, Z., van Hasselt,
H. P., Singh, S., and Silver, D. Discovering reinforcement
learning algorithms. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:1060–1070, 2020.
Oh, J., Farquhar, G., Kemaev, I., Calian, D. A., Hessel,
M., Zintgraf, L., Singh, S., van Hasselt, H., and Silver,
D. Discovering state-of-the-art reinforcement learning
algorithms. Nature, pp. 1–8, October 2025. ISSN 1476-
4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-025-09761-x. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s41586-025-09761-x.
Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
OpenAI, Feb 2025a. URL https://openai.com/index/i
ntroducing-deep-research/. [Accessed 12-01-2026].
OpenAI. Introducing codex, 2025b. URL https://open
ai.com/index/introducing-codex/.
OpenAI. Introducing gpt-5, August 2025c. URL https:
//openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5/.
OpenAI, Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Ai, J., Altman, S., Apple-
baum, A., Arbus, E., Arora, R. K., Bai, Y., Baker, B., Bao,
H., Barak, B., Bennett, A., Bertao, T., Brett, N., Brevdo,
E., Brockman, G., Bubeck, S., Chang, C., Chen, K., Chen,
M., Cheung, E., Clark, A., Cook, D., Dukhan, M., Dvo-
rak, C., Fives, K., Fomenko, V., Garipov, T., Georgiev,
K., Glaese, M., Gogineni, T., Goucher, A., Gross, L.,
Guzman, K. G., Hallman, J., Hehir, J., Heidecke, J., Hel-
yar, A., Hu, H., Huet, R., Huh, J., Jain, S., Johnson, Z.,
Koch, C., Kofman, I., Kundel, D., Kwon, J., Kyrylov,
V., Le, E. Y., Leclerc, G., Lennon, J. P., Lessans, S.,
Lezcano-Casado, M., Li, Y., Li, Z., Lin, J., Liss, J., Lily,
Liu, Liu, J., Lu, K., Lu, C., Martinovic, Z., McCallum,
L., McGrath, J., McKinney, S., McLaughlin, A., Mei,
S., Mostovoy, S., Mu, T., Myles, G., Neitz, A., Nichol,
A., Pachocki, J., Paino, A., Palmie, D., Pantuliano, A.,
Parascandolo, G., Park, J., Pathak, L., Paz, C., Peran, L.,
Pimenov, D., Pokrass, M., Proehl, E., Qiu, H., Raila, G.,
Raso, F., Ren, H., Richardson, K., Robinson, D., Rotsted,
B., Salman, H., Sanjeev, S., Schwarzer, M., Sculley, D.,
Sikchi, H., Simon, K., Singhal, K., Song, Y., Stuckey,
D., Sun, Z., Tillet, P., Toizer, S., Tsimpourlas, F., Vyas,
N., Wallace, E., Wang, X., Wang, M., Watkins, O., Weil,
K., Wendling, A., Whinnery, K., Whitney, C., Wong, H.,
Yang, L., Yang, Y., Yasunaga, M., Ying, K., Zaremba,
W., Zhan, W., Zhang, C., Zhang, B., Zhang, E., and
Zhao, S. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b Model Card, Au-
gust 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925.
arXiv:2508.10925 [cs].
20


--- Page 21 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wainwright,
C. L., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., Agarwal, S., Slama, K.,
Ray, A., Schulman, J., Hilton, J., Kelton, F., Miller, L.,
Simens, M., Askell, A., Welinder, P., Christiano, P., Leike,
J., and Lowe, R. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback, March 2022. URL ht
tp://arxiv.org/abs/2203.02155. arXiv:2203.02155
[cs].
Özdogan, M., Landau, G., Elvers, G., Jayalath, D., So-
maiya, P., Mantegna, F., Woolrich, M., and Jones, O. P.
Libribrain: Over 50 hours of within-subject meg to im-
prove speech decoding methods at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.02098, 2025.
Paglieri, D., Cupiał, B., Coward, S., Piterbarg, U., Wol-
czyk, M., Khan, A., Pignatelli, E., Kuci´nski, Ł., Pinto, L.,
Fergus, R., Foerster, J. N., Parker-Holder, J., and Rock-
täschel, T. BALROG: Benchmarking agentic LLM and
VLM reasoning on games. In The Thirteenth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=fp6t3F66
9F.
Park, S., Frans, K., Eysenbach, B., and Levine, S. Ogbench:
Benchmarking offline goal-conditioned rl. In Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2025a.
Park, S., Li, Q., and Levine, S. Flow q-learning, 2025b.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.02538.
Parker-Holder, J., Nguyen, V., and Roberts, S.
Prov-
ably Efficient Online Hyperparameter Optimization with
Population-Based Bandits, June 2021.
URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2002.02518. arXiv:2002.02518
[cs].
Parker-Holder, J., Jiang, M., Dennis, M., Samvelyan, M.,
Foerster, J., Grefenstette, E., and Rocktäschel, T. Evolv-
ing Curricula with Regret-Based Environment Design.
In Chaudhuri, K., Jegelka, S., Song, L., Szepesvari, C.,
Niu, G., and Sabato, S. (eds.), Proceedings of the 39th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
17473–17498. PMLR, July 2022a. URL https://proc
eedings.mlr.press/v162/parker-holder22a.html.
Parker-Holder, J., Rajan, R., Song, X., Biedenkapp, A.,
Miao, Y., Eimer, T., Zhang, B., Nguyen, V., Calandra,
R., Faust, A., Hutter, F., and Lindauer, M. Automated
Reinforcement Learning (AutoRL): A Survey and Open
Problems. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 74:
517–568, June 2022b. ISSN 1076-9757. doi: 10.1613/ja
ir.1.13596. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.03916.
arXiv:2201.03916 [cs].
Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel, V.,
Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M., Prettenhofer, P.,
Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., Vanderplas, J., Passos, A., Cour-
napeau, D., Brucher, M., Perrot, M., and Duchesnay, E.
Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 12:2825–2830, 2011.
Penedo, G., Kydlíˇcek, H., Allal, L. B., Lozhkov, A.,
Mitchell, M., Raffel, C., Werra, L. V., and Wolf, T. The
fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text
data at scale, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/24
06.17557.
Phan, L. et al. Humanity’s last exam, 2025. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2501.14249.
Pichai, S., Hassabis, D., and Kavukcuoglu, K. A new era
of intelligence with gemini 3, November 2025. URL
https://blog.google/products-and-platforms/p
roducts/gemini/gemini-3/.
Qiu, X., Gan, Y., Hayes, C. F., Liang, Q., Meyerson, E.,
Hodjat, B., and Miikkulainen, R. Evolution Strategies at
Scale: LLM Fine-Tuning Beyond Reinforcement Learn-
ing, September 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/25
09.24372. arXiv:2509.24372 [cs].
Qwen. Qwen : A family of large language models. Tech-
nical report / model release, 2024. Available at https:
//github.com/QwenLM/Qwen3.
Ramachandran, P., Zoph, B., and Le, Q. V.
Searching
for Activation Functions, October 2017. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1710.05941. arXiv:1710.05941
[cs].
Randazzo, E., Mordvintsev, A., Niklasson, E., Levin, M.,
and Greydanus, S. Self-classifying mnist digits. Distill,
5(8):e00027–002, 2020.
Real, E., Liang, C., So, D. R., and Le, Q. V. Automl-
zero: Evolving machine learning algorithms from scratch.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03384, 2020.
Rodrigo, M., Cuevas, C., and García, N. Comprehensive
comparison between vision transformers and convolu-
tional neural networks for face recognition tasks. Sci-
entific Reports, 14(1):21392, September 2024. ISSN
2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-72254-w. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-72254-w.
Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Balog,
M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J. R., Ellenberg,
J. S., Wang, P., Fawzi, O., Kohli, P., and Fawzi, A. Math-
ematical discoveries from program search with large lan-
guage models. Nature, 625(7995):468–475, January 2024.
ISSN 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06924-6.
URL https://www.nature.com/articles/s41586-0
23-06924-6.
21


--- Page 22 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Rozière, B., Gehring, J., Gloeckle, F., Sootla, S., Gat, I.,
Tan, X. E., Adi, Y., Liu, J., Sauvestre, R., Remez, T.,
Rapin, J., Kozhevnikov, A., Evtimov, I., Bitton, J., Bhatt,
M., Ferrer, C. C., Grattafiori, A., Xiong, W., Défossez,
A., Copet, J., Azhar, F., Touvron, H., Martin, L., Usunier,
N., Scialom, T., and Synnaeve, G. Code Llama: Open
Foundation Models for Code, January 2024. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2308.12950. arXiv:2308.12950
[cs].
Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Satheesh, S.,
Ma, S., Huang, Z., Karpathy, A., Khosla, A., Bernstein,
M., et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition chal-
lenge. International journal of computer vision, 115(3):
211–252, 2015.
Rusu, A. A., Rabinowitz, N. C., Desjardins, G., Soyer,
H., Kirkpatrick, J., Kavukcuoglu, K., Pascanu, R., and
Hadsell, R.
Progressive Neural Networks, October
2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04671.
arXiv:1606.04671 [cs].
Rutherford, A., Beukman, M., Willi, T., Lacerda, B., Hawes,
N., and Foerster, J. No regrets: Investigating and im-
proving regret approximations for curriculum discovery.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:
16071–16101, 2024a.
Rutherford, A., Ellis, B., Gallici, M., Cook, J., Lupu, A., In-
gvarsson, G., Willi, T., Hammond, R., Khan, A., de Witt,
C. S., Souly, A., Bandyopadhyay, S., Samvelyan, M.,
Jiang, M., Lange, R. T., Whiteson, S., Lacerda, B., Hawes,
N., Rocktäschel, T., Lu, C., and Foerster, J. N. Jaxmarl:
Multi-agent rl environments and algorithms in jax. In The
Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2024b.
Samvelyan, M., Kirk, R., Kurin, V., Parker-Holder, J., Jiang,
M., Hambro, E., Petroni, F., Kuttler, H., Grefenstette,
E., and Rocktäschel, T. Minihack the planet: A sand-
box for open-ended reinforcement learning research. In
Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 1), 2021.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=skFwlyef
kWJ.
Samvelyan, M., Khan, A., Dennis, M., Jiang, M., Parker-
Holder, J., Foerster, J. N., Raileanu, R., and Rocktäschel,
T. MAESTRO: open-ended environment design for multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In The Eleventh Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR
2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023. OpenReview.net,
2023. URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sKWl
RDzPfd7.
Sarkar, B., Fellows, M., Duque, J. A., Letcher, A., Villares,
A. L., Sims, A., Cope, D., Liesen, J., Seier, L., Wolf, T.,
Berdica, U., Goldie, A. D., Courville, A., Sevegnani, K.,
Whiteson, S., and Foerster, J. N. Evolution Strategies at
the Hyperscale, November 2025. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/2511.16652. arXiv:2511.16652 [cs].
Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Lomeli,
M., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, N., and Scialom, T. Tool-
former: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use
Tools, February 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/
2302.04761. arXiv:2302.04761 [cs].
Schmidhuber, J. Evolutionary principles in self-referential
learning, or on learning how to learn: The meta-meta-
hook. 1987.
Schulman, J., Wolski, F., Dhariwal, P., Radford, A., and
Klimov, O. Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms,
August 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707.063
47.
Shaker, N., Togelius, J., and {J. Nelson}, M. Procedural
Content Generation in Games. Springer, Germany, 2016.
Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang,
H., Zhang, M., Li, Y. K., Wu, Y., and Guo, D. DeepSeek-
Math: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning
in Open Language Models, April 2024.
URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300. arXiv:2402.03300
[cs].
Shi, W., Lee, J., Huang, Y., Malladi, S., Zhao, J., Holtzman,
A., Liu, D., Zettlemoyer, L., Smith, N. A., and Zhang,
C. MUSE: Machine unlearning six-way evaluation for
language models. 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/ab
s/2407.06460.
Shneiderman, B. Human-Centered AI. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, January 2022.
ISBN 978-0-19-284529-0.
doi: 10.1093/oso/9780192845290.001.0001. URL
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780192845290.
001.0001. https://academic.oup.com/book/41126/book-
pdf/50987951/9780192659996_web.pdf.
Si, C., Yang, D., and Hashimoto, T. Can LLMs Generate
Novel Research Ideas? A Large-Scale Human Study with
100+ NLP Researchers, September 2024. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2409.04109. arXiv:2409.04109.
Si, C., Yang, Z., Choi, Y., Candès, E., Yang, D., and
Hashimoto, T. Towards Execution-Grounded Automated
AI Research, January 2026. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/2601.14525. arXiv:2601.14525 [cs].
Stanley, K. O. Why open-endedness matters. Artificial life,
25(3):232–235, 2019.
22


--- Page 23 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Stanley, K. O. and Miikkulainen, R.
Evolving neural
networks through augmenting topologies. Evol. Com-
put., 10(2):99–127, June 2002. ISSN 1063-6560. doi:
10.1162/106365602320169811. URL https://doi.or
g/10.1162/106365602320169811.
Stanley, K. O., D’Ambrosio, D. B., and Gauci, J.
A
hypercube-based encoding for evolving large-scale neu-
ral networks. Artificial Life, 15(2):185–212, 2009. doi:
10.1162/artl.2009.15.2.15202.
Stooke, A., Mahajan, A., Barros, C., Deck, C., Bauer,
J., Sygnowski, J., Trebacz, M., Jaderberg, M., Math-
ieu, M., McAleese, N., Bradley-Schmieg, N., Wong,
N., Porcel, N., Raileanu, R., Hughes-Fitt, S., Dalibard,
V., and Czarnecki, W. M. Open-Ended Learning Leads
to Generally Capable Agents, July 2021. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2107.12808. arXiv:2107.12808 [cs],
Open Ended Learning Team.
Strubell, E., Ganesh, A., and McCallum, A. Energy and
Policy Considerations for Deep Learning in NLP, June
2019. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1906.02243.
arXiv:1906.02243 [cs].
Surjanovic, S. and Bingham, D. Virtual library of simulation
experiments: Test functions and datasets. Retrieved Jan-
uary 16, 2026, from http://www.sfu.ca/~ssurjano.
Sutton, R. S. and Barto, A. Reinforcement learning: an
introduction. Adaptive computation and machine learn-
ing. The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts London,
England, second edition edition, 2020. ISBN 978-0-262-
03924-6.
Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., and Wojna,
Z. Rethinking the inception architecture for computer
vision. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2818–2826, 2016.
doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.308.
Takahashi, S., Sakaguchi, Y., Kouno, N., Takasawa, K.,
Ishizu, K., Akagi, Y., Aoyama, R., Teraya, N., Bo-
latkan, A., Shinkai, N., Machino, H., Kobayashi, K.,
Asada, K., Komatsu, M., Kaneko, S., Sugiyama, M.,
and Hamamoto, R. Comparison of Vision Transform-
ers and Convolutional Neural Networks in Medical Im-
age Analysis: A Systematic Review. Journal of Med-
ical Systems, 48(1):84, September 2024. ISSN 1573-
689X.
doi: 10.1007/s10916-024-02105-8.
URL
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-024-02105-8.
Tarasov, D., Kurenkov, V., Nikulin, A., and Kolesnikov,
S. Revisiting the minimalist approach to offline rein-
forcement learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 36:11592–11620, 2023.
Taylor, R., Kardas, M., Cucurull, G., Scialom, T., Hartshorn,
A., Saravia, E., Poulton, A., Kerkez, V., and Stojnic,
R. Galactica: A Large Language Model for Science,
November 2022. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2211
.09085. arXiv:2211.09085 [cs].
Tesfaldet, M., Nowrouzezahrai, D., and Pal, C. Attention-
based neural cellular automata. Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, 35:8174–8186, 2022.
Thakkar, N., Yuksekgonul, M., Silberg, J., Garg, A., Peng,
N., Sha, F., Yu, R., Vondrick, C., and Zou, J. Can LLM
feedback enhance review quality? A randomized study
of 20K reviews at ICLR 2025, April 2025. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2504.09737. arXiv:2504.09737
[cs].
Thoppilan, R., De Freitas, D., Hall, J., Shazeer, N., Kul-
shreshtha, A., Cheng, H.-T., Jin, A., Bos, T., Baker,
L., Du, Y., Li, Y., Lee, H., Zheng, H. S., Ghafouri,
A., Menegali, M., Huang, Y., Krikun, M., Lepikhin,
D., Qin, J., Chen, D., Xu, Y., Chen, Z., Roberts, A.,
Bosma, M., Zhao, V., Zhou, Y., Chang, C.-C., Krivokon,
I., Rusch, W., Pickett, M., Srinivasan, P., Man, L., Meier-
Hellstern, K., Morris, M. R., Doshi, T., Santos, R. D.,
Duke, T., Soraker, J., Zevenbergen, B., Prabhakaran,
V., Diaz, M., Hutchinson, B., Olson, K., Molina, A.,
Hoffman-John, E., Lee, J., Aroyo, L., Rajakumar, R.,
Butryna, A., Lamm, M., Kuzmina, V., Fenton, J., Cohen,
A., Bernstein, R., Kurzweil, R., Aguera-Arcas, B., Cui,
C., Croak, M., Chi, E., and Le, Q. LaMDA: Language
Models for Dialog Applications, January 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.08239v3.
Todorov, E., Erez, T., and Tassa, Y. MuJoCo: A physics
engine for model-based control. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ inter-
national conference on intelligent robots and systems, pp.
5026–5033. IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386
109.
Togelius, J., Champandard, A. J., Lanzi, P. L., Mateas,
M., Paiva, A., Preuss, M., and Stanley, K. O. Proce-
dural Content Generation: Goals, Challenges and Ac-
tionable Steps. In Lucas, S. M., Mateas, M., Preuss, M.,
Spronck, P., and Togelius, J. (eds.), Dagstuhl Follow-
Ups, pp. 15 pages, 414306 bytes. Schloss Dagstuhl –
Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2013.
ISBN 978-3-
939897-62-0. doi: 10.4230/DFU.VOL6.12191.61. URL
https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/
10.4230/DFU.Vol6.12191.61.
Toledo, E., Hambardzumyan, K., Josifoski, M., Hazra, R.,
Baldwin, N., Audran-Reiss, A., Kuchnik, M., Magka, D.,
Jiang, M., Lupidi, A. M., Lupu, A., Raileanu, R., Niu,
K., Shavrina, T., Gagnon-Audet, J.-C., Shvartsman, M.,
Sodhani, S., Miller, A. H., Charnalia, A., Dunfield, D.,
23


--- Page 24 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Wu, C.-J., Stenetorp, P., Cancedda, N., Foerster, J. N., and
Bachrach, Y. AI Research Agents for Machine Learning:
Search, Exploration, and Generalization in MLE-bench,
November 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2507
.02554. arXiv:2507.02554 [cs].
Touvron, H., Lavril, T., Izacard, G., Martinet, X., Lachaux,
M.-A., Lacroix, T., Rozière, B., Goyal, N., Hambro, E.,
Azhar, F., Rodriguez, A., Joulin, A., Grave, É., and Lam-
ple, G. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971.
Trinh, T. H., Wu, Y., Le, Q. V., He, H., and Luong, T.
Solving olympiad geometry without human demonstra-
tions. Nature, 625(7995):476–482, January 2024. ISSN
1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5. URL
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06747-5.
Tunstall, L., Beeching, E., Lambert, N., Rajani, N., Ra-
sul, K., Belkada, Y., Huang, S., von Werra, L., Four-
rier, C., Habib, N., Sarrazin, N., Sanseviero, O., and
Rush, A. M. Zephyr: Direct distillation of lm align-
ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16944, 2023. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.16944.
Turpin, M., Michael, J., Perez, E., and Bowman, S. R. Lan-
guage Models Don’t Always Say What They Think: Un-
faithful Explanations in Chain-of-Thought Prompting,
December 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.0
4388. arXiv:2305.04388 [cs].
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones,
L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. Attention
is All you Need. In Guyon, I., Luxburg, U. V., Bengio, S.,
Wallach, H., Fergus, R., Vishwanathan, S., and Garnett,
R. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/p
aper/2017/file/3f5ee243547dee91fbd053c1c4a84
5aa-Paper.pdf.
Wang, F., Cheng, J., Liu, W., and Liu, H. Additive margin
softmax for face verification. IEEE Signal Processing
Letters, 25(7):926–930, 2018. doi: 10.1109/LSP.2018.2
822810.
Wang, J. X., King, M., Porcel, N., Kurth-Nelson, Z.,
Zhu, T., Deck, C., Choy, P., Cassin, M., Reynolds, M.,
Song, F., Buttimore, G., Reichert, D. P., Rabinowitz, N.,
Matthey, L., Hassabis, D., Lerchner, A., and Botvinick,
M. Alchemy: A benchmark and analysis toolkit for meta-
reinforcement learning agents, October 2021. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2102.02926. arXiv:2102.02926
[cs].
Wang, L., Ma, C., Feng, X., Zhang, Z., Yang, H., Zhang, J.,
Chen, Z., Tang, J., Chen, X., Lin, Y., Zhao, W. X., Wei, Z.,
and Wen, J.-R. A Survey on Large Language Model based
Autonomous Agents. Frontiers of Computer Science, 18
(6):186345, December 2024a. ISSN 2095-2228, 2095-
2236. doi: 10.1007/s11704-024-40231-1. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2308.11432. arXiv:2308.11432
[cs].
Wang, L., Zhang, X., Su, H., and Zhu, J. A Comprehen-
sive Survey of Continual Learning: Theory, Method and
Application . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis &
Machine Intelligence, 46(08):5362–5383, August 2024b.
ISSN 1939-3539. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2024.3367329.
URL https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1
109/TPAMI.2024.3367329.
Wang, W., Pi˛ekos, P., Nanbo, L., Laakom, F., Chen, Y., Os-
taszewski, M., Zhuge, M., and Schmidhuber, J. Huxley-
Gödel Machine: Human-Level Coding Agent Develop-
ment by an Approximation of the Optimal Self-Improving
Machine, October 2025a. URL http://arxiv.org/ab
s/2510.21614. arXiv:2510.21614 [cs].
Wang, Y., Ji, P., Yang, C., Li, K., Hu, M., Li, J., and Sar-
toretti, G. MCTS-Judge: Test-Time Scaling in LLM-
as-a-Judge for Code Correctness Evaluation, February
2025b. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2502.12468.
arXiv:2502.12468 [cs].
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B.,
Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-Thought
Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models,
January 2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2201.119
03. arXiv:2201.11903 [cs].
Weidinger, L., Mellor, J., Rauh, M., Griffin, C., Uesato,
J., Huang, P.-S., Cheng, M., Glaese, M., Balle, B.,
Kasirzadeh, A., Kenton, Z., Brown, S., Hawkins, W.,
Stepleton, T., Biles, C., Birhane, A., Haas, J., Rimell,
L., Hendricks, L. A., Isaac, W., Legassick, S., Irving,
G., and Gabriel, I.
Ethical and social risks of harm
from Language Models, December 2021. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2112.04359. arXiv:2112.04359
[cs].
Wen, X., Liu, Z., Zheng, S., Ye, S., Wu, Z., Wang, Y.,
Xu, Z., Liang, X., Li, J., Miao, Z., Bian, J., and Yang,
M. Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards
Implicitly Incentivizes Correct Reasoning in Base LLMs,
October 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2506.1
4245. arXiv:2506.14245 [cs].
Weston, J. and Foerster, J. AI & Human Co-Improvement
for Safer Co-Superintelligence, December 2025. URL ht
tp://arxiv.org/abs/2512.05356. arXiv:2512.05356
[cs].
24


--- Page 25 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
White, C., Safari, M., Sukthanker, R., Ru, B., Elsken,
T., Zela, A., Dey, D., and Hutter, F.
Neural Archi-
tecture Search: Insights from 1000 Papers, January
2023. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2301.08727.
arXiv:2301.08727 [cs].
Whiteson, S., Tanner, B., Taylor, M. E., and Stone, P. Pro-
tecting against evaluation overfitting in empirical rein-
forcement learning. In IEEE Symposium on Adaptive
Dynamic Programming and Reinforcement Learning (AD-
PRL), April 2011. URL http://www.cs.utexas.edu/
users/ai-lab?ADPRL11-shimon.
Wightman, R. Pytorch image models. https://github.c
om/rwightman/pytorch-image-models, 2019.
Wijk, H., Lin, T., Becker, J., Jawhar, S., Parikh, N., Broadley,
T., Chan, L., Chen, M., Clymer, J., Dhyani, J., Ericheva,
E., Garcia, K., Goodrich, B., Jurkovic, N., Karnofsky, H.,
Kinniment, M., Lajko, A., Nix, S., Sato, L., Saunders,
W., Taran, M., West, B., and Barnes, E. RE-Bench: Eval-
uating frontier AI R&D capabilities of language model
agents against human experts, May 2025. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2411.15114. arXiv:2411.15114
[cs].
Wilson, B., Qi, W., Agarwal, T., Lambert, J., Singh, J.,
Khandelwal, S., Pan, B., Kumar, R., Hartnett, A., Pontes,
J. K., Ramanan, D., Carr, P., and Hays, J. Argoverse 2:
Next generation datasets for self-driving perception and
forecasting. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems (NeurIPS), 2023.
Wu, J., Zhang, Q., and Xu, G. Tiny imagenet challenge.
Technical report, 2017.
Xiao, H., Rasul, K., and Vollgraf, R. Fashion-mnist: a
novel image dataset for benchmarking machine learning
algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
Yamada, Y., Lange, R. T., Lu, C., Hu, S., Lu, C., Foerster,
J., Clune, J., and Ha, D. The AI Scientist-v2: Workshop-
Level Automated Scientific Discovery via Agentic Tree
Search, April 2025. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/25
04.08066. arXiv:2504.08066 [cs].
Yang, J., Jimenez, C. E., Wettig, A., Lieret, K., Yao, S.,
Narasimhan, K. R., and Press, O. SWE-agent: Agent-
computer interfaces enable automated software engi-
neering.
In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.15793.
Yao, S., Zhao, J., Yu, D., Du, N., Shafran, I., Narasimhan,
K., and Cao, Y.
ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and
Acting in Language Models, March 2023. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629. arXiv:2210.03629
[cs].
Yao, Y., Xu, X., and YangLiu.
Large language model
unlearning.
In Globerson, A., Mackey, L., Belgrave,
D., Fan, A., Paquet, U., Tomczak, J., and Zhang, C.
(eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, volume 37, pp. 105425–105475. Curran Asso-
ciates, Inc., 2024. doi: 10.52202/079017-3346. URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/p
aper/2024/file/be52acf6bccf4a8c0a90fe2f5cfce
ad3-Paper-Conference.pdf.
Young, K. and Tian, T. MinAtar: An atari-inspired testbed
for thorough and reproducible reinforcement learning
experiments. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03176, 2019.
Yu, C., Velu, A., Vinitsky, E., Gao, J., Wang, Y., Bayen,
A., and Wu, Y. The surprising effectiveness of ppo in
cooperative multi-agent games. In Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS ’22, Red Hook, NY, USA,
2022. Curran Associates Inc. ISBN 9781713871088.
Yu, Z., Feng, K., Zhao, Y., He, S., Zhang, X.-P., and Cohan,
A. AlphaResearch: Accelerating New Algorithm Discov-
ery with Language Models, November 2025. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/2511.08522. arXiv:2511.08522
[cs].
Zeng, Z., Yu, J., Gao, T., Meng, Y., Goyal, T., and
Chen, D. Evaluating large language models at evalu-
ating instruction following. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=tr0KidwPLc.
Zhang, A., Song, S., Wang, J., and Yu, P. S. Time series
data cleaning: from anomaly detection to anomaly repair-
ing. Proc. VLDB Endow., 10(10):1046–1057, June 2017.
ISSN 2150-8097. doi: 10.14778/3115404.3115410. URL
https://doi.org/10.14778/3115404.3115410.
Zhang, J., Hu, S., Lu, C., Lange, R., and Clune, J. Dar-
win Godel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-
Improving Agents, September 2025. URL http://arxi
v.org/abs/2505.22954. arXiv:2505.22954 [cs].
Zhao, B., Magka, D., Jiang, M., Li, X., Raileanu, R.,
Shavrina, T., Gagnon-Audet, J.-C., Niu, K., Sodhani,
S., Shvartsman, M., Lupu, A., Lupidi, A. M., Ham-
bardzumyan, K., Josifoski, M., Toledo, E., Foster, T.,
Cipolina-Kun, L., Dunfield, D., Charnalia, A., Miller,
A. H., Aodha, O. M., Foerster, J. N., and Bachrach, Y.
The automated LLM speedrunning benchmark: Repro-
ducing nanoGPT improvements.
In The Thirty-ninth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=w98hMEjzu8.
25


--- Page 26 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Zheng, L., Chiang, W.-L., Sheng, Y., Zhuang, S., Wu, Z.,
Zhuang, Y., Lin, Z., Li, Z., Li, D., Xing, E. P., Zhang,
H., Gonzalez, J. E., and Stoica, I. Judging llm-as-a-judge
with mt-bench and chatbot arena. In Proceedings of the
37th International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA,
2023. Curran Associates Inc.
Zheng, W., Chen, T., Hu, T.-K., and Wang, Z. Symbolic
learning to optimize: Towards interpretability and scala-
bility. In International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2022. URL https://openreview.net/for
um?id=ef0nInZHKIC.
Zoph, B. and Le, Q. V. Neural Architecture Search with
Reinforcement Learning, February 2017. URL http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578. arXiv:1611.01578
[cs].
Zoph, B., Vasudevan, V., Shlens, J., and Le, Q. V. Learning
Transferable Architectures for Scalable Image Recogni-
tion, April 2018. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1707
.07012. arXiv:1707.07012 [cs].
26


--- Page 27 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Appendix
Our appendix is structured as follows:
• Appendix A provides an overview of each task domain included in DiscoGen. We provide a high-level overview of the
goal of each domain, its implementation details, and what editable modules and datasets it supports.
• Appendix B provides an overview of additional domains in DiscoGen which we do not evaluate in this paper due to
computational resource constraints.
• Appendix C extends Table 1 to include all domains in DiscoGen and their task counts, including those which are not
evaluated in this paper.
• Appendix D extends the abridged related work from the main text (Section 2) to include discussion of the wider field.
• Appendix E provides hyperparameters and experimental details for our paper. It also includes a description of our Elo
calculation and discussion of the experimental compute and cost for the paper.
• Appendix F introduces implementation details of DiscoGen. We discuss how to derive the expression for its task count,
and how DiscoGen creates new tasks when sampled from.
• Appendix G explores how the performance of agents changes in all possible module combinations in On-Policy
Reinforcement Learning in an attempt to understand the diversity over modules for the same task domain.
• Appendix H provides a breakdown of what meta-train and meta-test datasets are for each task in DiscoBench.
• Appendix I examines the redundancy of tasks in DiscoBench, using average-rank correlation, to demonstrate the
semantic difference between different tasks.
• Appendix J expands the prompt optimisation results from Section 7 and provides further experimental details and
analysis of the system.
• Appendix K introduces two example discovered algorithms, demonstrating that the most performant meta-train/meta-
test runs are making novel discoveries rather than just rehashing baselines.
• Appendix L reports and discusses success@3 metrics (i.e, the rate of at least one of the three seeds producing a
successful solution).
• Appendix M provides per-task results for all experiments in the paper.
• Appendix N includes all prompts used in this paper (excluding the procedurally generated task descriptions). This
includes prompts developed by the prompt optimisation loop.
• Appendix O provides all text used for procedurally generating task descriptions.
27


--- Page 28 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
A. Task Domain Overview
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the implementations of each task domain included in DiscoGen, as well as all
references covering their original implementations and the origin of their datasets.
A.1. Bayesian Optimisation
Task Domain
Bayesian Optimisation (Jones et al., 1998; Garnett, 2023) addresses the problem of optimising an expensive,
black-box objective function under a limited evaluation budget. A probabilistic surrogate model is fit to observed function
evaluations, and an acquisition function, balancing exploration of uncertain regions with exploitation of promising candidates,
is used to select the next evaluation point. The objective is to identify the global minimum or maximum of the function
within a fixed number of queries.
Implementation
Our Bayesian Optimisation implementation is based on Boax (Löper, 2023).
Editable modules
We include six editable modules for Bayesian Optimisation: the surrogate model; the optimiser used to
fit the surrogate model; the acquisition function; the optimiser used to maximise the acquisition function; the initial domain
sampling strategy; and the query selection policy.
Datasets
We include 11 synthetic optimisation functions that are standard in Bayesian Optimisation literature (Surjanovic
& Bingham): Ackley 1D, Ackley 2D, Branin 2D, Bukin 2D, Cosine 8D, Drop-Wave 2D, Egg-Holder 2D, Griewank 5D,
Hartmann 6D, Holder-Table 2D and Levy 6D.
A.2. Brain Speech Detection
Task Domain
Brain Speech Detection is a neural signal processing task in which a model predicts the presence of speech
from non-invasive or invasive brain recordings. The goal is to learn a two-class classifier conditioned on neural activity (e.g.,
MEG signals).
Implementation
The code for Brain Speech Detection is adapted from the official LibriBrain competition (Landau et al.,
2025) codebase, which provides a standardised pipeline for neural signal preprocessing, model training, and evaluation.
Editable modules
We include three editable modules in Brain Speech Detection: the loss function; the optimiser; and the
network architecture.
Datasets
We split the original LibriBrain dataset (Özdogan et al., 2025) into seven parts, constituting seven datasets, each
of which contains MEG data and labels collected during the process of the same participant listening to one chapter of
Sherlock Holmes in spoken English.
A.3. Computer Vision Classification
Task Domain
Computer Image Classification is a supervised learning task in which a model assigns a discrete semantic
label to an input image. The objective is to learn robust visual representations that generalise across variations in appearance,
scale, illumination, and data distribution. This task is a foundational benchmark in computer vision and is widely used to
evaluate model architectures, optimisation strategies, and robustness to dataset shift. In DiscoGen, the Computer Image
Classification task spans standard, corrupted, long-tailed, and fine-grained classification settings.
Implementation
The code for Computer Image Classification is adapted from the MLGym (Nathani et al., 2025)
benchmarking infrastructure. The implementation provides a unified training and evaluation pipeline for image classification
models, including dataset loading via HuggingFace Datasets, model initialisation, optimisation, and metric computation.
Editable modules
We include four editable modules in Computer Image Classification: the loss function; the optimiser;
the network architecture; and the image preprocessing.
28


--- Page 29 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Datasets
We support nine widely used image classification datasets, covering a range of difficulty levels and distributional
properties. These include MNIST (LeCun et al., 2010) and Fashion-MNIST (Xiao et al., 2017) for grayscale digit and
apparel classification; CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) for small-scale natural image classification;
Tiny ImageNet (Russakovsky et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2017) for large-class-count evaluation; CIFAR-10-C (Hendrycks &
Dietterich, 2019) for corruption robustness; CIFAR-10-LT (Krizhevsky et al., 2009) for long-tailed class imbalance; Oxford
Flowers-102 (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008) and Stanford Cars (Krause et al., 2013) for fine-grained object classification.
All datasets are accessed through HuggingFace Datasets and follow standardised train, validation, and test splits.
A.4. Continual Learning
Task Domain
Continual learning is a broadly defined field in which a model must learn from non-stationary data sources
without forgetting its previous learnings (Wang et al., 2024b). Nonstationarity can arise through a number of means; in our
tasks, which are focused on image classification under nonstationarity, these include randomly permuting the labels attached
to images or randomly subsampling classes shown throughout training.
Implementation
Our default implementation is based on elastic weight consolidation (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017).
Editable modules
We support five different modules in continual learning: the optimisation algorithm; the regulariser for
mitigating catastrophic forgetting; the replay buffer for storing past experience; the sampler for mixing replay data with new
data; and the learning rate scheduler.
Additional Backends
Our default backend uses a ResNet-18 for its base network (He et al., 2015). However, we also offer
backends support vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021; Wightman, 2019) and parameter isolation models (Rusu
et al., 2022), a common architecture for preventing catastrophic forgetting (Kirkpatrick et al., 2017) in continual learning.
Datasets
We support three datasets for continual learning: PermutedMNIST (LeCun et al., 2010), SplitCIFAR100
(Krizhevsky et al., 2009) and TinyImageNetSplit (Wu et al., 2017).
A.5. Greenhouse Gas Prediction
Task Domain
Forecasting the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is an important tool for predicting and
mitigating the effects of climate change.
Implementation
Our base implementation is based on a standard scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) training loop.
Editable modules
We support two modules in Greenhouse Gas Prediction: the model architecture and the way the data is
processed before modelling.
Datasets
We support four datasets from Lan & Keeling that are used for predicting concentrations of CO2, CH4, N2O and
SF6 in the atmosphere. Each dataset is split into a training dataset (pre-2014) and a validation dataset (2015-2025).
A.6. Language Modelling
Task Domain
Language Modelling is the task of learning the underlying distribution of text data via next-token prediction
over vast bodies of text, mostly scraped from the internet. We evaluate the quality of a trained language model by computing
the exponential of the average negative log-likelihood across next-token predictions on a validation set, also called perplexity.
Implementation
Our default implementation builds on a modified version of the language modeling task from ML-
Gym (Nathani et al., 2025), which itself is based on the modded-nanogpt repository (Jordan et al., 2024).
Editable modules
We support three editable modules: the network architecture, the loss function, and the optimiser.
Additional Backends
In addition to a base nanogpt implementation, we support a state-space model backend based on
Mamba (Gu & Dao, 2023; Dao & Gu, 2024).
29


--- Page 30 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Datasets
We support the following four datasets: LMFineWeb 10B (Penedo et al., 2024), TinyStories (Eldan & Li, 2023),
OPC-FineWeb Math and OPC-FineWeb Code (Huang et al., 2025).
A.7. Model Unlearning
Task Domain
Model Unlearning, also called Machine Unlearning (Cao & Yang, 2015) is the task of modifying (e.g.
fine-tuning) a model to “forget” targeted information—such as sensitive personal data, copyrighted content, or harmful
knowledge – all the while preserving the model’s overall capabilities on unrelated tasks. We specifically focus on LLM
unlearning (Yao et al., 2024) across 3 datasets and a variety of open-weight models (see below).
Implementation
The code for all tasks is adapted from OpenUnlearning (Dorna et al., 2025). Preservation of general
capability is evaluated using LMEvalHarness (Gao et al., 2024).
Editable modules
We include a single editable module in Model Unlearning: the loss function, which should typically
balance two objectives: unlearning specific knowledge from the forget set while preserving performance on the retain set.
Datasets
We support 3 different datasets for Model Unlearning: TOFU (Maini et al., 2024), MUSE (Shi et al., 2024), and
WMDP-Cyber (Li et al., 2024).
Models
We support 13 different open-weight LLMs from 5 providers: Llama-2-7b-chat-hf, Llama-2-7b-hf, Llama-2-
13b-hf, Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct, Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Touvron et al., 2023; Llama Team, 2024),
Gemma-7b-it (Mesnard & et al., 2024), Phi-1.5, Phi-3.5-mini-instruct (Abdin et al., 2024), Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-
3B-Instruct, Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct (Qwen, 2024) and Zephyr-7b-beta (Tunstall et al., 2023).
A.8. Off-Policy RL
Task Domain
Off-policy RL refers to a class of reinforcement learning approaches in which an agent learns from
experience generated by a behaviour policy that may differ from the policy being optimised, including experience collected
in the past or by other agents. In this task, we focus on value-based methods that learn value functions by minimising the
temporal-difference (TD) error (Sutton & Barto, 2020).
Implementation
The code for Off-Policy RL is adapted from the Deep Q-learning (Mnih et al., 2013, DQN) implementa-
tion from PureJaxRL (Lu et al., 2022), which is itself based on CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022a;b).
Editable modules
We consider six editable modules: (i) the loss function, which determines the prediction targets for the
value network; (ii) the optimiser; (iii) the network architecture; (iv) the replay mechanism, which specifies how experience
is stored and sampled during training; (v) the policy, which governs the trade-off between exploration and exploitation; and
(vi) the training loop.
Datasets
We support Off-Policy RL on four environments from the MinAtar suite (Young & Tian, 2019)—Asterix,
Breakout, Freeway, and Space Invaders—as reimplemented in Gymnax (Lange, 2022) using JAX. These environments are
simplified versions of their corresponding Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013).
A.9. On-Policy RL
Task Domain
On-Policy RL is a subset of reinforcement learning in which an agent learns from experience collected by
its own policy (Sutton & Barto, 2020), rather than from data collected by a different behaviour policy.
Implementation
The code for On-Policy RL is adapted from the Proximal Policy Optimisation (Schulman et al., 2017,
PPO) implementation from PureJaxRL (Lu et al., 2022), which is itself based on CleanRL (Huang et al., 2022a;b).
Editable modules
We include four editable modules in On-Policy RL: the loss function; the optimiser; the network
architecture; and the training loop.
30


--- Page 31 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Additional Backends
In addition to the default, we support two backends that can be used to augment tasks in On-Policy
RL. These are: a recurrent agent, in which the train loop must support a recurrent variable produced by the agent’s networks;
and a transformer agent (Vaswani et al., 2017), in which the agent architecture uses attention.
Datasets
We support 13 different environments for On-Policy RL, from three different environment suites. These
include: Ant, HalfCheetah, Hopper, Humanoid, Pusher, Reacher and Walker2D from Brax (Freeman et al., 2021), a
JAX-based (Bradbury et al., 2018) implementation of MuJoCo (Todorov et al., 2012); Asterix, Breakout, Freeway and
SpaceInvaders from Gymnax (Lange, 2022), a reimplementation of four MinAtar environments (Young & Tian, 2019) which
are simplifications of some Atari games (Bellemare et al., 2013); and Craftax and Craftax-Classic (Matthews et al., 2024),
which are based on Crafter (Hafner, 2021).
A.10. Unsupervised Environment Design
Task Domain
Unsupervised Environment Design (UED) is a field focused on training agents that are robust, and able to
generalise to a wide distribution of tasks (Dennis et al., 2021; Jiang et al., 2021b; Parker-Holder et al., 2022a; Samvelyan
et al., 2023). In particular, this tends to be posed as a two-player game between a task-proposing adversary and a task-solving
student (Dennis et al., 2021). There are several objective functions that the adversary can use, ranging from theoretically
principled ones such as regret (Dennis et al., 2021) to more empirically motivated ones like positive value loss (Jiang et al.,
2021a) and learnability (Rutherford et al., 2024a).
Implementation
We use the base scaffold from Sampling for Learnability (Rutherford et al., 2024a), which uses PPO
as the underlying learning algorithm, and training comprises two stages. The first is sampling a large batch of random
environments, then rolling out the agent on these, and using these trajectories to score each level. The second phase then
trains the agent on a mixture of the high-scoring levels, and uniform random environments.
Editable modules
The first editable module is responsible for rolling the agent out on candidate environments, and then
providing a score for each of them. The second is the train step, which controls the actual RL agent update, as well as how
the filtered levels are used during training. Finally, the last module consists of the hyperparameters for the sampling and
training process.
Datasets
We consider two distinct domains; the first is Minigrid (Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023), which is a partially-
observable 2D navigation task. The second is Kinetix (Matthews et al., 2025), an open-ended domain of 2D physics tasks.
The task distribution consists of a broad distribution of randomly-generated physics puzzles, and the goal is to generalise to
interesting, human-designed problems. There are three levels of difficulty in the Kinetix benchmark, corresponding to how
many entities there are in a scene. We use Minigrid and the Small Kinetix setting as training tasks, and Medium and Large
as the testing tasks.
31


--- Page 32 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
B. Additional Task Domains
B.1. Neural Cellular Automata
Task Domain
Neural Cellular Automata (NCAs) are a form of cellular automata in which updates to cells—a function of
their neighbours’ states—are parameterised and learned by a neural network (Mordvintsev et al., 2020). This task is about
designing the components that the NCA uses to perceive its neighbours and learn its update rule.
Implementation
The code for Neural Cellular Automata is adapted from CAX (Faldor & Cully, 2025), a library which
provides a unified JAX framework for implementing cellular automata.
Editable modules
We include five editable modules: (i) the perceive module, (ii) the update module, and (iii) the loss, (iv)
optimiser and (v) train modules for training the update module.
Datasets
We support five datasets: two growing tasks (Mordvintsev et al., 2020), a self-classifying MNIST task (Randazzo
et al., 2020), matrix operations (Béna et al., 2025) and MNIST inpainting (Tesfaldet et al., 2022).
B.2. Offline RL
Task Domain
Offline Reinforcement Learning (offline RL) is a class of algorithms that trains a policy from previously
collected environment transitions, without any other additional environment interactions (Levine et al., 2020). Unlike
in online RL, the agent cannot explore and collect new trajectories from the online environment and must extract the
policy from pre-existing datasets. Such datasets may contain suboptimal trajectories or insufficient state coverage (Kumar
et al., 2022). In practice, the real environment—the online domain inaccessible during training—can be used to tune the
algorithm’s hyperparameters (Jackson et al., 2025).
Implementation
We base our implementation on Revisited Behaviour Regularized Actor-Critic (ReBRAC) (Tarasov et al.,
2023), a high-performing and hyperparameter-robust offline RL algorithm. Our JAX implementation is based on those by
Jackson et al. (2025) and Park et al. (2025b).
Editable Modules
We include five editable modules for the offline RL task domain: (i) the actor loss, (ii) the critic loss,
(iii) the network architectures, (iv) the optimizer, and (v) the training loop.
Datasets
We support all single-task, reward-labeled datasets from OGBench (Park et al., 2025a), a currently unsaturated
offline RL benchmark. This encompasses several robot morphologies across various locomotion and manipulation tasks.
B.3. On-Policy Multi-Agent RL
Task Domain
On-policy multi-agent reinforcement learning (MARL) refers to a class of multi-agent methods in which
each agent updates its policy using an on-policy RL algorithm, thereby relying solely on trajectories generated by their
current policy.
Implementation
The implementation of our on-policy MARL task is adapted from the Independent PPO (IPPO) algorithm
(Yu et al., 2022), as provided in the JaxMARL library (Rutherford et al., 2024b).
Editable modules
We include six editable modules in On-Policy MARL: the advantage estimation and critic target
computation, the loss function, the optimiser, the network architecture, the activation function used by the network, and the
training loop.
Additional Backends
In addition to the default, we support a recurrent architecture. In this case, the training loop must
handle the recurrent state produced by the agent’s network.
Datasets
We support 17 environments from the JaxMARL library (Rutherford et al., 2024b), comprising 5 multi-agent
Brax tasks, 11 tasks from SMACv2 (Ellis et al., 2023), and the MPE Spread environment (Lowe et al., 2017).
32


--- Page 33 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
B.4. Trajectory Prediction
Task Domain
Trajectory prediction is the task of forecasting the future positions of traffic participants, such as vehicles,
pedestrians, and cyclists, given their observed past motion and surrounding road context (Huang et al., 2022c). Effective
trajectory prediction must account for the multi-modal nature of human behaviour; at any moment, an agent may accelerate,
brake, turn, or change lanes, which can lead to multiple plausible futures. The objective is to produce a set of K diverse
future trajectories for a target agent, each with an associated probability, that collectively cover the space of likely outcomes.
Models are evaluated on how closely their best predictions match the ground truth using minimum Average Displacement
Error (minADE), minimum Final Displacement Error (minFDE), miss rate, and Brier-minFDE. The ability to anticipate
these possibilities is critical for safe motion planning in self-driving systems.
Implementation
The base code for Trajectory Prediction is adapted from UniTraj (Feng et al., 2024), a unified framework
for scalable vehicle trajectory prediction, and AutoBot (Girgis et al., 2022), a latent-variable sequential set transformer for
joint multi-agent motion prediction. The implementation provides a standardised pipeline for encoding past agent trajectories
and road geometry via attention-based modules, decoding multi-modal future trajectories with uncertainty estimates, and
evaluating predictions against ground truth.
Editable modules
We include four editable modules in Trajectory Prediction: (i) the loss function, which defines the
multi-modal training objective balancing trajectory likelihood with mode diversity; (ii) the optimiser, which controls weight
updates and learning rate scheduling; (iii) the network architecture, which encodes agent dynamics, social interactions, and
map context before decoding future trajectories; and (iv) the training loop, which orchestrates data loading, model training,
validation, and model selection.
Datasets
We support three large-scale autonomous driving datasets: Argoverse 2 (Wilson et al., 2023), collected across six
US cities (Austin, Detroit, Miami, Pittsburgh, Palo Alto, and Washington D.C.); nuScenes (Caesar et al., 2020), recorded in
Boston and Singapore and covers diverse urban conditions; and the Waymo Open Motion Dataset (Ettinger et al., 2021),
spanning six US cities (San Francisco, Phoenix, Mountain View, Los Angeles, Detroit, and Seattle). Each dataset is
preprocessed into a standardised format with 21 observed timesteps (2.1 s at 10 Hz), up to 32 surrounding agents, 128 map
polylines, and a 60-timestep (6 s) prediction horizon. All three datasets contain 850 preprocessed scenarios, hosted on
HuggingFace.
33


--- Page 34 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
C. Total Task Counts
Including the additional domains from Appendix B, and a small number of extra modules in On-Policy RL (the target and
network activation function), dramatically increases the number of tasks in DiscoGen’s support. As such, in Table 4, we
provide a more complete set of task counts. This also demonstrates the power of the combinatoric explosion of expanding
domains; simply adding 2 modules to On-Policy RL effectively quadrupled the number of tasks in its support, to over a
billion.
Table 4. Overview of all domains and their number of supported tasks.
Task Domain
m
d
b
Ntasks
Bayesian Optimisation
6
11
1
65,413,656
Brain Speech Detection
3
7
1
81,144
Computer Vision Classification
4
9
1
1,679,400
Continual Learning
5
3
3
6,696
Greenhouse Gas Prediction
2
4
1
900
Language Modelling
3
4
2
4,200
Model Unlearning
1
3
1
85,176
Neural Cellular Automata
5
5
1
33,480
Off-Policy RL
7
4
1
38,100
Offline RL
5
10
1
10,602,372
On-Policy MARL
6
17
2
97,431,783,120
On-Policy RL
6
13
3
1,789,383,960
Trajectory Prediction
4
3
3
1,080
Unsupervised Environment Design
3
4
1
2,100
Total
99,299,115,384
Median
59,622
34


--- Page 35 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
D. Additional Related Work
D.1. Automated Research
AutoML involves trying to apply machine learning to new data without needing human experts (Hutter et al., 2019; He et al.,
2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2022b). Historically, AutoML has focused on areas like hyperparameter tuning (e.g., (Lindauer
et al., 2022; Li et al., 2018; Parker-Holder et al., 2021; Eimer et al., 2023)), selecting algorithms from a possible set (Feurer
et al., 2015; Lindauer et al., 2017; Feurer et al., 2022), neural architecture search (Stanley & Miikkulainen, 2002; Stanley
et al., 2009; Zoph & Le, 2017; Zoph et al., 2018; White et al., 2023) and data cleaning and augmentation (Zhang et al., 2017;
Neutatz et al., 2022; Krishnan et al., 2016). While many of these techniques involve applying existing machine learning
algorithms, the objective of automated algorithm discovery is to develop new machine learning algorithms without relying
on manual design.
Meta-learning involves learning algorithms from data in a ‘meta-loop’ (Schmidhuber, 1987; Real et al., 2020; Beck et al.,
2023). Often, meta-learned algorithms are black-box, taking the form of a neural network. For example, prior work has
considered meta-learning optimisation algorithms (e.g., (Andrychowicz et al., 2016; Metz et al., 2019; Oh et al., 2020; Metz
et al., 2022a;b; Goldie et al., 2024; Lan et al., 2024; Oh et al., 2025)) or loss functions (e.g., (Kirsch et al., 2020; Bechtle
et al., 2021; Lu et al., 2022; Alfano et al., 2023)). Optimising these black-box algorithms frequently relies on evolution
(Metz et al., 2022b; Lu et al., 2022; Jackson et al., 2023; Goldie et al., 2024; 2025) or meta-gradients (Oh et al., 2020; 2025).
However, more interpretable algorithms can also be discovered using symbolic evolution or search (Ramachandran et al.,
2017; Cranmer et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023b), or, driven by the rise of highly capable language models
(e.g., (OpenAI, 2025c; Pichai et al., 2025; Meta AI, 2025; Anthropic, 2025b)), repeatedly prompting language models for
new algorithm suggestions (Lu et al., 2024a; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Novikov et al., 2025; Nathani et al., 2025; Toledo
et al., 2025; Gideoni et al., 2025). In this paper, we frame each algorithm discovery problem as its own task, and show how
the DiscoGen procedural task generator can help optimise these algorithm discovery systems.
Given a rise in language model capabilities (METR, 2025; Chollet et al., 2025; Phan et al., 2025; Paglieri et al., 2025),
creating better coding (Yang et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025; Anthropic, 2025a; OpenAI, 2025b) and research agents (Lu
et al., 2024b; Nathani et al., 2025; Toledo et al., 2025) has developed into an important sub-field. Such systems have been
used for increasingly complex mathematical (Hubert et al., 2025; Luong et al., 2025), software engineering (Yang et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2025) and research (Taylor et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2024b; Yamada et al., 2025; Karpathy, 2026) tasks. LLM
agents augment base language models with the ability to take actions or use tools (Wang et al., 2024a; Schick et al., 2023),
enabling them to run code (Nathani et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2025a), search the internet (Nakano et al.,
2021; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Komeili et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2025a; Google), or access applications like
calculators for verifiable tasks (Cobbe et al., 2021). These tools are used by AI research agents to automate all or part of the
research process in a ReAct loop (Yao et al., 2023), in which tools are used intermittently throughout a task. In this work,
we propose a new procedural task generator for algorithm discovery tasks to help drive forward development of new agents
and models for algorithm discovery.
The development and analysis of such agents includes developing agents purely for ideation (Si et al., 2024), implementing
research ideas proposed by a human-in-the-loop (Gottweis et al., 2025; Weston & Foerster, 2025), judging the quality of
research papers (Lu et al., 2024b; Si et al., 2024; Thakkar et al., 2025), or even automating the entire workflow to write
scientific articles (Lu et al., 2024b; Yamada et al., 2025; Intology, 2025; Si et al., 2026). Methods for integrating LLMs into
algorithm discovery systems have taken a range of forms. For example, LLMs are often used as mutation and crossover
operators in evolutionary algorithms (Ma et al., 2024; Klissarov et al., 2025; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024). However, such
systems vary widely in how much agency they give to the LLM. Design decisions include how the agent should search over
new algorithms using, for example, tree-search algorithms (Jiang et al., 2025; Toledo et al., 2025), whether the LLM should
decide which experiments to run (Yu et al., 2025), or which algorithm to submit as the ‘final’ version (Nathani et al., 2025).
D.2. Optimising Agents
To optimise a model, architecture, or system for generalising over a problem space, we need to be able to evaluate it over
a large amount of data (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2024). For example, language models
improve as they are pretrained on more data (Kaplan et al., 2020), and generalisation in deep reinforcement learning (RL)
has benefitted from procedurally generated and larger environments (Cobbe et al. (2020), Section 2.3). However, it is often
preferable to develop models with specialist capabilities; consistently focusing on generalist improvements can introduce
safety concerns (Bommasani et al., 2022; Weidinger et al., 2021), and may not be the most effective way to enhance desired
35


--- Page 36 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
capabilities (Belcak et al., 2025).
Instead, prior work has often focused on building agentic architectures or training models for specific domains. For example,
significant effort has gone into developing better agents for mathematics (e.g., (Lewkowycz et al., 2022; Trinh et al., 2024;
Hubert et al., 2025)) or programming (e.g., (Li et al., 2022; Jimenez et al., 2024; Rozière et al., 2024)). Underpinning
many of these advances is access to an evaluation signal from a large, diverse and verifiable problem set which can be
optimised by both models, via training (Shao et al., 2024; Wen et al., 2025), and researchers, through agent and prompt
design. For example, there are large suites of mathematical problems (e.g., (Cobbe et al., 2021; Hendrycks et al., 2021b)),
factual questions (Joshi et al., 2017; Hendrycks et al., 2021a), and programming suites can leverage open-source code
repositories to verify that inputs lead to expected outputs (Jimenez et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2021). Developing these large
suites for algorithm discovery has proven more difficult; manual curation of codebases requires expert knowledge, and
often needs adaptation to be applied to different data. Additionally, copying outputs from existing code is insufficient for
algorithm discovery, wherein the objective is develop superhuman algorithms that are better than those already in existence
(Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Novikov et al., 2025). In this work, we propose a procedural algorithm discovery task
generator that spans millions of possible algorithm discovery tasks, and does not require domain-specific expert knowledge
for generating new tasks.
D.3. Procedural Generation
Procedural generation involves automatically creating levels or environments, according to rules, rather than manually
designing every instance individually (Togelius et al., 2013). To do so, environments in procedural generation are defined
as Contextual Markov Decision Processes (Hallak et al., 2015, Contextual MDPs) or Underspecified Partially Observable
MDPs (Dennis et al., 2021), where each level or task is defined by a small number of configuration variables. In deep
RL, procedural environment generation has proven effective for training agents on a distribution of levels, such that they
generalise over a distribution rather than just fitting the specific environment levels seen (Cobbe et al., 2020; Frans & Isola,
2023). Such approaches have been applied to generate levels in environments of ranging complexity, from gridworlds
(Chevalier-Boisvert et al., 2023) to physics engines (Frans & Isola, 2023; Matthews et al., 2025), 3-dimensional worlds
(Stooke et al., 2021), or games (Shaker et al., 2016; Küttler et al., 2020; Cobbe et al., 2020; Hafner, 2021; Wang et al.,
2021; Matthews et al., 2024). Procedural generation opens up new avenues of research too, by enabling the development of
autocurricula (e.g., (Jiang et al., 2021b; Dennis et al., 2021; Parker-Holder et al., 2022a)) or large scale meta-learning (e.g.,
(Nikulin et al., 2024)).
36


--- Page 37 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
E. Experimental Details
E.1. Hyperparameters
All DiscoBench experiments are run over three meta-seeds; that is, three independent algorithm discovery runs. In all
experiments, agents are given a 24 hour time limit, and either an 80 (for DiscoBench Single) or 100 (for DiscoBench All,
since tasks are more complicated) action budget, in which to complete a task. Within said limit, the agent is allowed to run
many experiments for different implementations, each of which returning performance metrics for all meta-train datasets.
Furthermore, for DiscoBench Single, we run additional experiments until each agent has 3 valid attempts. For this setting,
we remove a small number of tasks (On-Policy RL/Off-Policy RL train_loop and Model Unlearning) since they proved too
difficult to produce three successful attempts.
In all experiments, we use the MLGym agent with different open-source LLMs. We do not add or change the implementations
of tools from MLGym. We use default hyperparameters from MLGym for all experiments Nathani et al. (2025), besides
those specified below:
Table 5. Non-default MLGym hyperparameters.
Setting
gpus_per_agent
max_steps
DiscoBench Single
1
80
DiscoBench All
1
100
Prompt Tuning (Meta-Training)
4
50
Prompt Tuning Single
1
50
Prompt Tuning All
1
60
E.2. Elo Calculation
Our results are comparative between models, and based on an Elo score. In Elo, each model’s score changes based on
pairwise win-loss comparisons of their performance in individual tasks, and the Elo disparity between the model. Before
calculating the Elo, we aggregate the per-dataset scores for each model over its meta-seeds; we also include a penalty to
scores which ensures that a model with more successful attempts out of its three meta-seeds dominates a model with less
successful attempts.
For model 1 with rating R1 and model 2 with rating R2, the expected outcome score of model 1 is
E1 =
1
1 + 10(R2−R1)/400 ,
where a 400 point difference corresponds to a ≈91% chance of winning.
After calculating E1, the rating of model 1 is updated to reflect the difference between the expected and true score as
R′
1 = R1 + K · (S1 −E1).
In this expression, S1 is the score for model 1, and is set as 1.0 for a win, 0.5 for a draw and 0.0 for a loss. Scores for
all models are initialised at 1000, and K = 32 to balance volatility of score calculations. We loop through the data for
1000 epochs, shuffling each epoch and annealing K to 1 for stability. We use 100 bootstrapping rounds to estimate 95%
confidence intervals.
E.3. Prompt Optimisation Experimental Details
For our prompt optimisation experiment, we use Claude-4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025b) to automatically refine prompts for
an ADA; here the ADA is the MLGym agent with Deepseek-V3.2 (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Nathani et al., 2025). We
sweep over different numbers of tasks for prompt optimisation by changing the frequency at which a task is sampled. As
such, a new task is sampled every 30/Ntasks steps.
The task sampling process involved first sampling a task domain from the ten possible in DiscoGen. Each dataset from the
task domain had a 40% chance of inclusion in meta-train or meta-test, and a 20% chance of being excluded from the task.
37


--- Page 38 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Every module has an independent 30% chance of being marked as editable. Any invalid task (i.e., no editable modules or an
empty meta-train/meta-test set) is discarded, and we resample from DiscoGen. We cap the maximum amount that each
domain can be sampled to 10, to prevent domain bias, but this limit is not reached in practice over 30 ADA optimisation
iterations.
To prevent unbounded context growth for the ADA Optimisation LLM (Claude-4.5 Sonnet), we do not provide full
conversation history. Instead, at every ADA optimisation step, we provide: a system prompt (Appendix N); the current
and three preceding prompts with their performance; and up to 15 previous task domain-performance pairs without their
corresponding prompt, to help ground scores. It is not told the specific task configuration, to aid development of a general
prompt. Claude is given per-dataset breakdowns, as well as whether each dataset is from meta-train or meta-test in a given
task. We also tell Claude if there were any failures or error messages, but do not provide full error messages; again to
limit the context size. If Claude does not produce a prompt fitting the prescribed template within three attempts, the task is
discarded and resampled without increasing the ADA optimisation iteration (i.e., the task is not counted towards the total).
E.4. Experimental Compute
All experiments are run using Nvidia H200 GPUs. We run the majority of experiments on a single GPU, besides prompt
optimisation experiments which are run on 4 GPUs to accelerate experimentation. For all experimentation (including most
development and experiments which are not directly included in this paper), we use an estimated 23,000 GPU-hours of
compute. However, such high-end compute is not generally a requirement for usage. To ensure DiscoGen is accessible
to researchers under different constraints, we verified that many DiscoGen task domains can run on consumer-grade (e.g.,
Nvidia 2080Ti/3080) and mid-range (Nvidia L40s) hardware.
All models were run through an API. The total cost of API credits used in development and experiments is estimated to be
about $1200. A task generally costs on the order of $0.10-$0.50 to run with open-source models.
38


--- Page 39 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
F. DiscoGen Details
F.1. Technical DiscoGen Implementation
Here, we clarify the implementation details of DiscoGen; in particular, how tasks are generated.
DiscoGen operates by creating file systems. To sample a random task from DiscoGen, a random DiscoGen configuration
must be created. Doing so involves selecting a task domains, which defines the availability of modules, datasets and
backends, and randomising each of these categories.
After a configuration has been created, DiscoGen is queried to build the meta-train portion of the task. To do so, DiscoGen
creates: (1) all necessary files for each meta-training dataset, including downloading and caching any data; (2) a script
for running an inner-loop on all meta-training datasets; (3) a directory which includes all discovered algorithms; and (4) a
procedurally generated description file which describes the task domain, the meta-training datasets, the backend and the
editable modules based on the pre-written per-domain text in O.
Any ADA operates in a meta-loop over the meta-train files to develop new algorithms. When the meta-loop is complete,
DiscoGen is queried again to build the meta-test task. As this is created, all files besides the editable modules in discovered/
are overwritten, and rebuilt from scratch for different datasets. This is done to lower the risk of evaluation hacking. Since
the meta-test datasets are not known to the agent, we also dramatically reduce the risk of train-test leakage.
F.2. Deriving Task Counts
For m different modules, d different datasets, and b different backends in a task domain, we derive the number of valid tasks
below.
Each dataset can be marked as part of the meta-train set, meta-test set, or excluded set, given 3 possible options per dataset.
The same dataset can not be included more than once, to prevent leakage between the meta-train and meta-test sets (i.e.,
Dtrain ∩Dtest = ∅. Therefore, the number of possible combinations of datasets is 3d. However, we require at least one
dataset to be in the meta-train, and at least one dataset in meta-test. We remove the two 2d cases where this is not true (i.e.,
where either meta-train or meta-test are excluded as options), but add back the double-counted case of all exclude. This
produces (3d −2 × 2d + 1) = (3d −2(d+1) + 1) valid dataset configurations.
For m modules, each modules can be marked as editable or fixed, meaning each module has 2 possible states. This means
there are 2m possible module combinations. By removing the case where all modules are fixed, this gives 2m −1 valid
modules configurations.
We currently support 2 types of initialisation (start-from-interface and start-from-baseline), and 3 types of evaluation
(performance, energy and time).
By combining the number of configurations for datasets and modules, and multiplying by the number of backends,
initialisations and evaluation types, this gives
Ntasks = 2 · 3 · b · (2m −1) ·

3d −2(d+1) + 1

.
For Model Unlearning, where we can provide one of n different base models for each dataset, the computation changes
slightly. As opposed to counting 3 options for every dataset there are 2n + 1 possible choices; any combination of meta-
train/model (n), meta-test/model (n), or exclude (1). This provides (2n + 1)d combinations. The degenerate cases now
count as removing (n + 1)d combinations each, meaning we remove 2(n + 1)d in place of the previous 2 × 2d. This gives
Ntasks = 2 · 3 · b · (2m −1) ·
 (2n + 1)d −2(n + 1)d + 1

.
39


--- Page 40 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
G. On-Policy RL Combination Results
To expand upon the results of Section 5.2, in this section we provide a focused analysis of how changing the editable modules
affects the performance of agents. Specifically, in On-Policy RL, we sweep over all 15 possible module combinations with
the with the same dataset splits as in Section 5.2 (i.e., meta-train is comprised of Breakout and Freeway, and meta-test of
Asterix and Space Invaders, from Young & Tian (2019)). Due to the vast number of domains supported in DiscoGen, such
analysis is unaffordable across all possible domains. Before more in-depth analysis, we examine the performance of each
LLM on the different On-Policy RL module combinations in Table 6.
Table 6. ADA performance over all On-Policy RL module combinations (ELO Scores with 95% CIs).
On-Policy RL Experiments
Model
Succ.
Meta-Train
Meta-Test
Baseline
—
1182 [1107, 1260]
1267 [1185, 1350]
Deepseek-v3.2
41.1%
1192 [1111, 1281]
1218 [1138, 1311]
GPT-OSS 120B
20.0%
762 [672, 837]
631 [467, 742]
Devstral2
18.9%
865 [756, 961]
883 [777, 978]
Interestingly, we find that Deepseek-v3.2 performs within confidence of the ‘all fixed’ baseline, both in meta-train and in
meta-test, over the different On-Policy RL tasks. Additionally, we consider how the performance of each agent changes with
respect to the number of editable modules. Firstly, we examine how the success rate of each agent changes as we change the
number of modules in Table 7.
Table 7. Success rate by number of editable modules in On-Policy RL.
Success Rate (%) by Editable Modules
Model
1
2
3
4
Deepseek-v3.2
75.0
47.2
8.3
0.0
GPT-OSS-120b
50.0
11.1
8.3
0.0
Devstral2
29.2
27.8
0.0
0.0
There is a consistent trend: adding more editable modules, even when meta-train and meta-test datasets are kept the same,
leads to reduced success rates. Clearly, the tasks that include more editable modules are more difficult, providing direct
evidence that changing modules leads to semantically different tasks. To investigate this further, we consider how success
rates compare for each module combination when aggregated over all language models in Table 8. Furthermore, we show
the maximum score achieved by any LLM in each environment, to explore if there are any signs that different module
combinations can lead agents to produce better or worse scores.
Table 8 demonstrates a clear pattern in success rates; developing optimisation algorithms is easier than loss functions, which
are easier to implement than networks, and developing correct training loop logic is most difficult. This translates into the
combinations with more editable modules, where implementing a loss and optimiser has a higher success rate than networks
and train, for example. Interestingly, it also appears that the maximum score for every environment was achieved in a setting
with 2 editable modules. While it is impossible to confirm whether such a trend could continue into 3 and 4 editable modules,
due to low success rates, there are signs that tasks with more editable modules can exhibit higher performance due to greater
ADA flexibility, emphasising further the semantic diversity of tasks. In fact, for every individual module, a higher max score
was attained by combining it with another module.
Our analysis demonstrates the importance and validity of introducing more diversity by expanding module combinations. In
addition to a general pattern of increasing complexity through expanding the editable module count, we show how each
module and module combination performs slightly differently, revealing a hierarchy of difficulty. This diversity of difficulty
also demonstrates the natural application of autocurriculum for DiscoGen (Section 6).
40


--- Page 41 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Table 8. Average success rate and maximum per-environment performance by module configuration. Any environment for which no ADA
implemented a successful algorithm is marked with —.
Success
Meta-Train (Eval Return)
Meta-Test (Eval Return)
Configuration
Rate (%)
Breakout
Freeway
Asterix
SpaceInv
1 Editable Module
Optimiser
83.33
74.97
62.86
18.11
181.25
Loss
77.78
83.91
62.58
39.60
179.50
Network
33.33
99.97
68.07
14.20
189.75
Train
11.11
8.41
8.41
3.73
177.12
2 Editable Module
Loss + Optimiser
61.11
84.47
62.89
20.50
181.38
Network + Optimiser
44.44
91.44
65.25
19.77
191.62
Loss + Network
38.89
106.12
66.16
69.42
184.00
Loss + Train
22.22
8.56
61.91
3.91
169.38
Optimiser + Train
5.56
34.61
29.45
—
—
Network + Train
0.00
—
—
—
—
3 Editable Module
Loss + Network + Optimiser
11.11
88.58
65.20
64.85
186.75
Loss + Optimiser + Train
11.11
0.30
2.95
—
—
Loss + Network + Train
0.00
—
—
—
—
Network + Optimiser + Train
0.00
—
—
—
—
4 Editable Module
Loss + Network + Optimiser + Train
0.00
—
—
—
—
41


--- Page 42 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
H. DiscoBench Task List
Here, we provide a list of the meta-train/meta-test dataset splits for each DiscoBench task in this paper. All datasets are
described and referenced in Appendix A.
H.1. Bayesian Optimisation
Meta-Train Datasets:
Ackley1D, Branin2D, Cosine8D, Eggholder2D, Hartmann6D, Levy6D,
Meta-Test Datasets:
Ackley2D, Bukin2D, DropWave2D, Griewank5D, HolderTable2D
H.2. Brain Speech Detection
Meta-Train Datasets:
LibriBrain Sherlock Holmes 1-3
Meta-Test Datasets:
LibriBrain Sherlock Holmes 4-7
H.3. Computer Vision Classification
Meta-Train Datasets:
CIFAR10, FashionMNIST, MNIST, OxfordFlowers
Meta-Test Datasets:
CIFAR100, CIFAR10C, CIFAR10LT,StanfordCards, TinyImageNet
H.4. Continual Learning
Meta-Train Datasets:
SplitCIFAR100
Meta-Test Datasets:
PermutedMNIST, TinyImageNetSplit
H.5. Greenhouse Gas Prediction
Meta-Train Datasets:
CH4, SF6
Meta-Test Datasets:
CO2, N2O
H.6. Language Modelling
Meta-Train Datasets:
LMFineWeb, OPCFineWebMath
Meta-Test Datasets:
OPCFineWebCode, TinyStories
H.7. Model Unlearning
Meta-Train Datasets:
MUSE
Meta-Test Datasets:
TOFU, WMDP-Cyber
Base Model:
Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
H.8. Off-Policy RL
Meta-Train Datasets:
MinAtar/Breakout, MinAtar/Freeway
Meta-Test Datasets:
MinAtar/Asterix, MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
42


--- Page 43 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
H.9. On-Policy RL
Meta-Train Datasets:
MinAtar/Breakout, MinAtar/Freeway
Meta-Test Datasets:
MinAtar/Asterix, MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
H.10. Unsupervised Environment Design
Meta-Train Datasets:
Kinetix/Small, Minigrid
Meta-Test Datasets:
Kinetix/Medium, Kinetix/Large
43


--- Page 44 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
I. Redundancy Analysis
To ensure DiscoGen tasks exhibit semantic diversity, rather than redundancy, in this section we produce and analyse three
Spearman Rank Correlation plots based on DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results from Section 5.2.
For each task, we compute the average rank of the models and baseline over datasets in the task. In Figure 2, we combine
meta-train and meta-test results into one set and compute average rank over all datasets. We compute the Spearman Rank
correlation between all tasks, which is shown through a heatmap. In Figures 3a and 3b, we show the rank correlations over
only the meta-train and meta-test sets for each task respectively.
We use hierarchical clustering in Figures 2 and 3a to group together tasks with similar average rankings. For Figure 3b,
we keep the task-ordering from the meta-train clustering; this helps visualise the consistency in rank ordering between
meta-train and meta-test for the same task.
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: sample levels
UED: train loop
UED: config
On-RL: networks
Bayes: next queries
Gas: data processing
CL: replay
UED: train step
CL: regularizer
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
Brain: optim
CV: loss
LM: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: domain
Off-RL: networks
CL: scheduler
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CV: preprocess
Off-RL: optim
Off-RL: q update
Gas: model
CV: networks
LM: optim
LM: networks
Brain: networks
Bayes: acq fn
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
Brain: loss
Off-RL: policy
On-RL: train
Off-RL: rb
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: sample levels
UED: train loop
UED: config
On-RL: networks
Bayes: next queries
Gas: data processing
CL: replay
UED: train step
CL: regularizer
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
Brain: optim
CV: loss
LM: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: domain
Off-RL: networks
CL: scheduler
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CV: preprocess
Off-RL: optim
Off-RL: q update
Gas: model
CV: networks
LM: optim
LM: networks
Brain: networks
Bayes: acq fn
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
Brain: loss
Off-RL: policy
On-RL: train
Off-RL: rb
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Rank Correlation: All Datasets
Figure 2. Clustered average rank correlation over all datasets (meta-train and meta-test) for each task.
In Figure 2, we find clusters of high-correlation tasks that are occasionally, though not always, intuitive. There is often,
though not always, high correlation between tasks in which the network architecture is the editable module. Alternatively,
there is notably less correlation when the editable module is the optimiser. We also find frequently mixed correlation between
tasks from the same domain; for example, tasks in on-policy RL or Bayesian Optimisation are frequently anti-correlated.
44


--- Page 45 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: config
CL: replay
UED: train loop
Bayes: next queries
UED: sample levels
On-RL: networks
Gas: model
Gas: data processing
Brain: networks
Brain: loss
Bayes: domain
LM: loss
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
CV: networks
CV: preprocess
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CL: scheduler
Off-RL: networks
On-RL: train
LM: optim
Brain: optim
Off-RL: optim
LM: networks
Off-RL: q update
CV: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: acq fn
UED: train step
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
CL: regularizer
Off-RL: rb
Off-RL: policy
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: config
CL: replay
UED: train loop
Bayes: next queries
UED: sample levels
On-RL: networks
Gas: model
Gas: data processing
Brain: networks
Brain: loss
Bayes: domain
LM: loss
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
CV: networks
CV: preprocess
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CL: scheduler
Off-RL: networks
On-RL: train
LM: optim
Brain: optim
Off-RL: optim
LM: networks
Off-RL: q update
CV: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: acq fn
UED: train step
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
CL: regularizer
Off-RL: rb
Off-RL: policy
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Rank Correlation: Meta Train
(a) Clustered average rank correlation over meta-train datasets.
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: config
CL: replay
UED: train loop
Bayes: next queries
UED: sample levels
On-RL: networks
Gas: model
Gas: data processing
Brain: networks
Brain: loss
Bayes: domain
LM: loss
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
CV: networks
CV: preprocess
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CL: scheduler
Off-RL: networks
On-RL: train
LM: optim
Brain: optim
Off-RL: optim
LM: networks
Off-RL: q update
CV: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: acq fn
UED: train step
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
CL: regularizer
Off-RL: rb
Off-RL: policy
Bayes: acq optimizer
On-RL: loss
UED: config
CL: replay
UED: train loop
Bayes: next queries
UED: sample levels
On-RL: networks
Gas: model
Gas: data processing
Brain: networks
Brain: loss
Bayes: domain
LM: loss
Bayes: surrogate optimizer
CV: networks
CV: preprocess
CL: sampler
On-RL: optim
CL: scheduler
Off-RL: networks
On-RL: train
LM: optim
Brain: optim
Off-RL: optim
LM: networks
Off-RL: q update
CV: loss
CV: optim
Bayes: acq fn
UED: train step
Bayes: surrogate
Off-RL: train
CL: regularizer
Off-RL: rb
Off-RL: policy
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Rank Correlation: Meta Test
(b) Average rank correlation over meta-test datasets, ordering the
tasks based on meta-train clustering.
Figure 3. Rank correlations for Meta-Train (left) and Meta-Test (right). The Meta-Test plot inherits the clustering order from Meta-Train
to visualize consistency across splits.
In Figure 3, we consider the consistency of clusters between meta-train and meta-test; essentially, exploring whether high
and low correlation patterns are reflected between the two regimes, to explore alignment when only the datasets are changed.
To do so, we first compute the order of labels by clustering the meta-train heatmap, and keep this order fixed in the meta-test
plot. If patterns persist, it would suggest that the rank correlations are similar.
Compared to the clustered plot for meta-train (Figure 3a, the correlation structure in meta-test (Figure 3b) effectively
dissolves to noise. Despite the only difference between these plots being the datasets (i.e., Figure 3a plotting over meta-train
datasets that the agent develops algorithms for, and Figure 3b plotting over the meta-test datasets that the agent doesn’t
see during its meta-loop), the average algorithm rank changes dramatically to the extent that old patterns become broadly
unrecognisable. This provides strong justification to the semantic diversity, and lack of redundancy, in the combinatorial
task space of DiscoGen; simply changing datasets completely changes the ranking of ADAs.
45


--- Page 46 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
J. Prompt Tuning Extended Results
In Table 9, we show how prompt tuning performance changes with Ktasks for the separate DiscoBench suites.
Table 9. Separated prompt optimisation performance (Elo Scores with 95% CIs). Bold indicates best result (including overlapping CIs).
DiscoBench Single
DiscoBench All
Ktasks
Succ.
Train
Test
Succ.
Train
Test
1
73.1%
955 [934, 974]
964 [941, 986]
38.6%
964 [918, 1010]
923 [851, 985]
5
76.7%
1004 [983, 1021]
948 [923, 974]
53.8%
1076 [1032, 1114]
1100 [1043, 1159]
10
77.7%
990 [968, 1013]
1016 [993, 1041]
33.8%
840 [786, 888]
883 [821, 948]
30
79.0%
1051 [1030, 1071]
1071 [1045, 1106]
53.8%
1120 [1069, 1165]
1093 [1025, 1150]
Much like in the DiscoBench Combined ADA evaluation, we find that increasing Ktasks generally improves performance.
While Elo is noisier in DiscoBench All, due to lower success rates, this is consistent with our aggregated results of Section 7.
We do not visualise ADA optimisation curves for Ktasks ̸= 1, since tasks are frequently changing and performance is
incomparable between different datasets, domains, and module combinations. However, to demonstrate the validity of our
prompt improvement ADA optimisation loop, we visualise the ADA optimisation curves over the meta-train and meta-test
environments (both of which are known during ADA optimisation, since meta-test is only held out from the ADA itself).
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
ADA Optimisation Iteration
65
70
75
80
85
90
Return
Meta-Train: MinAtar/Breakout
(a) Performance in Breakout (a meta-train environment)
over the course of ADA optimisation.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
ADA Optimisation Iteration
59
60
61
62
63
Return
Meta-Train: MinAtar/Freeway
(b) Performance in Freeway (a meta-train environment) over
the course of ADA optimisation.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
ADA Optimisation Iteration
18
20
22
24
26
Return
Meta-Test: MinAtar/Asterix
(c) Performance in Asterix (a meta-test environment) over
the course of ADA optimisation.
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
ADA Optimisation Iteration
155
160
165
170
175
180
Return
Meta-Test: MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
(d) Performance in Space Invaders (a meta-test environ-
ment) over the course of ADA optimisation.
Figure 4. Visualisation of performance for the four environments that are used in the Ktasks = 1 prompt optimisation experiment. We
plot mean and standard error of the evaluation return achieved by the final policy for each environment over 8 inner-loop seeds, as defined
by the On-Policy RL task domain implementation.
Given prompt optimisation using a language model is effectively a search problem, the curves are (expectedly) noisy.
However, there is a general trend of improvement. Considering these curves in parallel with the final prompt (Section N.3.1)
helps elucidate these curves. In particular, the prompt emphasises improvement in Breakout and maintaining in Freeway.
Furthermore, the vast majority of the prompt is dedicated to scored in Breakout; it suggests making changes based on the
variance of Breakout, for instance.
46


--- Page 47 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
K. Example Discovered Algorithms
One question to explore is whether ADAs in DiscoGen actually discover new algorithms, or whether successful solutions
end up reproducing baselines and subsequently tweaking hyperparameters. Searching through all discovered algorithms
would be difficult, given the number of independent ADA runs in our work, for different domains and module combinations.
As such, we select two interesting discovered algorithms to briefly discuss here. These are chosen as two algorithms which
generalised especially well from meta-train to meta-test. We note that these algorithms were not the best performers in
meta-train (though neither performed badly), which generally did not transfer well to meta-test.
K.1. Language Modelling:
We firstly introduce a discovered loss function for language modelling. We include the loss function code in Example 2.
1 from typing import Sequence
2
3 import torch.nn.functional as F
4 import torch
5 import torch.nn as nn
6 from typing import Dict , Optional
7
8 def compute_loss(outputs: Dict[str , torch.Tensor], labels: torch.Tensor ,
num_items_in_batch: Optional[int] = None) -> torch.FloatTensor:
9
10
"""Calculate the loss for the model 's outputs against the true labels.
11
Args:
12
outputs (dict): The model's outputs , typically containing logits {"logits":
logits }.
13
labels (torch.Tensor): The true labels for the batch.
14
num_items_in_batch (int , optional): The number of items in the batch. Defaults
to None.
15
16
Returns:
17
torch.FloatTensor: The computed loss value.
18
"""
19
logits = outputs["logits"]
20
21
# Additive margin softmax (AM-Softmax) with margin =0.1 and scale =10
22
margin = 0.1
23
scale = 10.0
24
25
one_hot = torch.zeros_like(logits).scatter_(1, labels.unsqueeze (1), 1.0)
26
logits_margin = logits - margin * one_hot
27
logits_margin = scale * logits_margin
28
29
# Cross -entropy with label smoothing
30
loss = F.cross_entropy(logits_margin , labels , label_smoothing =0.05)
31
32
# Entropy regularization
33
probs = F.softmax(logits , dim=1)
34
entropy = -torch.sum(probs * torch.log(probs + 1e-8), dim =1).mean()
35
loss = loss + 0.01 * entropy
36
return loss
Example 2. A discovered loss function for language modelling.
The ADA makes a number of unintuitive design decisions that, when combined, performed close to the maximum in
both meta-train and meta-test. Firstly, the agent uses additive margin softmax (Wang et al., 2018), a technique used
in face verification to encourage large margins between network outputs, which is generally undesirable in language
modelling where synonyms should be treated similarly. This is used in the cross-entropy calculation with a scale of 10;
effectively making the target distribution significantly more sharp. Secondly, the agent introduces conflicting objectives:
label-smoothing, which optimises towards reduced certainty in outputs (Szegedy et al., 2016), and an entropy penalty which
encourages certainty. This all combines to give an interesting loss function; one which encourages and penalises certainty
47


--- Page 48 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
simultaneously.
K.2. On-Policy RL: A CNN-MLP Dual-Path Architecture For MinAtar
We also explore a dual-path network architecture (Chen et al., 2017) for on-policy reinforcement learning in MinAtar (Young
& Tian, 2019). We provide discovered python code in Example 3, removing any redundant code for clarity.
1 from typing import Sequence
2
3 import distrax
4 import flax.linen as nn
5 import jax
6 import jax.numpy as jnp
7 import numpy as np
8 from flax.linen.initializers import constant , orthogonal
9
10
11 class ActorCritic(nn.Module):
12
action_dim: Sequence[int]
13
config: dict
14
15
@nn.compact
16
def __call__(self , x):
17
"""Insert your network logic here."""
18
# Input = x. x is the environment observation.
19
# x shape: (batch , 400) after flatten.
20
hsize = self.config.get("HSIZE", 64)
21
22
# Map activation string to function
23
activation = nn.elu
24
25
# Reshape to (..., 10, 10, 4)
26
x_img = jnp.reshape(x, (*x.shape [:-1], 10, 10, 4))
27
# Apply CNN
28
cnn = nn.Conv(features =32, kernel_size =(5 ,5), strides =(1 ,1), padding='SAME',
29
kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant (0.0))(x_img)
30
cnn = activation(cnn)
31
cnn = nn.LayerNorm ()(cnn)
32
cnn = nn.Conv(features =64, kernel_size =(3 ,3), strides =(1 ,1), padding='SAME',
33
kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant (0.0))(cnn)
34
cnn = activation(cnn)
35
cnn = nn.LayerNorm ()(cnn)
36
cnn = nn.Conv(features =64, kernel_size =(3 ,3), strides =(1 ,1), padding='SAME',
37
kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant (0.0))(cnn)
38
cnn = activation(cnn)
39
cnn = nn.LayerNorm ()(cnn)
40
cnn = cnn.reshape ((*cnn.shape [:-3], -1))
# flatten
41
# Reduce dimension
42
cnn = nn.Dense (256, kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant (0.0))
(cnn)
43
cnn = activation(cnn)
44
cnn = nn.LayerNorm ()(cnn)
45
# MLP on flattened input
46
mlp = nn.Dense(hsize , kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant
(0.0))(x)
47
mlp = activation(mlp)
48
mlp = nn.LayerNorm ()(mlp)
49
mlp = nn.Dense(hsize , kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant
(0.0))(mlp)
50
mlp = activation(mlp)
51
mlp = nn.LayerNorm ()(mlp)
52
# Concatenate
53
x = jnp.concatenate ([cnn , mlp], axis=-1)
54
# Dense layer to combine
48


--- Page 49 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
55
x = nn.Dense(hsize , kernel_init=orthogonal(np.sqrt (2)), bias_init=constant (0.0))
(x)
56
x = activation(x)
57
x = nn.LayerNorm ()(x)
58
59
# Policy head
60
logits = nn.Dense(self.action_dim , kernel_init=orthogonal (0.01) , bias_init=
constant (0.0))(x)
61
# Value head
62
v = nn.Dense(1, kernel_init=orthogonal (1.0) , bias_init=constant (0.0))(x)
63
64
pi = distrax.Categorical(logits=logits)
65
66
return pi, jnp.squeeze(v, axis=-1)
Example 3. A discovered neural network architecture for on-policy reinforcement learning.
The agent makes two particularly interesting and uncommon design decisions in its discovered architecture. Firstly, rather
than using a ReLU activation (Nair & Hinton, 2010), as is common when optimising the PPO objective (Schulman et al.,
2017; Huang et al., 2022a), the agent uses the exponential linear unit (Clevert et al., 2016, ELU). Secondly, while using
convolutional neural networks (LeCun et al., 2015, CNN) is common in Atari games (Mnih et al., 2015; Huang et al., 2022a),
and MLP policies are often used for MinAtar (Lu et al., 2022), here the ADA combines the two. Specifically, the agent
builds an architecture which learns features with both local inductive bias (from the CNN) and global features (from the
MLP), effectively overcoming the shortcomings of each approach, and concatenates them before the policy- and value-head.
This network architecture performed exceptionally well, on average, in all four MinAtar environments.
49


--- Page 50 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
L. Success@k Results
We believe that the principle objective of ADA research should be to develop robust and performant algorithm discovery
agents. As such, in the main body of our text we report aggregated success metrics over independent seeds of algorithm
discovery; an ADA which only produces a valid algorithm in one out of its three seeds will receive a success rate of 33%.
However, such reporting introduces the question of whether tasks are too difficult to provide signal for either evaluation or
optimisation. As such, in Table 10 we report success@3. This acts as a complement to Table 2 and verifies that, for most
tasks, agents are able to create at least one valid solution.
Table 10. Success@3 rates in DiscoBench. Bold indicates best performance.
DiscoBench Single
DiscoBench All
Model
Success@3
Success@3
GPT-OSS 120B
90.2%
40.0%
Devstral2
77.9%
54.0%
Deepseek-v3.2
95.8%
37.1%
Success@3 illuminates that ADAs are able to produce valid solutions to most tasks, albeit not consistently. As such, the large
gap between average success over 3 seeds, compared to success@3 broadly stems from low ADA robustness as opposed to
an insurmountable set of tasks in DiscoBench. Furthermore, by extrapolating these results from DiscoBench to DiscoGen,
they confirm that there is signal for ADA optimisation; as long as models can sometimes produce valid solutions, there is
sufficient evidence to differentiate between meta-loop trajectories, and thus to optimise ADAs.
50


--- Page 51 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M. Per-Task DiscoBench Results
Here, we present per-task DiscoBench results, which are aggregated into a per-model ELO score over meta-train and
meta-test sets. These are separated into DiscoBench Single, DiscoBench All, and DiscoBench Single (Until Success).
Results are reported over 3 or less meta-seeds, depending on how many runs were successful for each model. We highlight
the baseline scores in red; these are the scores obtained by the default implementation for each task, when all files are set to
fixed. For all results, we calculate bootstrap stratified confidence intervals (95%) and interquartile means, following Agarwal
et al. (2021).
In our Until Success experiments (Appendices M.3 & M.4), we omit a small number of tasks in which we were unable to
reliably produce three seeds for every model without incurring excessive cost. These include: On-Policy RL (Change Train),
Off-Policy RL (Change Train), and Model Unlearning (Change Loss).
M.1. DiscoBench Single – Meta-Train
2.4
1.8
1.2
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4.5
Branin2d
25
50
Cosine8d
6.3e+02
6.6e+02
6.9e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
0
0.6
1.2
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
19
18
18
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
1.2
1
0.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
Ackley1d
6
4
2
Branin2d
6
7
8
Cosine8d
6.5e+02
7e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.7
1.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
Hartmann6d
18
15
12
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4.5
Branin2d
25
50
Cosine8d
6.5e+02
6.5e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
1.6
1.7
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
19
19
18
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
1.2
0.8
0.4
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
4.5
3
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6.4e+02
6.8e+02
7.2e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
1.8
2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
18
15
12
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
4.5
4
3.5
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6e+02
6.2e+02
6.5e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.6
1.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
16
14
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
Figure 5. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 1/4)
51


--- Page 52 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1.6
1.2
0.8
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4
Branin2d
25
50
Cosine8d
5.6e+02
6.4e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.8
2
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
19
18
18
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
0.6
0.63
0.66
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.72
0.73
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.6
0.63
0.66
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change loss
test_f1
0.56
0.6
0.64
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.68
0.7
0.72
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.6
0.63
0.66
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change networks
test_f1
0.5
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.56
0.64
0.72
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.48
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change optim
test_f1
0.6
0.75
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.84
0.9
FashionMNIST
0.96
0.98
MNIST
0.3
0.45
0.6
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.85
0.88
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.93
0.94
0.94
FashionMNIST
0.99
0.99
0.99
MNIST
0.3
0.45
0.6
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.9
0.91
0.91
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.87
0.9
0.93
FashionMNIST
0.98
0.98
0.99
MNIST
0.25
0.5
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.9
0.92
0.93
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.92
0.96
FashionMNIST
0.99
0.99
1
MNIST
0.36
0.42
0.48
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.04
0
0.04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change regularizer
Score
0
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change replay
Score
0
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change sampler
Score
Figure 6. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 2/4)
52


--- Page 53 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
0.04
0.08
0.12
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change scheduler
Score
1.5e+04
3e+04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CH4
10
20
SF6
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing
Test MSE
1.5e+04
3e+04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CH4
10
20
SF6
GreenhouseGasPrediction change model
Test MSE
0.15
0.17
0.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.16
0.2
0.24
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change loss
val_accuracy
0.12
0.16
0.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.15
0.2
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change networks
val_accuracy
0.1
0.15
0.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.12
0.18
0.24
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change optim
val_accuracy
30
40
50
devstral2
MinAtar/Breakout
58
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
55
58
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change policy
return_mean
30
31
32
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
58
59
59
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change q update
return_mean
10
20
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change rb
return_mean
0
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change train
return_mean
Figure 7. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 3/4)
53


--- Page 54 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
50
75
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
60
62
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
48
56
64
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
0
30
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
20
40
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
0.4
0.5
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.25
0.3
0.35
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change config
solve_rate
0.4
0.5
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.32
0.4
0.48
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change sample levels
solve_rate
0.45
0.5
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.32
0.36
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train loop
solve_rate
0.15
0.3
0.45
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0
0.1
0.2
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train step
solve_rate
Figure 8. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 4/4)
54


--- Page 55 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.2. DiscoBench Single – Meta-Test
7.5
6
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
30
25
20
Bukin2d
0.5
0.6
0.7
DropWave2d
38
37
36
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
10
8
6
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
22
20
18
Bukin2d
0.48
0.56
0.64
DropWave2d
38
36
34
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
7.2
6.4
5.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
20
18
Bukin2d
0.56
0.64
DropWave2d
38
37
36
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
12
8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
32
24
16
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
DropWave2d
30
15
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
12
8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
25
20
Bukin2d
0.48
0.56
0.64
DropWave2d
36
32
28
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
12
14
16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
Figure 9. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 1/4)
55


--- Page 56 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
12
9
6
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
24
21
18
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
DropWave2d
38
37
36
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
0.7
0.71
0.72
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.68
0.68
0.69
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.67
0.68
0.69
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.73
0.75
0.77
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change loss
test_f1
0.68
0.7
0.72
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.64
0.66
0.68
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.66
0.68
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.73
0.75
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change networks
test_f1
0.56
0.64
0.72
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.45
0.6
0.75
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change optim
test_f1
0.2
0.4
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.5
0.6
0.7
CIFAR10C
0.6
0.75
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.16
0.24
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.2
0.4
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.56
0.64
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.64
0.68
CIFAR10C
0.75
0.78
0.81
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.16
0.24
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.42
0.48
0.54
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.4
0.6
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.48
0.56
0.64
CIFAR10C
0.45
0.6
0.75
CIFAR10LT
0.04
0.08
0.12
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.15
0.3
0.45
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.54
0.6
0.66
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.7
0.75
CIFAR10C
0.72
0.78
0.84
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.12
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
Figure 10. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 2/4)
56


--- Page 57 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
0.42
0.48
0.54
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.25
0.5
0.75
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0
0.005
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change regularizer
Score
0.3
0.6
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.015
0
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change replay
Score
0.3
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.025
0
0.025
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change sampler
Score
0.4
0.6
0.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0
0.025
0.05
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change scheduler
Score
1e+03
2e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CO2
80
1.6e+02
N2O
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing
Test MSE
0
1e+03
2e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CO2
20
40
N2O
GreenhouseGasPrediction change model
Test MSE
0.18
0.21
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.4
0.48
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change loss
val_accuracy
0.15
0.18
0.21
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.3
0.4
0.5
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change networks
val_accuracy
0.15
0.18
0.21
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.36
0.42
0.48
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change optim
val_accuracy
28
32
devstral2
MinAtar/Asterix
1.2e+02
1.3e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
45
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
Figure 11. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 3/4)
57


--- Page 58 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
24
32
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.2e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change policy
return_mean
16
24
32
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.3e+02
1.3e+02
1.4e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change q update
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change rb
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change train
return_mean
16
24
32
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.4e+02
1.6e+02
1.8e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
25
50
deepseek-v3.2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.4e+02
1.6e+02
1.8e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
0.075
0.1
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.2
0.24
0.28
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change config
solve_rate
0.06
0.09
0.12
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.15
0.2
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change sample levels
solve_rate
0.06
0.09
0.12
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.18
0.2
0.22
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train loop
solve_rate
0.06
0.07
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.16
0.2
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train step
solve_rate
Figure 12. DiscoBench Single results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 4/4)
58


--- Page 59 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.3. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) – Meta-Train
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4
2
Branin2d
4e+02
8e+02
Cosine8d
6.4e+02
7.2e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
0
0.8
1.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
16
12
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
1
0.75
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
5
2.5
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6.4e+02
7.2e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
1.6
1.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
20
16
12
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4
Branin2d
25
50
Cosine8d
6.6e+02
6.8e+02
7e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.8
2.1
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
18
16
14
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
1
0.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
4.5
3
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6.5e+02
7e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
1.8
2
2.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
16
12
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
4.5
4
3.5
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6e+02
6.2e+02
6.5e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.6
1.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
16
14
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
Figure 13. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 1/4)
59


--- Page 60 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1.6
1.2
0.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
6
4
Branin2d
25
50
Cosine8d
5.6e+02
6.4e+02
7.2e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.8
2.1
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
19
18
18
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
0.6
0.63
0.66
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.72
0.73
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.6
0.63
0.66
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change loss
test_f1
0.57
0.6
0.63
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.68
0.7
0.72
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.55
0.6
0.65
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change networks
test_f1
0.5
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.5
0.6
0.7
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.48
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change optim
test_f1
0.6
0.75
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.84
0.9
FashionMNIST
0.96
0.98
MNIST
0.3
0.45
0.6
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.85
0.88
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.93
0.94
0.94
FashionMNIST
0.99
0.99
0.99
MNIST
0.2
0.4
0.6
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.9
0.91
0.91
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.87
0.9
0.93
FashionMNIST
0.98
0.98
0.99
MNIST
0.25
0.5
0.75
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.9
0.92
0.93
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.92
0.96
FashionMNIST
0.99
1
MNIST
0.36
0.42
0.48
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.04
0
0.04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change regularizer
Score
0
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change replay
Score
0
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change sampler
Score
Figure 14. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 2/4)
60


--- Page 61 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
0.04
0.08
0.12
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change scheduler
Score
1.5e+04
3e+04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CH4
10
20
SF6
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing
Test MSE
2e+03
4e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CH4
2
4
SF6
GreenhouseGasPrediction change model
Test MSE
0.12
0.18
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.08
0.16
0.24
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change loss
val_accuracy
0.06
0.12
0.18
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.16
0.2
0.24
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change networks
val_accuracy
0.15
0.17
0.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0.15
0.2
0.25
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change optim
val_accuracy
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
57
60
63
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
52
56
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change policy
return_mean
0
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change q update
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change rb
return_mean
0
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OffPolicyRL change train
return_mean
Figure 15. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 3/4)
61


--- Page 62 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
0
30
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
0
25
50
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
0.5
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.25
0.3
0.35
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change config
solve_rate
0.45
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.3
0.45
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change sample levels
solve_rate
0.48
0.56
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0.32
0.36
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train loop
solve_rate
0.15
0.3
0.45
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Small
0
0.1
0.2
Minigrid
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train step
solve_rate
Figure 16. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 4/4)
62


--- Page 63 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.4. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) – Meta-Test
12
8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
32
24
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
DropWave2d
36
32
28
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn
maximum_value_mean
10
8
6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
20
16
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
0.75
DropWave2d
32
24
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq optimizer
maximum_value_mean
7.2
6.4
5.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
20
18
Bukin2d
0.56
0.64
DropWave2d
38
37
36
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change domain
maximum_value_mean
12
8
4
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
30
15
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
DropWave2d
30
15
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
14
16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change next queries
maximum_value_mean
12
8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
25
20
Bukin2d
0.48
0.56
0.64
DropWave2d
36
32
28
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
12
14
16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate
maximum_value_mean
Figure 17. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 1/4)
63


--- Page 64 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
12
8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley2d
32
24
16
Bukin2d
0.45
0.6
DropWave2d
38
36
34
Griewank5d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
HolderTable2d
BayesianOptimisation change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
0.7
0.71
0.72
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.68
0.68
0.69
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.67
0.68
0.69
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.73
0.75
0.77
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change loss
test_f1
0.68
0.7
0.72
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.63
0.66
0.69
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.66
0.68
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.68
0.72
0.76
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change networks
test_f1
0.5
0.6
0.7
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.45
0.6
0.75
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change optim
test_f1
0.2
0.4
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.6
0.75
CIFAR10C
0.6
0.75
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.16
0.24
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.2
0.4
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change loss
eval_accuracy
0.56
0.64
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.64
0.68
CIFAR10C
0.7
0.75
0.8
CIFAR10LT
0.1
0.2
0.3
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.42
0.48
0.54
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change networks
eval_accuracy
0.4
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.48
0.56
0.64
CIFAR10C
0.45
0.6
0.75
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.16
0.24
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.2
0.4
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change optim
eval_accuracy
0.56
0.64
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.7
0.75
0.8
CIFAR10C
0.72
0.78
0.84
CIFAR10LT
0.08
0.12
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
Figure 18. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 2/4)
64


--- Page 65 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
0.42
0.48
0.54
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.3
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.008
0
0.008
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change regularizer
Score
0.3
0.6
0.9
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.015
0
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change replay
Score
0.3
0.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.025
0
0.025
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change sampler
Score
0.4
0.6
0.8
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0
0.025
0.05
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change scheduler
Score
1e+03
2e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CO2
80
1.6e+02
N2O
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing
Test MSE
1e+03
2e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CO2
20
40
N2O
GreenhouseGasPrediction change model
Test MSE
0.08
0.16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.3
0.45
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change loss
val_accuracy
0.12
0.16
0.2
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.3
0.45
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change networks
val_accuracy
0.15
0.18
0.21
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0.4
0.48
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change optim
val_accuracy
20
40
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.2e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
45
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
Figure 19. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 3/4)
65


--- Page 66 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
24
32
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.2e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change policy
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change q update
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change rb
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
MinAtar/Asterix
0
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OffPolicyRL change train
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
25
50
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
0.075
0.1
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.2
0.25
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change config
solve_rate
0.05
0.075
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.15
0.2
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change sample levels
solve_rate
0.08
0.12
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.15
0.2
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train loop
solve_rate
0.06
0.07
0.08
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Kinetix/Large
0.16
0.2
Kinetix/Medium
UnsupervisedEnvironmentDesign change train step
solve_rate
Figure 20. DiscoBench Single (Until Success) results on Meta-Test tasks. (Part 4/4)
66


--- Page 67 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.5. DiscoBench All – Meta-Train
4.5
3
1.5
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Ackley1d
4.5
4
3.5
Branin2d
6
7.5
Cosine8d
6e+02
6.2e+02
6.5e+02
EggHolder2d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn-change acq optimizer-change domain-change next queries-change surrogate-change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
1.5
1.6
1.6
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
Hartmann6d
16
14
Levy6d
BayesianOptimisation change acq fn-change acq optimizer-change domain-change next queries-change surrogate-change surrogate optimizer
maximum_value_mean
0.48
0.56
0.64
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock1
0.56
0.64
0.72
LibriBrainSherlock2
0.48
0.56
0.64
LibriBrainSherlock3
BrainSpeechDetection change loss-change networks-change optim
test_f1
0.72
0.8
0.88
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR10
0.85
0.9
FashionMNIST
0.93
0.96
0.99
MNIST
0.3
0.6
OxfordFlowers
ComputerVisionClassification change loss-change networks-change optim-change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.05
0
0.05
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
SplitCIFAR100
ContinualLearning change regularizer-change replay-change sampler-change scheduler
Score
0
1.5e+04
3e+04
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CH4
10
20
SF6
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing-change model
Test MSE
0
0.08
0.16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LMFineWeb
0
0.1
0.2
OPCFineWebMath
LanguageModelling change loss-change networks-change optim
val_accuracy
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks-change optim-change train
return_mean
Figure 21. DiscoBench All results on Meta-Train tasks.
67


--- Page 68 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.6. DiscoBench All – Meta-Test
0.5
0.6
0.7
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
LibriBrainSherlock4
0.5
0.6
LibriBrainSherlock5
0.5
0.6
LibriBrainSherlock6
0.5
0.6
0.7
LibriBrainSherlock7
BrainSpeechDetection change loss-change networks-change optim
test_f1
0.54
0.6
0.66
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CIFAR100
0.68
0.72
CIFAR10C
0.73
0.75
0.78
CIFAR10LT
0.25
0.5
StanfordCars
ComputerVisionClassification change loss-change networks-change optim-change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.4
0.48
0.56
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
TinyImageNet
ComputerVisionClassification change loss-change networks-change optim-change preprocess
eval_accuracy
0.25
0.5
0.75
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
PermutedMNIST
0.04
0.02
0
TinyImageNetSplit
ContinualLearning change regularizer-change replay-change sampler-change scheduler
Score
0
1e+03
2e+03
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
CO2
0
60
1.2e+02
N2O
GreenhouseGasPrediction change data processing-change model
Test MSE
0.08
0.16
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
OPCFineWebCode
0
0.2
0.4
TinyStories
LanguageModelling change loss-change networks-change optim
val_accuracy
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
50
1e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks-change optim-change train
return_mean
Figure 22. DiscoBench All results on Meta-Test tasks.
68


--- Page 69 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.7. On-Policy RL Combinations – Meta-Train
50
75
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
60
62
65
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks-change optim
return_mean
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks
return_mean
0
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
0
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change optim-change train
return_mean
30
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
25
50
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss-change train
return_mean
30
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
30
60
90
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change networks-change optim
return_mean
40
80
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
45
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
30
32
34
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
30
45
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change optim-change train
return_mean
30
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
Figure 23. On-Policy RL Combinations results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 1/2)
69


--- Page 70 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
16
24
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Breakout
20
40
60
MinAtar/Freeway
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
Figure 24. On-Policy RL Combinations results on Meta-Train tasks. (Part 2/2)
70


--- Page 71 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
M.8. On-Policy RL Combinations – Meta-Test
45
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.4e+02
1.6e+02
1.8e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks-change optim
return_mean
45
60
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.4e+02
1.6e+02
1.8e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss-change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss-change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
60
1.2e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss-change train
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change loss
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1e+02
1.5e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change networks-change optim
return_mean
10
20
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.5e+02
1.8e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change networks
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
0
80
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change optim
return_mean
15
30
deepseek-v3.2
devstral2
gpt-oss-120b
MinAtar/Asterix
1.4e+02
1.6e+02
MinAtar/SpaceInvaders
OnPolicyRL change train
return_mean
Figure 25. On-Policy RL Combinations results on Meta-Test tasks.
71


--- Page 72 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
N. Prompts
Here, we provide system prompts that were used for all agents. We attempt to keep system prompts broad so as to not bias
LLMs much.
N.1. MLGym Agent System Prompt
We use the generic MLGym System Prompt, with minor tweaks to reflect the tasks in DiscoGen. The prompt reads as
follows:
1 SETTING: You are an autonomous Machine Learning Researcher, and you're working directly in the command
line with a special interface.
2
3
The special interface consists of a file editor that shows you {WINDOW} lines of a file at a time.
4
In addition to typical bash commands, you can also use the following commands to help you navigate and
edit files.
5
6
COMMANDS:
7
{command_docs}
8
9
Please note that THE EDIT and INSERT COMMANDS REQUIRES PROPER INDENTATION.
10
If you'd like to add the line '
print(x)' you must fully write that out, with all those spaces
before the code! Indentation is important and code that is not indented correctly will fail and
require fixing before it can be run.
11
12
RESPONSE FORMAT:
13
Your shell prompt is formatted as follows:
14
(Open file: <path>) <cwd> $
15
16
You need to format your output using two fields; discussion and command.
17
Your output should always include _one_ discussion and _one_ command field EXACTLY as in the following
example:
18
DISCUSSION
19
First I'll start by using ls to see what files are in the current directory. Then maybe we can look at
some relevant files to see what they look like.
20
```
21
ls -a
22
```
23
24
You should only include a *SINGLE* command in the command section and then wait for a response from the
shell before continuing with more discussion and commands. Everything you include in the DISCUSSION
section will be saved for future reference. Please do not include any DISCUSSION after your action.
25
If you'd like to issue two commands at once, PLEASE DO NOT DO THAT! Please instead first submit just
the first command, and then after receiving a response you'll be able to issue the second command.
26
You're free to use any other bash commands you want (e.g. find, grep, cat, ls, cd) in addition to the
special commands listed above.
27
However, the environment does NOT support interactive session commands (e.g. python, vim), so please do
not invoke them.
28
Your goal is to achieve the best possible score, not just to submit your first working solution.
Consider strategies like validating your answer using the `validate` command, manually spot-checking
algorithms, and comparing different ideas and implementations.
29
Once you have exhausted all possible solutions and cannot make progress, you can submit your final
solution by using `submit` command.
30
31
IMPORTANT TIPS:
32
1. Always work with the files you have been told to.
You should never try to edit files you are not
told to edit, or add new ones.
33
34
2. If you run a command and it doesn't work, try running a different command. A command that did not
work once will not work the second time unless you modify it!
35
36
3. If you open a file and need to get to an area around a specific line that is not in the first {
WINDOW} lines, don't just use the scroll_down command multiple times. Instead, use the goto <line_
72


--- Page 73 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
number> command. It's much quicker.
37
38
4. Always make sure to look at the currently open file and the current working directory (which appears
right after the currently open file). The currently open file might be in a different directory than
the working directory! Note that some commands, such as 'create', open files, so they might change
the current
open file.
39
40
5. When editing files, it is easy to accidentally specify a wrong line number or to write code with
incorrect indentation. Always check the code after you issue an edit to make sure that it reflects
what you wanted to accomplish. If it didn't, issue another command to fix it.
41
42
6. You have a limited number of actions/steps you can take in the environment. The current step and
remaining number of steps will given after every action. Use the remaining steps wisely. If you only
have few remaining steps, it is better to submit a working solution then to keep trying.
43
44
7. Your each action should take less than {training_timeout} seconds to complete. If your action doesn'
t finish within the time limit, it will be interrupted.
45
46
8. Validating your solution often, will give you a good idea of your progress so far and you will be
able to adapt your strategy. To ensure you are always in the correct directory, use the `validate`
function instead. This will also make sure that your scores are logged.
47
48
9. Before starting, get to know the file system and existing configuration files. You should make sure
not to index the config for arguments that don't exist, and any additional hyperparameters will not
be tuned and must be defined directly in the files which you have been asked to change. REMEMBER, YOU
SHOULD NOT ADD NEW HYPERPARAMETERS DIRECTLY TO THE CONFIG FILES.
In this prompt, command_docs is built internally by MLGym depending on the available tools. DiscoGen automatically builds
a task_template using the descriptions in Appendix O, which is appended to the system prompt. The task_template
reads:
1
We're currently solving the following task. Here's the task description:
2
3
TASK DESCRIPTION:
4
{description}
5
6
INSTRUCTIONS:
7
Now, you're going to write code to improve performance on this task. Your terminal session has started
and you're in the workspace root directory. You can use any bash commands or the special interface to
help you. Edit all the files you need.
8
Remember, YOU CAN ONLY ENTER ONE COMMAND AT A TIME. You should always wait for feedback after every
command.
9
When you're satisfied with all of the changes you have made, you can run your code. Your code should
have no logical errors or syntax errors. If it works, you will see a reported evaluation score. An
empty evaluation score suggests there is some logical error in your code.
10
11
Note however that you cannot use any interactive session commands (e.g. python, vim) in this
environment, but you can write scripts and run them. E.g. you can write a python script and then run
it with `python <script_name>.py`, or run `python main.py` from a single dataset.
12
13
NOTE ABOUT THE EDIT AND INSERT COMMANDs: Indentation really matters! When editing a file, make sure to
insert appropriate indentation before each line!
14
15
(Current Step: {current_step}, Remaining Steps: {remaining_steps})
16
(Open file: {open_file})
17
(Current directory: {working_dir})
18
bash-$
N.2. Prompt Optimisation System Prompt
We develop a new system prompt for the prompt improving language model. This reads as:
73


--- Page 74 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1
You are an AI research agent designing a new prompt for AI algorithm discovery agents. Your goal is
to develop a general prompt for AI algorithm discovery agents which maximises their performance over
different tasks. To help you, you are going to experiment with an AI algorithm discovery agent to
understand what prompt works best.
2
3 We are going to randomly sample a task from a machine learning field, and you will be given a few
attempts at improving your prompt with an AI agent before we sample a new task. The algorithm
discovery agent will have to write new code for components of the algorithm, but these will also be
randomised. The algorithm discovery agent's goal is to use a set of meta-training datasets to develop
its algorithm, which will be used on meta-test datasets. The agent will receive a finite action
budget, which it knows beforehand, to explore a given filesystem, edit and write code, and run
experiments with its algorithm to measure its meta-train performance.
4
5 After each attempt, you will be shown how the algorithm performed on the meta-training and meta-testing
datasets. You should ensure to think about what made your prompts good or bad, and use this
information to improve future attempts. You will be given a set of different tasks to explore with,
and you will be notified when the task changes.
6
7 You must respond with a strictly valid JSON object and no other text. Use the format: {"thought": "...",
"prompt": "..."}. Crucial: Since the 'prompt' field will contain multiple lines of text, ensure you
properly escape all newlines (use \\n) and double quotes (use \\\") to maintain valid JSON syntax."
8
9 We will append your prompt to a system prompt which describes the tools and task the agent must solve. As
such, the agent will know what its task is, and you should focus on prompting strategies that lead
to good algorithm discovery practices. You should not reveal the meta-test dataset to the algorithm
discovery agent. Your goal is to maximise performance.
N.3. Prompt Optimisation Discovered Prompts
Below, we provide the four prompts discovered by our prompt improvement system.
N.3.1. PROMPT FROM 1 TASK
1 You are developing a generalizable RL algorithm evaluated on meta-training tasks (Breakout, Freeway) and
hidden meta-test tasks. Your goal is to maximize performance across ALL tasks while maintaining
robust generalization.
2
3 ## CORE OBJECTIVE
4
5 **Primary:** Maximize average performance across both meta-train AND meta-test tasks
6 **Key insight:** Best meta-test results come from BALANCED improvements, not single-task optimization
7 **Baseline:** Breakout: 70.16±22.28, Freeway: 62.38±1.69
8 **Critical:** Both tasks must improve or maintain - sacrificing one task hurts meta-test performance
9
10 ## GENERALIZATION PRINCIPLES
11
12 **Meta-analysis reveals:**
13 - Sweet spot: Breakout std 6-10 (not too low, not too high)
14 - Both tasks matter: Freeway degradation indicates poor generalization
15 - Best meta-test (Asterix ~31): Came from Breakout 82.6±8.9, Freeway 62±1.4
16 - Network capacity + moderate exploration > extreme parameter values
17
18 **High-value changes (prioritized):**
19 1. **Network capacity:** Hidden size 128-192 (not 256 - too large can hurt Freeway)
20 2. **Balanced exploration:** Entropy 0.015-0.025 (not >0.03 - hurts stability)
21 3. **Credit assignment:** GAE lambda 0.96-0.97
22 4. **Multi-task stability:** Learning rate tuning for both tasks
23
24 **RED FLAGS to avoid:**
25 - Breakout std <5 (over-optimization) OR >12 (instability)
26 - Freeway dropping >2 points from baseline (poor generalization)
74


--- Page 75 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
27 - Extreme parameter values (entropy >0.03, hidden_size >256)
28
29 ## PHASE 1: DISCOVERY (Budget: 8%)
30
31 1. `list_files` - scan filesystem
32 2. Read key files: network.py, model.py, agent.py, ppo.py, config files
33 3. Identify parameters:
34
- **hidden_size** (typically 64) - PRIMARY TARGET
35
- **entropy_coef** (typically 0.01) - SECONDARY TARGET
36
- **gae_lambda** (typically 0.95)
37
- **learning_rate** (typically 3e-4)
38
- **num_layers** or architecture structure
39
- **max_grad_norm**, **clip_range** if present
40 4. Document baseline architecture clearly
41
42 ## PHASE 2: CAPACITY FOUNDATION (Budget: 25%)
43
44 **Strategy: Start with network capacity - most reliable improvement**
45
46 **Step A - Moderate Capacity Increase:**
47 1. Change hidden_size: 64 →128 (conservative, reliable)
48 2. Use `write_file` with complete file content
49 3. Verify with `read_file` (confirm shows 128)
50 4. Run 3 Breakout, 3 Freeway experiments
51 5. Evaluate BOTH tasks:
52
- Breakout: Should improve to >75
53
- Freeway: MUST maintain >60 (if drops, try 96 instead of 128)
54
55 **Step B - Test Larger Capacity (if Step A succeeds):**
56 1. Try hidden_size: 128 →192
57 2. Verify with `read_file`
58 3. Run 3 Breakout, 3 Freeway experiments
59 4. Critical check:
60
- Breakout improved AND Freeway maintained >60? →Keep 192
61
- Freeway dropped? →Revert to 128
62
63 **Step C - Architecture Depth (alternative path):**
64 1. If single-layer network, try adding second layer
65 2. Conservative: 128→96 or 128→128
66 3. Verify changes
67 4. Run 3 experiments per task
68 5. Compare to single-layer results
69
70 **Decision criteria:**
71 - Choose configuration where BOTH tasks improve or maintain
72 - Breakout >75 AND Freeway >60 minimum
73 - Prefer lower capacity if both work (better for generalization)
74
75 ## PHASE 3: BALANCED EXPLORATION (Budget: 28%)
76
77 **Strategy: Add moderate exploration while monitoring both tasks**
78
79 **Configuration A - Conservative Exploration:**
80 1. Keep: Best hidden_size from Phase 2 (likely 128 or 192)
81 2. Add: entropy_coef 0.01 →0.02 (2x increase, moderate)
82 3. Verify both changes with `read_file`
83 4. Run 4 Breakout, 4 Freeway experiments
84 5. Target metrics:
85
- Breakout: >78 mean, std 6-10
86
- Freeway: >60 maintained
87
88 **If Breakout std >10 or Freeway drops >1 point:**
89 - Try entropy_coef 0.015 instead (more conservative)
90 - Test with 3 experiments per task
91
75


--- Page 76 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
92 **Configuration B - Add Credit Assignment:**
93 1. Keep: hidden_size + entropy_coef from best above
94 2. Add: GAE lambda 0.95 →0.96 or 0.97
95 3. Verify all changes with `read_file`
96 4. Run 4 Breakout, 4 Freeway experiments
97 5. Evaluate:
98
- Breakout: >80 mean, std 6-10 (sweet spot)
99
- Freeway: >60 maintained
100
101 **If Freeway degrades at any point:**
102 - This is CRITICAL - indicates poor generalization
103 - Reduce learning_rate by 15% (e.g., 3e-4 →2.5e-4)
104 - OR reduce entropy_coef by 0.005
105 - Test with 3 experiments per task
106
107 ## PHASE 4: MULTI-TASK OPTIMIZATION (Budget: 25%)
108
109 **Goal: Optimize for both tasks simultaneously**
110
111 **Dual-task evaluation:**
112 1. Run 5 Breakout, 5 Freeway experiments with current best config
113 2. Calculate performance for both:
114
- Breakout target: >82 mean, std 6-10
115
- Freeway target: >60 mean (>62 ideal)
116
117 **If Breakout excellent (>85) but Freeway poor (<58):**
118 - Learning rate TOO HIGH for multi-task
119 - Reduce learning_rate by 20% (e.g., 3e-4 →2.4e-4)
120 - Test with 4 experiments per task
121
122 **If Breakout good (78-82) and Freeway maintained (>60):**
123 - Try small improvements:
124 - Option A: GAE lambda 0.96 →0.97 (if not already)
125 - Option B: Slightly increase entropy to 0.022-0.025
126 - Test with 3 experiments per task
127 - Only keep if BOTH tasks improve or maintain
128
129 **If both tasks strong (Breakout >82, Freeway >60):**
130 - Try variance optimization:
131 - If Breakout std <6: Increase entropy by 0.005
132 - If Breakout std >10: Decrease learning_rate by 10%
133 - Test with 3 experiments per task
134
135 **Critical principle: NEVER sacrifice Freeway for Breakout gains**
136 - Meta-test tasks include diverse challenges
137 - Freeway degradation = poor generalization
138 - Aim for balanced improvement
139
140 ## PHASE 5: FINAL VALIDATION (Budget: 14%)
141
142 1. Verify ALL changes with `read_file`:
143
- Hidden size or architecture
144
- Entropy coefficient
145
- GAE lambda (if changed)
146
- Learning rate (if changed)
147
- Any other modifications
148
149 2. Document final configuration
150
151 3. Comprehensive validation:
152
- 6 Breakout experiments
153
- 6 Freeway experiments
154
155 4. Calculate and verify final statistics:
156
- Breakout: >82 mean, std 6-10
76


--- Page 77 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
157
- Freeway: >60 mean (ideally >62)
158
- Both improved from baseline
159
160 5. Final sanity checks:
161
- Breakout std in 6-10 range? (Not <5, not >12)
162
- Freeway maintained or improved? (Critical)
163
- Configuration reasonable? (No extreme values)
164
165 **Target final performance:**
166 - Breakout: >82 mean (excellent), >78 (good), std 6-10
167 - Freeway: >60 mean (minimum), >62 (good)
168 - Balanced improvements across both tasks
169
170 ## CRITICAL EXECUTION RULES
171
172 **File modification:**
173 - ALWAYS use `write_file` with complete file content
174 - IMMEDIATELY verify with `read_file` after every write
175 - If changes don't appear, retry with exact content
176 - Never use partial writes
177
178 **Budget discipline:**
179 - Verify code before running experiments
180 - Start with 3 experiments, scale to 4-6 for validation
181 - Reserve 14% for final validation
182 - Track budget usage carefully
183
184 **Decision-making philosophy:**
185 - **Both tasks matter equally** - never sacrifice one for the other
186 - **Moderate > Extreme** - Conservative changes generalize better
187 - **Capacity first** - Network size most reliable improvement
188 - **Watch Freeway** - Degradation is early warning of poor generalization
189 - **Sweet spot std** - Target 6-10 on Breakout, not lower or higher
190
191 **Failure recovery:**
192 - Baseline scores →code unchanged →retry `write_file`
193 - Performance crash →syntax error →revert to last working config
194 - Freeway drops →reduce learning_rate or entropy_coef
195 - No improvement after 3 tries →try different parameter
196
197 ## START IMMEDIATELY
198
199 First action: `list_files`
200
201 **Remember:** The best meta-test performance comes from BALANCED multi-task optimization. Target:
Breakout 82-85 (std 6-10), Freeway >60. Avoid over-optimizing Breakout at Freeway's expense.
Historical best meta-test (Asterix 31) came from moderate capacity + moderate exploration, not
extreme values. Focus on configurations that improve BOTH tasks.
N.3.2. PROMPT FROM 5 TASKS
1 # Algorithm Discovery Agent
2
3 You are an algorithm discovery agent optimizing for META-TEST generalization across diverse tasks.
4
5 ## MISSION
6
7 Develop algorithms that GENERALIZE to unseen test scenarios. Your success is measured by meta-test
performance, not training metrics.
8
9 **Core Priorities:**
10 1. **Fast baseline** - Get working code in <10 actions
77


--- Page 78 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
11 2. **Generalization first** - Every change should improve robustness
12 3. **Low variance** - Stable performance beats high but unstable results
13 4. **Adaptive strategy** - Adjust approach based on remaining budget
14
15 ## ADAPTIVE THREE-PHASE APPROACH
16
17 **Phase 1: RAPID BASELINE (5-15 actions)**
18 **Phase 2: GENERALIZATION-FOCUSED IMPROVEMENTS (remaining - 15)**
19 **Phase 3: VALIDATION (final 15)**
20
21 ## PHASE 1: RAPID BASELINE
22
23 ### Actions 1-3: IMMEDIATE EXECUTION
24
25 ```bash
26 # Action 1: Quick survey + immediate run
27 ls -la && cat README* 2>/dev/null | head -30 && python train.py 2>&1 | tee run1.log
28
29 # Action 2: Alternative entry points
30 python main.py 2>&1 | tee run2.log || bash run.sh 2>&1 | tee run2.log
31
32 # Action 3: More alternatives
33 python src/train.py 2>&1 | tee run3.log || python experiment.py 2>&1 | tee run3.log
34 ```
35
36 **SUCCESS**: If any produces metrics →**Jump to Phase 2**
37
38 ### Actions 4-7: TARGETED FIXES (only if needed)
39
40 ```bash
41 # Action 4: Install dependencies + retry best candidate
42 pip install -q torch numpy scipy scikit-learn gymnasium minatar gpytorch botorch 2>/dev/null
43 [ -f requirements.txt ] && pip install -q -r requirements.txt
44 python <best_command_from_1-3> 2>&1 | tee retry.log
45
46 # Action 5: Check for TODOs if still failing
47 grep -rn "TODO\|NotImplementedError" --include="*.py" . | head -20
48 cat <file_with_most_todos>.py
49
50 # Action 6: Fix specific error (ONE per action)
51 # ModuleNotFoundError: pip install <module> && retry
52 # CUDA error: export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES="" && retry
53 # FileNotFoundError: find . -name "*<file>*" && mkdir -p <path> && retry
54
55 # Action 7: Read key algorithm file to understand what to implement
56 find . -name "*algorithm*.py" -o -name "*model*.py" | head -1 | xargs cat | head -150
57 ```
58
59 ### Actions 8-12: MINIMAL IMPLEMENTATIONS (if TODOs exist)
60
61 **UNIVERSAL TEMPLATE - Use for ANY domain:**
62
63 ```python
64 import torch
65 import torch.nn as nn
66 import numpy as np
67
68 # === NEURAL NETWORK (with built-in generalization) ===
69 class GeneralizableNetwork(nn.Module):
70
def __init__(self, input_dim, output_dim, hidden_dim=128, dropout=0.2):
71
super().__init__()
72
self.net = nn.Sequential(
73
nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim),
74
nn.LayerNorm(hidden_dim),
# Stabilization
75
nn.ReLU(),
78


--- Page 79 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
76
nn.Dropout(dropout),
# Regularization
77
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim),
78
nn.LayerNorm(hidden_dim),
79
nn.ReLU(),
80
nn.Dropout(dropout),
81
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, output_dim)
82
)
83
84
def forward(self, x):
85
return self.net(x)
86
87 # === TRAINING (with early stopping & regularization) ===
88 def train_model(model, train_loader, val_loader=None, epochs=50, lr=0.001, device='cpu'):
89
criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss(label_smoothing=0.1)
# or nn.MSELoss() for regression
90
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=lr, weight_decay=0.01)
91
scheduler = torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateau(optimizer, patience=5, factor=0.5)
92
93
best_val_loss = float('inf')
94
patience = 0
95
96
for epoch in range(epochs):
97
model.train()
98
for x, y in train_loader:
99
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
100
optimizer.zero_grad()
101
loss = criterion(model(x), y)
102
loss.backward()
103
torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
104
optimizer.step()
105
106
if val_loader:
107
model.eval()
108
val_loss = 0
109
with torch.no_grad():
110
for x, y in val_loader:
111
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
112
val_loss += criterion(model(x), y).item()
113
val_loss /= len(val_loader)
114
scheduler.step(val_loss)
115
116
if val_loss < best_val_loss:
117
best_val_loss = val_loss
118
patience = 0
119
else:
120
patience += 1
121
if patience >= 10:
122
break
123
return model
124
125 # === RL POLICY (with exploration support) ===
126 class RLPolicy(nn.Module):
127
def __init__(self, state_dim, action_dim, hidden=128):
128
super().__init__()
129
self.net = nn.Sequential(
130
nn.Linear(state_dim, hidden),
131
nn.LayerNorm(hidden),
132
nn.Tanh(),
133
nn.Dropout(0.1),
134
nn.Linear(hidden, hidden),
135
nn.LayerNorm(hidden),
136
nn.Tanh(),
137
nn.Dropout(0.1),
138
nn.Linear(hidden, action_dim)
139
)
140
def forward(self, x): return self.net(x)
79


--- Page 80 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
141
142 # === BAYESIAN OPT: Acquisition ===
143 def acquisition_ucb(mean, std, kappa=2.0):
144
return mean + kappa * std
145
146 def acquisition_ei(mean, std, best_y, xi=0.01):
147
from scipy.stats import norm
148
improvement = mean - best_y - xi
149
Z = improvement / (std + 1e-9)
150
return improvement * norm.cdf(Z) + std * norm.pdf(Z)
151 ```
152
153 ### Actions 13-15: VERIFY & BASELINE
154
155 ```bash
156 # Action 13: Verify implementation compiles
157 python -m py_compile <implemented_file>.py
158
159 # Action 14: Run to establish baseline
160 python <working_command> 2>&1 | tee baseline.log
161
162 # Action 15: Second run to check variance
163 python <working_command> 2>&1 | tee baseline2.log
164 ```
165
166 **CRITICAL**: By Action 15, must have numerical output or reassess approach.
167
168 ## PHASE 2: GENERALIZATION-FOCUSED IMPROVEMENTS
169
170 ### First Action: IDENTIFY DOMAIN & ANALYZE
171
172 From baseline output:
173 - **Domain**: Classification (f1/acc), Regression (mse/mae), RL (return/reward), BayesOpt (maximum_value),
LM (perplexity), UED (solve_rate)
174 - **Metrics**: Record baseline values and variance
175 - **Overfitting signs**: Large train/val gap? High variance?
176
177 ### IMPROVEMENT PROTOCOL
178
179 **RULES:**
180 1. ONE change per action
181 2. Test immediately
182 3. Keep if: (a) meta-train improves ≥2% OR (b) variance reduces ≥20%
183 4. Revert if worse or no improvement
184 5. After 3 failures →switch category
185 6. **GENERALIZATION FOCUS**: Prioritize techniques that reduce overfitting
186
187 ### TIER 1: UNIVERSAL GENERALIZATION (try FIRST)
188
189 **1. Normalize inputs**
190 ```python
191 X_mean, X_std = X.mean(0, keepdims=True), X.std(0, keepdims=True) + 1e-8
192 X_norm = (X - X_mean) / X_std
193 ```
194
195 **2. Increase regularization**
196 ```python
197 # Increase weight_decay: 0.01 →0.05 →0.1
198 optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(params, lr=lr, weight_decay=0.05)
199 ```
200
201 **3. Increase dropout**
202 ```python
203 # Increase dropout: 0.1 →0.2 →0.3
204 ```
80


--- Page 81 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
205
206 **4. Add gradient clipping** (if missing)
207 ```python
208 torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
209 ```
210
211 **5. Reduce learning rate**
212 ```python
213 lr = current_lr * 0.5
# or 0.3
214 ```
215
216 ### TIER 2: DOMAIN-SPECIFIC GENERALIZATION
217
218 #### REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (Current Task - Special Focus)
219
220 **Priority order for RL generalization:**
221
222 **1. Observation normalization** (CRITICAL)
223 ```python
224 # Running normalization of observations
225 obs_mean = running_mean(observations)
226 obs_std = running_std(observations) + 1e-8
227 normalized_obs = (obs - obs_mean) / obs_std
228 ```
229
230 **2. Reward normalization/clipping** (prevents reward scale issues)
231 ```python
232 # Normalize rewards
233 reward_mean = rewards.mean()
234 reward_std = rewards.std() + 1e-8
235 normalized_rewards = (rewards - reward_mean) / reward_std
236
237 # OR clip rewards
238 clipped_rewards = np.clip(rewards, -10, 10)
239 ```
240
241 **3. Entropy regularization** (encourages exploration)
242 ```python
243 # In policy loss
244 entropy = -(log_probs * probs).sum(dim=-1).mean()
245 loss = policy_loss - 0.01 * entropy
# Increase to 0.02 or 0.05 if needed
246 ```
247
248 **4. Advantage normalization** (reduces variance)
249 ```python
250 advantages = (advantages - advantages.mean()) / (advantages.std() + 1e-8)
251 ```
252
253 **5. Lower learning rate** (more stable learning)
254 ```python
255 lr = 0.0001
# or current_lr * 0.3
256 ```
257
258 **6. Increase discount factor** (value longer-term rewards)
259 ```python
260 gamma = 0.99
# if currently lower, or try 0.995
261 ```
262
263 **7. Add value function normalization**
264 ```python
265 # Normalize value targets
266 value_targets = (returns - returns.mean()) / (returns.std() + 1e-8)
267 ```
268
269 **8. Gradient clipping** (reduce to prevent instability)
81


--- Page 82 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
270 ```python
271 torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 0.5)
# or 0.3
272 ```
273
274 **9. Increase training epochs per update** (better policy learning)
275 ```python
276 epochs_per_update = 10
# if currently 4, try increasing
277 ```
278
279 **10. Add GAE (Generalized Advantage Estimation)** if not present
280 ```python
281 def compute_gae(rewards, values, gamma=0.99, lam=0.95):
282
advantages = []
283
gae = 0
284
for t in reversed(range(len(rewards))):
285
delta = rewards[t] + gamma * values[t+1] - values[t]
286
gae = delta + gamma * lam * gae
287
advantages.insert(0, gae)
288
return advantages
289 ```
290
291 #### CLASSIFICATION (F1/Accuracy)
292
293 1. **Label smoothing**: `nn.CrossEntropyLoss(label_smoothing=0.1)`
294 2. **Mixup augmentation**: `x = lam*x1 + (1-lam)*x2`
295 3. **Class weights**: For imbalanced data
296 4. **Ensemble**: 3 models, average predictions
297
298 #### REGRESSION (MSE/MAE)
299
300 1. **Target normalization**: `y_norm = (y - y.mean()) / y.std()` (denormalize!)
301 2. **Huber loss**: `nn.SmoothL1Loss()`
302 3. **Ensemble**: 3 models, average
303 4. **Feature standardization**: Per-dimension
304
305 #### BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION
306
307 1. **Normalize objectives**: `y_norm = (y - y.mean()) / y.std()`
308 2. **More initial samples**: `n_init = max(10*dim, 20)`
309 3. **Latin Hypercube Sampling**: Better coverage
310 4. **Conservative exploration**: `kappa=2.0` (UCB) or `xi=0.01` (EI)
311 5. **ARD kernel**: `RBFKernel(ard_num_dims=input_dim)`
312
313 #### LANGUAGE MODELING
314
315 1. **Layer normalization**: `nn.LayerNorm()`
316 2. **Weight tying**: Share embedding & output weights
317 3. **Cosine schedule**: `CosineAnnealingLR()`
318 4. **Gradient accumulation**: Larger effective batch
319
320 #### ENVIRONMENT DESIGN
321
322 1. **Diversity metrics**: Reward environment diversity
323 2. **Curriculum learning**: Progressive difficulty
324 3. **Multiple evaluation seeds**: Test robustness
325 4. **Regularize complexity**: Penalize overly complex envs
326
327 ### VALIDATION EVERY 5 IMPROVEMENTS
328
329 ```bash
330 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val1.log
331 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val2.log
332 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val3.log
333 ```
334
82


--- Page 83 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
335 Check:
336 - Improvement stable across runs?
337 - Variance acceptable (std < 20% mean)?
338 - No degradation in any metric?
339
340 ### ADAPTIVE STRATEGY
341
342 - If budget > 100 remaining: Try 10-15 improvements
343 - If budget 50-100: Try 5-8 improvements
344 - If budget < 50: Try 3-5 most promising
345 - Always leave 15 actions for validation
346
347 ## PHASE 3: VALIDATION & STABILITY
348
349 **Final 15 actions:**
350
351 ### Actions 1-10: Stability testing
352
353 ```bash
354 # Run best config 10 times
355 for i in {1..10}; do
356
python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee final$i.log
357 done
358 ```
359
360 ### Actions 11-13: Analysis
361
362 - Calculate mean and std across runs
363 - Verify improvement ≥5% over baseline
364 - Check variance (std < 20% of mean)
365 - Look for warnings/errors
366
367 ### Actions 14-15: Final adjustments
368
369 - If variance too high: Add more regularization
370 - If performance dropped: Revert last change
371 - Document final configuration
372
373 ## KEY PRINCIPLES
374
375 1. **SPEED TO BASELINE**: <10 actions ideal, <15 maximum
376 2. **GENERALIZATION FIRST**: Every improvement should help meta-test
377 3. **NORMALIZE EVERYTHING**: Inputs, targets, rewards, advantages, observations
378 4. **VARIANCE IS KEY**: Low variance = good generalization
379 5. **DOMAIN ADAPTIVE**: Use proven techniques for each field
380 6. **ONE CHANGE RULE**: Never combine without individual testing
381 7. **VALIDATE RIGOROUSLY**: Multiple runs confirm real improvements
382 8. **SIMPLICITY WINS**: Basic techniques beat complex hacks
383
384 ## ANTI-PATTERNS
385
386 ✗Spending >15 actions on baseline
387 ✗Complex changes without understanding
388 ✗Optimizing training metrics over validation
389 ✗Removing regularization to boost performance
390 ✗Multiple simultaneous changes
391 ✗Ignoring variance
392 ✗Not validating improvements
393
394 ## SUCCESS CRITERIA
395
396 ✓Baseline in <15 actions
397 ✓Domain identified correctly
398 ✓5-15 improvements tested
399 ✓Best config validated (10 runs)
83


--- Page 84 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
400 ✓Improvement ≥5% over baseline
401 ✓Low variance (std < 20% mean)
402 ✓Simple, generalizable solution
403 ✓Strong meta-test performance
404
405 **REMEMBER:** Fast baseline →Generalization-focused improvements →Rigorous validation. Your goal is
META-TEST performance. Normalize aggressively, regularize heavily, validate thoroughly.
N.3.3. PROMPT FROM 10 TASKS
1 You are an algorithm discovery agent. Your ONE goal: get code running on all meta-train tasks.
2
3 === CRITICAL: ACT FAST ===
4
5 You have limited budget. Spend it wisely:
6 - 15% exploring and finding entry point
7 - 60% running and fixing errors
8 - 20% improvements (only if baseline works)
9 - 5% final validation
10
11 === STEP 1: FIND ENTRY POINT (Quick!) ===
12
13 ```bash
14 ls -R
15 ```
16
17 Look for main files:
18 ```bash
19 find . -name "*.py" -type f | grep -E "(main|train|run|experiment)" | head -10
20 ```
21
22 Pick the most likely file (usually train.py or main.py), read it:
23 - Find `if __name__ == "__main__":`
24 - See what imports it needs
25 - Check what arguments it takes
26
27 === STEP 2: RUN IT NOW ===
28
29 Try running immediately with the simplest command:
30 ```bash
31 python <main_file>.py
32 ```
33
34 If it needs args, try:
35 ```bash
36 python <main_file>.py --help
37 ```
38
39 Then run with minimal args.
40
41 === STEP 3: FIX ERRORS FAST ===
42
43 When error occurs:
44
45 1. Read LAST LINE of error
46 2. Find the error in YOUR code (not library code)
47 3. Apply IMMEDIATE fix:
48
49 **ImportError/ModuleNotFoundError**:
50 →Add `import X` at top of file
51
52 **NameError** (variable not defined):
84


--- Page 85 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
53 →Common fixes:
54 ```python
55 device = torch.device('cuda' if torch.cuda.is_available() else 'cpu')
56 model = Model().to(device)
57 criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss()
58 optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=0.001)
59 ```
60
61 **FileNotFoundError**:
62 →Check path with `ls`, fix it
63
64 **AttributeError**:
65 →Check object type, use correct method
66
67 **IndentationError**:
68 →Fix spacing (4 spaces)
69
70 **TypeError/ValueError**:
71 →Convert types: int(), float(), .item(), .detach()
72
73 4. Run SAME command again immediately
74 5. If SAME error 3 times: Try DIFFERENT fix
75 6. If stuck after 6 tries: Try DIFFERENT way to run the code entirely
76
77 === STEP 4: RUN ALL TASKS ===
78
79 Once ONE task works, run on ALL meta-train tasks.
80 Fix any new errors (max 3 tries each).
81
82 **SUCCESS = all tasks complete without errors**
83
84 === STEP 5: IMPROVE (Only if baseline works!) ===
85
86 Look at metrics, make ONE improvement:
87
88 **Continual Learning** (AA < 0.3):
89 →Add replay buffer before task loop:
90 ```python
91 import random
92 replay = []
93 # In training loop:
94 if len(replay) < 200:
95
replay.append((x.clone().cpu(), y.clone().cpu()))
96 if task_id > 0 and replay:
97
idx = random.sample(range(len(replay)), min(32, len(replay)))
98
rx = torch.stack([replay[i][0] for i in idx]).to(device)
99
ry = torch.stack([replay[i][1] for i in idx]).to(device)
100
loss = loss + criterion(model(rx), ry)
101 ```
102
103 **RL/Vision/Language** (crashes, NaN):
104 →Add after loss.backward():
105 ```python
106 torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
107 ```
108
109 **BayesOpt** (poor results):
110 →In acquisition function, change `beta * std` to `1.2 * beta * std`
111
112 **Regression** (MSE varies 100x):
113 →Normalize per task:
114 ```python
115 mean, std = y_train.mean(), y_train.std() + 1e-8
116 y_norm = (y_train - mean) / std
117 # Train on y_norm, save mean/std
85


--- Page 86 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
118 # At test: y_pred * std + mean
119 ```
120
121 Test improvement on 2-3 tasks. Keep if better, revert if not.
122
123 === RULES ===
124
125 1. **Run code within first 15% of budget**
126 2. **One fix per error - test immediately**
127 3. **If stuck: try different approach**
128 4. **Working baseline > perfect algorithm**
129 5. **Watch budget - stop if <10%**
130
131 **ACT →FIX →VALIDATE →IMPROVE**
N.3.4. PROMPT FROM 30 TASKS
1 You are an algorithm discovery agent optimizing for META-TEST generalization across diverse tasks.
2
3 === MISSION ===
4
5 Develop algorithms that GENERALIZE to unseen test scenarios. Your success is measured by meta-test
performance, not training metrics.
6
7 **Core Priorities:**
8 1. **Fast baseline** - Get working code in <10 actions
9 2. **Generalization first** - Every change should improve robustness
10 3. **Low variance** - Stable performance beats high but unstable results
11 4. **Adaptive strategy** - Adjust approach based on remaining budget
12
13 === ADAPTIVE THREE-PHASE APPROACH ===
14
15 **Phase 1: RAPID BASELINE (5-15 actions)**
16 **Phase 2: GENERALIZATION-FOCUSED IMPROVEMENTS (remaining - 15)**
17 **Phase 3: VALIDATION (final 15)**
18
19 === PHASE 1: RAPID BASELINE ===
20
21 **Actions 1-3: IMMEDIATE EXECUTION**
22
23 ```bash
24 # Action 1: Quick survey + immediate run
25 ls -la && cat README* 2>/dev/null | head -30 && python train.py 2>&1 | tee run1.log
26
27 # Action 2: Alternative entry points
28 python main.py 2>&1 | tee run2.log || bash run.sh 2>&1 | tee run2.log
29
30 # Action 3: More alternatives
31 python src/train.py 2>&1 | tee run3.log || python experiment.py 2>&1 | tee run3.log
32 ```
33
34 **SUCCESS**: If any produces metrics →**Jump to Phase 2**
35
36 **Actions 4-7: TARGETED FIXES (only if needed)**
37
38 ```bash
39 # Action 4: Install dependencies + retry best candidate
40 pip install -q torch numpy scipy scikit-learn gymnasium minatar gpytorch botorch 2>/dev/null
41 [ -f requirements.txt ] && pip install -q -r requirements.txt
42 python <best_command_from_1-3> 2>&1 | tee retry.log
43
44 # Action 5: Check for TODOs if still failing
86


--- Page 87 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
45 grep -rn "TODO\|NotImplementedError" --include="*.py" . | head -20
46 cat <file_with_most_todos>.py
47
48 # Action 6: Fix specific error (ONE per action)
49 # ModuleNotFoundError: pip install <module> && retry
50 # CUDA error: export CUDA_VISIBLE_DEVICES="" && retry
51 # FileNotFoundError: find . -name "*<file>*" && mkdir -p <path> && retry
52
53 # Action 7: Read key algorithm file to understand what to implement
54 find . -name "*algorithm*.py" -o -name "*model*.py" | head -1 | xargs cat | head -150
55 ```
56
57 **Actions 8-12: MINIMAL IMPLEMENTATIONS (if TODOs exist)**
58
59 **UNIVERSAL TEMPLATE - Use for ANY domain:**
60
61 ```python
62 import torch
63 import torch.nn as nn
64 import numpy as np
65
66 # === NEURAL NETWORK (with built-in generalization) ===
67 class GeneralizableNetwork(nn.Module):
68
def __init__(self, input_dim, output_dim, hidden_dim=128, dropout=0.2):
69
super().__init__()
70
self.net = nn.Sequential(
71
nn.Linear(input_dim, hidden_dim),
72
nn.LayerNorm(hidden_dim),
# Stabilization
73
nn.ReLU(),
74
nn.Dropout(dropout),
# Regularization
75
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, hidden_dim),
76
nn.LayerNorm(hidden_dim),
77
nn.ReLU(),
78
nn.Dropout(dropout),
79
nn.Linear(hidden_dim, output_dim)
80
)
81
82
def forward(self, x):
83
return self.net(x)
84
85 # === TRAINING (with early stopping & regularization) ===
86 def train_model(model, train_loader, val_loader=None, epochs=50, lr=0.001, device='cpu'):
87
criterion = nn.CrossEntropyLoss(label_smoothing=0.1)
# or nn.MSELoss() for regression
88
optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(model.parameters(), lr=lr, weight_decay=0.01)
89
scheduler = torch.optim.lr_scheduler.ReduceLROnPlateau(optimizer, patience=5, factor=0.5)
90
91
best_val_loss = float('inf')
92
patience = 0
93
94
for epoch in range(epochs):
95
model.train()
96
for x, y in train_loader:
97
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
98
optimizer.zero_grad()
99
loss = criterion(model(x), y)
100
loss.backward()
101
torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
102
optimizer.step()
103
104
if val_loader:
105
model.eval()
106
val_loss = 0
107
with torch.no_grad():
108
for x, y in val_loader:
109
x, y = x.to(device), y.to(device)
87


--- Page 88 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
110
val_loss += criterion(model(x), y).item()
111
val_loss /= len(val_loader)
112
scheduler.step(val_loss)
113
114
if val_loss < best_val_loss:
115
best_val_loss = val_loss
116
patience = 0
117
else:
118
patience += 1
119
if patience >= 10:
120
break
121
return model
122
123 # === RL POLICY (with exploration support) ===
124 class RLPolicy(nn.Module):
125
def __init__(self, state_dim, action_dim, hidden=128):
126
super().__init__()
127
self.net = nn.Sequential(
128
nn.Linear(state_dim, hidden),
129
nn.LayerNorm(hidden),
130
nn.Tanh(),
131
nn.Dropout(0.1),
132
nn.Linear(hidden, hidden),
133
nn.LayerNorm(hidden),
134
nn.Tanh(),
135
nn.Dropout(0.1),
136
nn.Linear(hidden, action_dim)
137
)
138
def forward(self, x): return self.net(x)
139
140 # === BAYESIAN OPT: Acquisition ===
141 def acquisition_ucb(mean, std, kappa=2.0):
142
return mean + kappa * std
143
144 def acquisition_ei(mean, std, best_y, xi=0.01):
145
from scipy.stats import norm
146
improvement = mean - best_y - xi
147
Z = improvement / (std + 1e-9)
148
return improvement * norm.cdf(Z) + std * norm.pdf(Z)
149 ```
150
151 **Action 13-15: VERIFY & BASELINE**
152
153 ```bash
154 # Action 13: Verify implementation compiles
155 python -m py_compile <implemented_file>.py
156
157 # Action 14: Run to establish baseline
158 python <working_command> 2>&1 | tee baseline.log
159
160 # Action 15: Second run to check variance
161 python <working_command> 2>&1 | tee baseline2.log
162 ```
163
164 **CRITICAL**: By Action 15, must have numerical output or reassess approach.
165
166 === PHASE 2: GENERALIZATION-FOCUSED IMPROVEMENTS ===
167
168 **First Action: IDENTIFY DOMAIN & ANALYZE**
169
170 From baseline output:
171 - **Domain**: Classification (f1/acc), Regression (mse/mae), RL (return/reward), BayesOpt (maximum_value),
LM (perplexity), UED (solve_rate)
172 - **Metrics**: Record baseline values and variance
173 - **Overfitting signs**: Large train/val gap? High variance?
88


--- Page 89 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
174
175 **IMPROVEMENT PROTOCOL:**
176
177 **RULES:**
178 1. ONE change per action
179 2. Test immediately
180 3. Keep if: (a) meta-train improves ≥2% OR (b) variance reduces ≥20%
181 4. Revert if worse or no improvement
182 5. After 3 failures →switch category
183 6. **GENERALIZATION FOCUS**: Prioritize techniques that reduce overfitting
184
185 **TIER 1: UNIVERSAL GENERALIZATION (try FIRST)**
186
187 1. **Normalize inputs**
188 ```python
189 X_mean, X_std = X.mean(0, keepdims=True), X.std(0, keepdims=True) + 1e-8
190 X_norm = (X - X_mean) / X_std
191 ```
192
193 2. **Increase regularization**
194 ```python
195 # Increase weight_decay: 0.01 →0.05 →0.1
196 optimizer = torch.optim.Adam(params, lr=lr, weight_decay=0.05)
197 ```
198
199 3. **Increase dropout**
200 ```python
201 # Increase dropout: 0.1 →0.2 →0.3
202 ```
203
204 4. **Add gradient clipping** (if missing)
205 ```python
206 torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 1.0)
207 ```
208
209 5. **Reduce learning rate**
210 ```python
211 lr = current_lr * 0.5
# or 0.3
212 ```
213
214 **TIER 2: DOMAIN-SPECIFIC GENERALIZATION**
215
216 **REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (Current Task - Special Focus):**
217
218 **Priority order for RL generalization:**
219
220 1. **Observation normalization** (CRITICAL)
221 ```python
222 # Running normalization of observations
223 obs_mean = running_mean(observations)
224 obs_std = running_std(observations) + 1e-8
225 normalized_obs = (obs - obs_mean) / obs_std
226 ```
227
228 2. **Reward normalization/clipping** (prevents reward scale issues)
229 ```python
230 # Normalize rewards
231 reward_mean = rewards.mean()
232 reward_std = rewards.std() + 1e-8
233 normalized_rewards = (rewards - reward_mean) / reward_std
234
235 # OR clip rewards
236 clipped_rewards = np.clip(rewards, -10, 10)
237 ```
238
89


--- Page 90 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
239 3. **Entropy regularization** (encourages exploration)
240 ```python
241 # In policy loss
242 entropy = -(log_probs * probs).sum(dim=-1).mean()
243 loss = policy_loss - 0.01 * entropy
# Increase to 0.02 or 0.05 if needed
244 ```
245
246 4. **Advantage normalization** (reduces variance)
247 ```python
248 advantages = (advantages - advantages.mean()) / (advantages.std() + 1e-8)
249 ```
250
251 5. **Lower learning rate** (more stable learning)
252 ```python
253 lr = 0.0001
# or current_lr * 0.3
254 ```
255
256 6. **Increase discount factor** (value longer-term rewards)
257 ```python
258 gamma = 0.99
# if currently lower, or try 0.995
259 ```
260
261 7. **Add value function normalization**
262 ```python
263 # Normalize value targets
264 value_targets = (returns - returns.mean()) / (returns.std() + 1e-8)
265 ```
266
267 8. **Gradient clipping** (reduce to prevent instability)
268 ```python
269 torch.nn.utils.clip_grad_norm_(model.parameters(), 0.5)
# or 0.3
270 ```
271
272 9. **Increase training epochs per update** (better policy learning)
273 ```python
274 epochs_per_update = 10
# if currently 4, try increasing
275 ```
276
277 10. **Add GAE (Generalized Advantage Estimation)** if not present
278 ```python
279 def compute_gae(rewards, values, gamma=0.99, lam=0.95):
280
advantages = []
281
gae = 0
282
for t in reversed(range(len(rewards))):
283
delta = rewards[t] + gamma * values[t+1] - values[t]
284
gae = delta + gamma * lam * gae
285
advantages.insert(0, gae)
286
return advantages
287 ```
288
289 **CLASSIFICATION (F1/Accuracy):**
290
291 1. **Label smoothing**: `nn.CrossEntropyLoss(label_smoothing=0.1)`
292 2. **Mixup augmentation**: `x = lam*x1 + (1-lam)*x2`
293 3. **Class weights**: For imbalanced data
294 4. **Ensemble**: 3 models, average predictions
295
296 **REGRESSION (MSE/MAE):**
297
298 1. **Target normalization**: `y_norm = (y - y.mean()) / y.std()` (denormalize!)
299 2. **Huber loss**: `nn.SmoothL1Loss()`
300 3. **Ensemble**: 3 models, average
301 4. **Feature standardization**: Per-dimension
302
303 **BAYESIAN OPTIMIZATION:**
90


--- Page 91 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
304
305 1. **Normalize objectives**: `y_norm = (y - y.mean()) / y.std()`
306 2. **More initial samples**: `n_init = max(10*dim, 20)`
307 3. **Latin Hypercube Sampling**: Better coverage
308 4. **Conservative exploration**: `kappa=2.0` (UCB) or `xi=0.01` (EI)
309 5. **ARD kernel**: `RBFKernel(ard_num_dims=input_dim)`
310
311 **LANGUAGE MODELING:**
312
313 1. **Layer normalization**: `nn.LayerNorm()`
314 2. **Weight tying**: Share embedding & output weights
315 3. **Cosine schedule**: `CosineAnnealingLR()`
316 4. **Gradient accumulation**: Larger effective batch
317
318 **ENVIRONMENT DESIGN:**
319
320 1. **Diversity metrics**: Reward environment diversity
321 2. **Curriculum learning**: Progressive difficulty
322 3. **Multiple evaluation seeds**: Test robustness
323 4. **Regularize complexity**: Penalize overly complex envs
324
325 **VALIDATION EVERY 5 IMPROVEMENTS:**
326
327 ```bash
328 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val1.log
329 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val2.log
330 python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee val3.log
331 ```
332
333 Check:
334 - Improvement stable across runs?
335 - Variance acceptable (std < 20% mean)?
336 - No degradation in any metric?
337
338 **ADAPTIVE STRATEGY:**
339
340 - If budget > 100 remaining: Try 10-15 improvements
341 - If budget 50-100: Try 5-8 improvements
342 - If budget < 50: Try 3-5 most promising
343 - Always leave 15 actions for validation
344
345 === PHASE 3: VALIDATION & STABILITY ===
346
347 **Final 15 actions:**
348
349 **Actions 1-10: Stability testing**
350
351 ```bash
352 # Run best config 10 times
353 for i in {1..10}; do
354
python <best_command> 2>&1 | tee final$i.log
355 done
356 ```
357
358 **Actions 11-13: Analysis**
359
360 - Calculate mean and std across runs
361 - Verify improvement ≥5% over baseline
362 - Check variance (std < 20% of mean)
363 - Look for warnings/errors
364
365 **Actions 14-15: Final adjustments**
366
367 - If variance too high: Add more regularization
368 - If performance dropped: Revert last change
91


--- Page 92 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
369 - Document final configuration
370
371 === KEY PRINCIPLES ===
372
373 1. **SPEED TO BASELINE**: <10 actions ideal, <15 maximum
374 2. **GENERALIZATION FIRST**: Every improvement should help meta-test
375 3. **NORMALIZE EVERYTHING**: Inputs, targets, rewards, advantages, observations
376 4. **VARIANCE IS KEY**: Low variance = good generalization
377 5. **DOMAIN ADAPTIVE**: Use proven techniques for each field
378 6. **ONE CHANGE RULE**: Never combine without individual testing
379 7. **VALIDATE RIGOROUSLY**: Multiple runs confirm real improvements
380 8. **SIMPLICITY WINS**: Basic techniques beat complex hacks
381
382 === ANTI-PATTERNS ===
383
384 ✗Spending >15 actions on baseline
385 ✗Complex changes without understanding
386 ✗Optimizing training metrics over validation
387 ✗Removing regularization to boost performance
388 ✗Multiple simultaneous changes
389 ✗Ignoring variance
390 ✗Not validating improvements
391
392 === SUCCESS CRITERIA ===
393
394 ✓Baseline in <15 actions
395 ✓Domain identified correctly
396 ✓5-15 improvements tested
397 ✓Best config validated (10 runs)
398 ✓Improvement ≥5% over baseline
399 ✓Low variance (std < 20% mean)
400 ✓Simple, generalizable solution
401 ✓Strong meta-test performance
402
403 REMEMBER: Fast baseline →Generalization-focused improvements →Rigorous validation. Your goal is META-
TEST performance. Normalize aggressively, regularize heavily, validate thoroughly.
92


--- Page 93 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
O. Task Prompts
For procedural generation, we automatically build a task description which can be fed to an agent. The task description
covers four things: a high-level overview of algorithm discovery; a description of the task domain; information about each
of the editable modules, including what purpose it serves and what interface it must have; and descriptions of each dataset in
meta-training. We provide all of these descriptions below.
Algorithm Discovery Description
1 Automated algorithm discovery is a branch of machine learning focused on using computational search to
create new, high-performance algorithms. Unlike traditional algorithm design, which relies on human
creativity and expertise, this field automates the process of invention by systematically exploring a
vast space of possible programs. The core idea is that a system generates candidate algorithms,
evaluates their performance on benchmark tasks, and uses these results as feedback to guide the
search towards more effective and efficient solutions.
2
3 Historically, automated algorithm discovery draws inspiration from evolutionary computation and genetic
programming, which apply principles of natural selection to evolve computer programs. Early
formalizations in the 1980s and 1990s established methods for representing algorithms as structures,
like trees or graphs, that could be modified and combined. The generate-evaluate-refine loop-where a
system proposes an algorithm, tests its correctness and efficiency, and iteratively improves it-
remains central to all automated discovery frameworks.
4
5 In practice, automated algorithm discovery has been used to find faster sorting and hashing routines,
optimize fundamental computations like matrix multiplication, and design novel neural network
architectures. Here, the objective is to discover new machine learning algorithms. To do so, files
have been created in `discovered/` which you can use to implement new algorithms. The algorithms
implemented in `discovered/` will eventually be tested for the ability to generalise. For testing,
these algorithms will be run with code that has the exact same format as that in the task folders
shared with you. Therefore, it is important that any algorithms you implement maintain the exact same
interface as that provided.
6
7 Below, we provide a description of the domain of machine learning in which you will be discovering
algorithms.
O.1. Bayesian Optimisation
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Bayesian Optimisation (BO) is a branch of machine learning that aims to find the maximum of an expensive
black-box function whose gradient is unknown. It does so by constructing a surrogate model (a
probabilistic approximation of the objective function) that quantifies both predicted performance and
uncertainty. Using this model, BO selects new evaluation points through an acquisition function that
balances exploration of uncertain regions with exploitation of promising areas.
2
3 The process begins with an initial set of samples, often chosen to cover the search space effectively
using methods such as Latin hypercube or Sobol sampling. These samples are used to fit the surrogate
model, typically via maximum likelihood estimation or Bayesian inference over model parameters. The
surrogate is then iteratively updated as new data become available.
4
5 In the past, Gaussian Processes (GPs) have been the most common choice of Surrogate Model, offering a
flexible non-parametric prior over functions. Variants employ different kernels (e.g., Matern, RBF,
periodic), or combinations of kernels, and mean functions to capture diverse function classes.
Extensions handle heteroscedastic noise or non-stationarity. For higher-dimensional or data-rich
settings, scalable alternatives such as random forests (SMAC), Bayesian neural networks, and deep
kernel learning have been proposed. Other researchers have explored parametric surrogates or hybrid
models to improve scalability and adaptivity.
6
7 The choice of input parameterisation has a large influence on BO performance. Transformations such as log-
scaling, normalization, or learned input warping (e.g., the Warped GP approach) can make the function
easier to model. Structured kernels or embeddings can also encode domain knowledge or correlations
93


--- Page 94 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
between inputs, improving sample efficiency.
8
9 The acquisition function determines where to evaluate the objective next. It embeds the surrogate model
and assigns each candidate input a scalar utility reflecting both its uncertainty and its predicted
value. Common acquisition functions include Expected Improvement (EI), Upper Confidence Bound (UCB),
and Probability of Improvement (PI). Variants such as Entropy Search, Predictive Entropy Search, and
Knowledge Gradient explicitly account for information gain.
10
11 Given the acquisition landscape, the next query function selects the actual input(s) to evaluate, often
by maximizing the acquisition function. Extensions to batch or multi-step lookahead settings select
multiple or future evaluations jointly, considering correlations and proximity between proposed
points. In batch BO, researchers have proposed strategies to encourage diversity among selected
points.
12
13 Bayesian Optimisation has been widely used in hyperparameter tuning of machine learning models, materials
and drug discovery, engineering design, and experimental control-anywhere function evaluations are
costly or noisy. Its success depends on careful choices of surrogate model, acquisition function,
input representation, and initial sampling strategy, all of which shape the efficiency and accuracy
of the optimisation process.
14
15 Below, we provide a description of the environments (objective functions) that you can use to develop an
algorithm to maximise black-box objectives. Even though you might know the points that maximise the
training objective functions, be aware that any code you develop will be applied to other BO
objective functions and that you will be assessed on your performance on these held-out tasks - hence
, ensure that the algorithm is generaliseable.
DATASET: ACKLEY1D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Ackley function in 1D is a classic optimization benchmark featuring a single global maximum
surrounded by numerous local maxima. The function's characteristic structure-a nearly flat outer
region with many small peaks-makes it ideal for testing an algorithm's ability to explore the search
space and escape from suboptimal solutions.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 1D
6 Domain: x
[-32.768, 32.768]
7 Global maximum: x = 0
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 One global maximum
11 Many regularly spaced local maxima
12 Nearly flat outer region that becomes highly multimodal near the center
13 Tests exploration capability and local optima avoidance
DATASET: ACKLEY2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Ackley function in 2D extends the 1D variant to a two-dimensional search space. It maintains
the characteristic nearly flat outer region with a central area containing many local peaks
surrounding a single global maximum. This benchmark is widely used to evaluate Bayesian optimization
algorithms' ability to balance exploration and exploitation.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: [x1, x2]
[-32.768, 32.768]2
7 Global maximum: [0, 0]
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 One global maximum at the origin
94


--- Page 95 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
11 Many local maxima arranged in a regular pattern
12 Exponentially decaying oscillations from the center
13 Tests systematic exploration and escape from local optima
DATASET: BRANIN2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Branin function is a 2D benchmark with an asymmetric search domain and three global maxima of
equal value. The function's multiple optima and structured landscape make it valuable for testing
whether optimization algorithms can identify all high-value regions rather than converging
prematurely to a single solution.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: x1
[-5, 10], x2
[0, 15]
7 Global maxima: Three locations with equal optimal values
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Three global maxima of identical value
11 Smooth, bowl-shaped structure
12 Asymmetric domain boundaries
13 Tests multi-modal optimization and thorough exploration
DATASET: BUKIN2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Bukin function features a narrow, curved ridge that leads to a single global maximum. The
function's steep gradients and irregular terrain make it particularly challenging for optimization
algorithms, testing their ability to navigate difficult landscapes with precision and maintain
progress along constrained paths.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: x1
[-15, -5], x2
[-3, 3]
7 Global maximum: Located along a curved ridge
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Single global maximum on a narrow curved ridge
11 Very steep gradients in one direction
12 Asymmetric and irregular landscape
13 Tests precision, robustness, and handling of difficult geometries
DATASET: COSINE8D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Cosine function in 8D is a high-dimensional periodic benchmark with a single global maximum
and many regularly spaced local maxima. The function's dimensionality and multimodality test whether
Bayesian optimization algorithms can scale effectively to higher dimensions while managing the curse
of dimensionality.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 8D
6 Domain: x
[-1, 1]8
7 Global maximum: At the origin
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Single global maximum
11 Many regularly spaced local maxima due to periodic structure
95


--- Page 96 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
12 Relatively compact domain
13 Tests high-dimensional optimization and scaling behavior
DATASET: DROPWAVE2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Dropwave function is a symmetric 2D benchmark characterized by a central peak surrounded by
concentric ripples of decreasing amplitude. The regular, repetitive structure creates multiple local
maxima arranged in a symmetric pattern, testing an algorithm's ability to navigate smooth but highly
multimodal landscapes.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: [x1, x2]
[-5.12, 5.12]2
7 Global maximum: [0, 0]
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 One global maximum at the origin
11 Radially symmetric ripple pattern
12 Multiple regularly spaced local maxima
13 Tests handling of smooth, repetitive landscapes
DATASET: EGGHOLDER2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Eggholder function is one of the most challenging 2D optimization benchmarks, featuring a
highly non-convex, rugged landscape with deep valleys and sharp peaks. The function's deceptive
structure-where many deep local maxima can mislead optimization algorithms away from the global
optimum-makes it an excellent test of robustness and exploration strategy.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: [x1, x2]
[-512, 512]2
7 Global maximum: Located in a difficult-to-find region
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 One global maximum among many deep local maxima
11 Highly non-convex and irregular landscape
12 Large search domain with deceptive structure
13 Tests exploration in rugged, complex terrains
DATASET: GRIEWANK5D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Griewank function in 5D combines a quadratic component with a product of cosine terms,
creating a smooth landscape with many regularly distributed local maxima. The function becomes
increasingly difficult as dimensionality increases, making it useful for testing how Bayesian
optimization algorithms balance broad exploration with fine-grained exploitation.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 5D
6 Domain: x
[-600, 600]5
7 Global maximum: At the origin
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 One global maximum at the origin
11 Many regularly spaced local maxima
12 Smooth oscillatory surface
96


--- Page 97 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
13 Large search domain tests long-range exploration
DATASET: HARTMANN6D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Hartmann function in 6D is a standard benchmark for moderate-dimensional optimization,
consisting of a sum of Gaussian peaks with different heights and locations. With six local maxima and
one global maximum, the function tests an algorithm's ability to distinguish between similarly-
valued regions and converge to the true optimum in higher dimensions.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 6D
6 Domain: x
[0, 1]6
7 Global maximum: One location among six local maxima
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Six local maxima of varying heights
11 One global maximum
12 Smooth Gaussian-like structure
13 Standard test for moderate-dimensional BO algorithms
DATASET: HOLDERTABLE2D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated HolderTable function features four global maxima of equal value arranged symmetrically across
the search domain. The function's complex structure with multiple equivalent optimal solutions makes
it valuable for testing whether optimization algorithms can identify all high-value regions and
understand the symmetric nature of the objective.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 2D
6 Domain: [x1, x2]
[-10, 10]2
7 Global maxima: Four symmetrically located points with equal values
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Four global maxima of identical value
11 Symmetric structure
12 Complex landscape with sharp features
13 Tests identification of multiple equivalent optima
DATASET: LEVY6D
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The negated Levy function in 6D features a single global maximum surrounded by a rugged landscape of many
local maxima. The function's high dimensionality combined with its multimodal, irregular structure
makes it challenging for optimization algorithms, requiring both broad exploration to avoid local
traps and precise local search to converge accurately.
3
4 SEARCH SPACE
5 Dimensionality: 6D
6 Domain: x
[-10, 10]6
7 Global maximum: Single location in a complex landscape
8
9 CHARACTERISTICS
10 Single global maximum
11 Many local maxima distributed throughout the domain
12 Rugged, irregular surface structure
13 Tests high-dimensional exploration and fine local search
97


--- Page 98 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
ACQ FN PROMPT
1 You should change the acquisition function file, which can be found in `acq_fn.py`. Implement a single,
differentiable acquisition function that computes scalar utilities from the surrogate mean and
variance, returning a 1D jnp.ndarray. The acquisition function must be numerically stable, fully
differentiable, and shape-consistent. All fixed design choices should be defined directly in the
function, rather than in the config.
ACQ OPTIMIZER PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer file, which can be found in `acq_optimizer.py`. The acquisition function
optimizer is used to globally optimise the acquisition function over a set of candidate points. The
query may then be further optimised by implementing local, gradient-based optimisation at the top N
points, for example.
DOMAIN PROMPT
1 You should change the domain file, which can be found in `domain.py`. Implement a single, consistent
sampling method that produces samples in [0, 1] space, ensuring that transformations are vectorised,
stable, and reversible. The sampler should be deterministic when a seed is provided. Ensure correct
dtype handling, reproducibility, and compatibility with the surrogate model's input scale.
NEXT QUERIES PROMPT
1 You should change the next queries file, which can be found in `next_queries.py`. The function should
output one or a batch of points at which you would like to evaluate the objective function. Your
overall budget is fixed, i.e. choosing in a batch will not increase your overall budget.
SURROGATE OPTIMIZER PROMPT
1 You should change the surrogate optimizer file, which can be found in `surrogate_optimizer.py`. You
should change the surrogate optimizer builder so it returns a stable optax.GradientTransformation for
fitting the surrogate model. The optimizer type and learning rate can be fixed directly in the
function. It must integrate cleanly with the fit_posterior loop and support smooth convergence.
SURROGATE PROMPT
1 You should change the surrogate file, which can be found in `surrogate.py`. You should implement one
concrete, fully-defined surrogate model. The predict function should always accept X and y as inputs,
even if you choose to ignore them within the prediction function (e.g. if you choose to define a
parametric surrogate model). The surrogate must predict both a mean and a variance (to quantify
uncertainty). Implement setup, neg_log_likelihood, and predict functions, ensure consistent tensor
shapes and numerical stability. Any kernel, network architecture, or other modelling choices should
be fixed within the surrogate itself, rather than in the config.
O.2. Brain Speech Detection
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Brain speech detection is a classification task in computational neuroscience that aims to determine
whether the brain is actively processing speech or silence, using neural signals as the sole input.
98


--- Page 99 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
This binary decision problem serves as a foundational step toward more complex neural decoding
applications, such as identifying which speaker a listener is attending to in multi-talker scenarios,
tracking speech intelligibility in real time, or enabling adaptive hearing aid technologies that
respond to neural states.
2
3 In this work, we focus on magnetoencephalography (MEG) as the recording modality. MEG measures magnetic
fields produced by electrical currents in the brain with millisecond-scale temporal resolution,
making it particularly well-suited for capturing the rapid dynamics of auditory processing that are
difficult to observe with other noninvasive neuroimaging techniques such as fMRI. The high temporal
precision of MEG allows us to track moment-by-moment fluctuations in neural activity as listeners
process acoustic input.
4
5 The task is formulated as follows: given MEG signals recorded during a listening session, classify each
time window as corresponding to speech perception or silence. This framing provides a clean and
interpretable benchmark for evaluating computational models that aim to link acoustic features to
neural responses. Success in this task demonstrates that the model captures meaningful structure in
the relationship between auditory input and brain activity.
6
7 Historically, research in this area has been motivated by the goal of understanding how the brain
represents and processes speech, as well as by practical applications in assistive hearing
technologies. Early work focused on identifying neural signatures of speech perception using event-
related potentials and oscillatory activity. More recently, advances in machine learning have enabled
data-driven approaches that can decode speech-related information directly from neural recordings
without requiring hand-crafted features.
8
9 The objective of brain speech detection is to learn a mapping from MEG sensor measurements to binary
labels (speech or silence) that generalizes across different listeners, recording sessions, and
acoustic conditions. Models for this task range from classical signal processing techniques, which
extract spectral or temporal features from MEG data, to modern deep learning architectures, which
learn representations directly from raw or minimally preprocessed signals. Success requires balancing
the need for models that are expressive enough to capture complex neural-acoustic relationships with
the need for robustness and interpretability.
10
11 In practice, accurate brain speech detection has implications for brain-computer interfaces, clinical
assessment of auditory disorders, and the development of next-generation hearing aids that adapt to
the listener's neural state. Understanding the structure of MEG data, the temporal dynamics of
auditory processing, and the statistical properties of speech and silence are essential before
implementing a detection algorithm, as these factors shape how models learn and generalize.
12
13 Below, we provide a description of the dataset and experimental paradigm used in this work. However, be
aware that any methods you develop may be applied to other neural decoding tasks and recording
modalities as well.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK1
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock1 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
99


--- Page 100 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 1) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK2
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock2 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
100


--- Page 101 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 2) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK3
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock3 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 3) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
101


--- Page 102 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK4
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock4 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 4) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
102


--- Page 103 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK5
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock5 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 5) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK6
103


--- Page 104 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock6 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 6) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
DATASET: LIBRIBRAINSHERLOCK7
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LibriBrainSherlock7 is a neural decoding task using MEG recordings from a single participant listening to
one complete audiobook. The objective is to detect whether speech is present at each time point
based solely on brain activity patterns. This binary classification task serves as a foundational
benchmark for brain-to-speech decoding, testing whether neural signals contain sufficient information
to distinguish speech from silence or non-speech audio.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation consists of:
104


--- Page 105 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
6
7 MEG sensor recordings: Multi-channel time-series data from magnetometers and gradiometers
8 Temporal resolution: ~1ms sampling rate
9 Spatial coverage: Full-head sensor array
10 Feature options: Raw signals, filtered bands, or extracted features
11
12 TARGET SPACE
13 Binary labels indicating speech presence:
14
15 0: No speech (silence, pauses, or non-speech audio)
16 1: Speech present (any spoken content)
17
18 Labels are time-aligned with MEG recordings at millisecond precision.
19
20 TASK STRUCTURE
21 Input: MEG brain activity at time t
22 Output: Binary prediction of speech presence
23
24 DATASET STRUCTURE
25 Source: Single book (book 7) from LibriBrain dataset
26 Duration: Multiple hours of continuous recording
27 Train/test splits: A randomly selected chapter will act as the test split
28
29 EVALUATION METRICS
30 The primary evaluation metric is macro-F1 score, which balances performance across both classes (speech
and non-speech):
31
32 Macro-F1: Average of F1 scores for both classes (speech and non-speech)
33
34 F1_positive = 2
TP / (2
TP + FP + FN)
35 F1_negative = 2
TN / (2
TN + FN + FP)
36 Macro-F1 = 0.5
(F1_positive + F1_negative)
37
38 Threshold optimization: The classification threshold is tuned to maximize macro-F1 on the validation set
39
40 Candidate thresholds derived from precision-recall curve
41 Best threshold selected via vectorized evaluation across all candidates
42 Same threshold applied during test evaluation
43
44 This metric ensures balanced performance on both speech detection and silence/non-speech detection,
preventing models from simply predicting the majority class.
OPTIM PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer, which can be found in `optim.py`. In deep learning, optimization is used
to descend the gradient of a loss function with respect to the parameters of a neural network. The
name of the function should be `create_optimizer`, and this function should return an `Optimizer`
with functions including `zero_grad` and `step`. Besides this, you are allowed to make whatever
changes you like.
LOSS PROMPT
1 You should change the loss, which can be found in `loss.py`. In deep learning, the loss provides an
objective to minimize; You should not change the name of the function, `compute_loss`, or its inputs.
This function should return a scalar loss value.
NETWORK PROMPTS
105


--- Page 106 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1 You should change the network, which can be found in `networks.py`. In deep learning, the network
provides the architecture of the model, and specifies the number of parameters, width of layers, and
type of connections that those layers should have. You should not change the name or interface of the
function `Model`, or its inputs.
O.3. Computer Vision Classification
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Image classification is a branch of computer vision focused on training models to categorize visual
inputs into predefined classes. A digital image is a grid of pixels, where each pixel encodes color
information as numerical values. These values are stored in binary format in computers, representing
the intensity of color channels (typically red, green, and blue for RGB images). Unlike tasks that
require understanding spatial relationships or generating new content, image classification distills
an entire image into a single categorical label.
2
3 Historically, image classification draws from pattern recognition and statistical learning theory
developed in the mid-20th century. Early approaches relied on hand-crafted features-such as edges,
textures, and color histograms-combined with classical machine learning algorithms. The field was
revolutionized in 2012 when deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) achieved breakthrough
performance on the ImageNet dataset, demonstrating that hierarchical learned features could
dramatically outperform engineered ones. The image-to-label pipeline-where a model receives pixel
data as input and outputs class probabilities-remains central to modern approaches.
4
5 The objective of image classification is to learn a function that maps raw pixel values to class labels
with high accuracy. Models achieve this by learning hierarchical representations: early layers detect
low-level features like edges and colors, while deeper layers combine these into complex patterns
representing objects, textures, and semantic concepts. Success in image classification requires
sufficient training data, appropriate model architecture, and techniques to handle challenges like
class imbalance, domain shift, and adversarial perturbations.
6
7 In practice, image classification serves as a foundation for numerous applications including medical
diagnosis, autonomous vehicles, content moderation, and agricultural monitoring. Understanding the
properties of image data-resolution, color spaces, and dataset statistics-is essential before
implementing a classification system, as these factors influence model design and performance.
8
9 Below, we provide descriptions of the datasets which you will be training on. However, be aware that any
code you develop may be applied to other image classification datasets too.
DATASET: CIFAR10
1 DESCRIPTION
2 CIFAR-10 is a widely-used image classification benchmark consisting of 60,000 color images across 10
common object categories. Each image is 3232 pixels in RGB format. The dataset provides a balanced
training set and a carefully curated test set for evaluating classification performance on natural
images.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 32323 RGB image with pixel values in the range [0, 255], representing one of 10
object classes.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 10 classes:
9
10 0: airplane
11 1: automobile
12 2: bird
13 3: cat
14 4: deer
15 5: dog
106


--- Page 107 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
16 6: frog
17 7: horse
18 8: ship
19 9: truck
20
21 DATASET STRUCTURE
22 Training set: 50,000 images (5,000 per class)
23 Test set: 10,000 images (1,000 per class)
24 The training data is divided into 5 batches of 10,000 images each
25 Test set contains exactly 1,000 randomly-selected images per class
DATASET: CIFAR100
1 DESCRIPTION
2 CIFAR-100 is an extension of CIFAR-10 with 100 fine-grained classes, providing a more challenging
classification benchmark. Each image is 3232 pixels in RGB format. The classes are grouped into 20
superclasses for hierarchical classification tasks, with 5 fine classes per superclass.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 32323 RGB image with pixel values in the range [0, 255], representing one of 100
classes.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 100 fine-grained classes organized into 20 superclasses:
9
10 Aquatic mammals: beaver, dolphin, otter, seal, whale
11 Fish: aquarium fish, flatfish, ray, shark, trout
12 Flowers: orchids, poppies, roses, sunflowers, tulips
13 Food containers: bottles, bowls, cans, cups, plates
14 Fruit and vegetables: apples, mushrooms, oranges, pears, sweet peppers
15 Household electrical devices: clock, keyboard, lamp, telephone, television
16 Household furniture: bed, chair, couch, table, wardrobe
17 Insects: bee, beetle, butterfly, caterpillar, cockroach
18 Large carnivores: bear, leopard, lion, tiger, wolf
19 Large man-made outdoor things: bridge, castle, house, road, skyscraper
20 Large natural outdoor scenes: cloud, forest, mountain, plain, sea
21 Large omnivores and herbivores: camel, cattle, chimpanzee, elephant, kangaroo
22 Medium-sized mammals: fox, porcupine, possum, raccoon, skunk
23 Non-insect invertebrates: crab, lobster, snail, spider, worm
24 People: baby, boy, girl, man, woman
25 Reptiles: crocodile, dinosaur, lizard, snake, turtle
26 Small mammals: hamster, mouse, rabbit, shrew, squirrel
27 Trees: maple, oak, palm, pine, willow
28 Vehicles 1: bicycle, bus, motorcycle, pickup truck, train
29 Vehicles 2: lawn mower, rocket, streetcar, tank, tractor
30
31 DATASET STRUCTURE
32 Training set: 50,000 images (500 per class)
33 Test set: 10,000 images (100 per class)
DATASET: CIFAR10C
1 DESCRIPTION
2 CIFAR-10-C is a robustness benchmark derived from CIFAR-10, designed to evaluate model performance under
distribution shift. The dataset systematically applies 19 types of common corruptions to the original
CIFAR-10 test images at 5 different severity levels, creating realistic perturbations that models
may encounter in deployment.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 32323 RGB image that has been corrupted, with the same class labels as CIFAR-10.
107


--- Page 108 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
6
7 CORRUPTION TYPES
8 The dataset includes 19 corruption categories:
9
10 Noise: Gaussian, shot, impulse
11 Blur: defocus, glass, motion, zoom
12 Weather: snow, frost, fog, brightness
13 Digital: contrast, elastic, pixelate, JPEG compression, saturate, spatter
14
15 DATASET STRUCTURE
16 Total images: 950,000 (10,000 base images
19 corruptions
5 severity levels)
17 Severity levels: 1 (mild) to 5 (severe)
18 Same 10 classes as CIFAR-10
DATASET: CIFAR10LT
1 DESCRIPTION
2 CIFAR-10-LT is a long-tailed variant of CIFAR-10 designed to study learning under class imbalance. The
training set exhibits exponential decay in samples per class, simulating real-world scenarios where
some categories have significantly more data than others. The test set remains balanced to evaluate
performance across all classes.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 32323 RGB image with pixel values in the range [0, 255].
6
7 CLASSES
8 The same 10 classes as CIFAR-10, but with imbalanced training distribution.
9
10 DATASET STRUCTURE
11 Training set: fewer than 50,000 images with exponentially decreasing samples per class
12 Test set: 10,000 balanced images (1,000 per class)
13 Imbalance ratio varies based on configuration (typical ratios: 10, 50, or 100)
DATASET: FASHIONMNIST
1 DESCRIPTION
2 Fashion-MNIST is a drop-in replacement for the classic MNIST dataset, consisting of grayscale images of
fashion items. Designed as a more challenging alternative to handwritten digits, it maintains the
same data format and split structure, making it ideal for benchmarking machine learning algorithms on
a more complex task while keeping computational requirements modest.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 2828 grayscale image with pixel values in the range [0, 255], where higher values
represent darker pixels. Total of 784 pixels per image.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 10 fashion item categories:
9
10 0: T-shirt/top
11 1: Trouser
12 2: Pullover
13 3: Dress
14 4: Coat
15 5: Sandal
16 6: Shirt
17 7: Sneaker
18 8: Bag
19 9: Ankle boot
20
21 DATASET STRUCTURE
108


--- Page 109 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
22 Training set: 60,000 images (6,000 per class)
23 Test set: 10,000 images (1,000 per class)
DATASET: MNIST
1 DESCRIPTION
2 MNIST is the foundational handwritten digit recognition dataset, consisting of grayscale images extracted
from two NIST databases. The digits were written by Census Bureau employees and high school students
, providing natural variation in writing styles. Despite its age, MNIST remains a standard benchmark
for validating machine learning implementations.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 2828 grayscale image representing a handwritten digit (0-9), with pixel values
typically normalized to [0, 1] or kept in [0, 255] range.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 10 digit classes (0-9), with one class per digit.
9
10 DATASET STRUCTURE
11 Training set: 60,000 images (6,000 per class)
12 Test set: 10,000 images (1,000 per class)
13 Balanced distribution: each class contains exactly 7,000 images total
14 Equal representation of Census Bureau employees and high school students in both splits
DATASET: OXFORDFLOWERS
1 DESCRIPTION
2 Oxford Flowers 102 is a fine-grained visual classification dataset featuring 102 flower species commonly
found in the United Kingdom. The dataset presents significant challenges due to large variations in
scale, pose, lighting, and high inter-class similarity. It is widely used for evaluating fine-grained
recognition and transfer learning approaches.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a color image of variable size containing one or more flowers. Images exhibit natural
variation in composition, background, and lighting conditions.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 102 flower categories with high visual similarity between some species.
9
10 DATASET STRUCTURE
11 Total images: between 4,080 and 26,316 (40-258 images per class)
12 Class distribution is imbalanced
13 Images feature large within-class variation and between-class similarity
14 Typical splits: training, validation, and test sets provided
DATASET: STANFORDCARS
1 DESCRIPTION
2 Stanford Cars is a fine-grained vehicle classification dataset containing images of cars with class
labels defined at the Make-Model-Year level. The dataset captures significant intra-class variation
and inter-class similarity, making it challenging for distinguishing between visually similar car
models and years.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a color image of variable size showing a car, typically from various angles and in
different settings.
6
7 CLASSES
109


--- Page 110 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
8 The dataset contains 196 classes representing different car make-model-year combinations (e.g., 2012
Tesla Model S, 2012 BMW M3 coupe).
9
10 DATASET STRUCTURE
11 Training set: 8,144 images
12 Test set: 8,041 images
13 Approximately 50-50 split between training and testing within each class
14 Total: 16,185 images
DATASET: TINYIMAGENET
1 DESCRIPTION
2 Tiny ImageNet is a subset of the ImageNet dataset designed for faster experimentation while maintaining
classification complexity. It consists of 200 classes from the original ImageNet, with images
downsampled to 64x64 pixels. The dataset provides a middle ground between small-scale datasets like
CIFAR and full-scale ImageNet.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a 64x64x3 RGB color image representing one of 200 object classes.
6
7 CLASSES
8 The dataset contains 200 classes selected from ImageNet, covering diverse object categories.
9
10 DATASET STRUCTURE
11 Training set: 100,000 images (500 per class)
12 Validation set: 10,000 images (50 per class)
13 Test set: 10,000 images (50 per class)
14 Total: 120,000 images
OPTIM PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer, which can be found in `optim.py`. In deep learning, optimization is used
to descend the gradient of a loss function with respect to the parameters of a neural network. The
name of the function should be `create_optimizer`, and this function should return an `Optimizer`
with functions including `zero_grad` and `step`. Besides this, you are allowed to make whatever
changes you like.
LOSS PROMPT
1 You should change the loss, which can be found in `loss.py`. In deep learning, the loss provides an
objective to minimize; You should not change the name of the function, `compute_loss`, or its inputs.
This function should return a scalar loss value.
NETWORK PROMPTS
1 You should change the network, which can be found in `networks.py`. In deep learning, the network
provides the architecture of the model, and specifies the number of parameters, width of layers, and
type of connections that those layers should have. You should not change the name or interface of the
function `Model`, or its inputs.
PREPROCESS PROMPTS
1 You should change the image preprocessing, which can be found in `preprocess.py`. Image processing
involves the manipulation of digital images to enhance them, reshape them, or extract useful
110


--- Page 111 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
information. In image classification, it is crucial to have strong preprocessing which makes it
easier for learned classifiers to identify and categorize images, instead of working purely with raw
images.. You should not change the name or interface of the function `build_transforms`, and the
function should output two transformers for training set and test set, respectively.
O.4. Continual Learning
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 This task evaluates continual learning for image classification under non-stationary task sequences (e.g.,
class- or task-incremental). The harness fixes data loading, model interface, and training loop; LLM
-editable modules are regularization, replay, sampling, scheduling, and optimizer. Training proceeds
sequentially over tasks without revisiting prior task data (except via replay). We report per-task
accuracy, average accuracy, and forgetting/Backward Transfer from the final evaluation matrix. The
default backend uses a standard image backbone with a dynamic classifier head sized to all seen
classes.
DATASET: PERMUTEDMNIST
1 DESCRIPTION
2 PermutedMNIST is a continual learning benchmark that creates multiple tasks from the MNIST dataset by
applying fixed, deterministic pixel permutations. Each task uses the same 10-digit classes (0-9) but
reorders the 2828 pixel grid according to a unique permutation derived from a base seed. This
generates a sequence of tasks with identical label semantics but different input distributions,
making it ideal for evaluating continual learning algorithms' ability to handle distribution shift
without forgetting previously learned knowledge.
3
4 TASK STRUCTURE
5 Base dataset: MNIST (2828 grayscale images)
6 Number of tasks: Configurable (typically 10-20 tasks)
7 Classes per task: 10 (digits 0-9, consistent across all tasks)
8 Permutation: Unique, deterministic pixel reordering per task based on seed
9 Task identity: Not provided at test time (unless explicitly stated)
10
11 OBSERVATION SPACE
12 Each observation is a permuted 2828 grayscale image (784 pixels total) with pixel values in the range [0,
255] or normalized to [0, 1].
13
14 EVALUATION
15 The benchmark tests continual learning through several metrics:
16
17 Per-task accuracy: Classification accuracy on each individual task after training
18 Average accuracy: Mean accuracy across all tasks after sequential training
19 Forgetting: Degradation in performance on earlier tasks after learning new ones
20 Forward transfer: Ability to leverage prior knowledge for new tasks
21 Backward transfer: Improvement on past tasks from learning new ones
22
23 CHARACTERISTICS
24 Same label space across all tasks (no class incremental component)
25 Distribution shift through input transformation only
26 No correlation between task permutations (unless designed)
27 Tests pure robustness to catastrophic forgetting
28 Domain-incremental continual learning scenario
DATASET: SPLITCIFAR100
1 DESCRIPTION
111


--- Page 112 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
2 SplitCIFAR100 is a class-incremental continual learning benchmark that partitions the 100 classes of
CIFAR-100 into disjoint subsets, with each subset forming a separate task. The class assignment to
tasks is deterministic based on a seed, creating a sequence where the model must learn new classes
without forgetting previously learned ones. This benchmark tests class-incremental learning where
both the input distribution and the set of relevant classes change over time.
3
4 TASK STRUCTURE
5 Base dataset: CIFAR-100 (3232 RGB images, 100 classes)
6 Number of tasks: Configurable (commonly 10 tasks
10 classes each)
7 Classes per task: Disjoint subsets (e.g., 10, 20, or 50 classes per task)
8 Class order: Deterministic based on seed
9 Total classes: 100 across all tasks
10
11 OBSERVATION SPACE
12 Each observation is a 32323 RGB image from CIFAR-100, with classes divided among tasks.
13
14 EVALUATION
15 Standard continual learning metrics include:
16
17 Per-task accuracy: Performance on each task's classes after training
18 Average accuracy: Mean accuracy across all seen classes
19 Forgetting: Performance drop on earlier tasks' classes
20 Incremental accuracy curve: Accuracy trajectory as tasks are learned sequentially
21
22 CHARACTERISTICS
23 Class-incremental scenario (new classes introduced per task)
24 Disjoint class sets prevent overlap between tasks
25 Fixed input distribution (CIFAR-100) across tasks
26 Tests ability to expand classifier without catastrophic forgetting
27 No task boundaries provided at test time (unified classification)
DATASET: TINYIMAGENETSPLIT
1 DESCRIPTION
2 TinyImageNetSplit is a class-incremental continual learning benchmark constructed from Tiny ImageNet by
partitioning its 200 classes into disjoint task-specific groups. With higher resolution (6464) and
more classes than CIFAR-based benchmarks, it provides a more challenging testbed for continual
learning algorithms operating on natural images with greater visual complexity and diversity.
3
4 TASK STRUCTURE
5 Base dataset: Tiny ImageNet (6464 RGB images, 200 classes)
6 Number of tasks: Configurable (commonly 10 tasks
20 classes each)
7 Classes per task: Disjoint subsets (e.g., 10, 20, or 40 classes per task)
8 Image resolution: 64643 RGB
9 Total classes: 200 across all tasks
10
11 OBSERVATION SPACE
12 Each observation is a 64643 RGB image representing one of 200 object classes from ImageNet, divided among
sequential tasks.
13
14 EVALUATION
15 Standard continual learning evaluation includes:
16
17 Per-task accuracy: Classification accuracy on each task's class subset
18 Average accuracy: Mean performance across all learned classes
19 Forgetting metric: Degradation on earlier tasks after learning new ones
20 Final accuracy: Performance on all 200 classes after sequential training
21
22 CHARACTERISTICS
23 Class-incremental learning with disjoint class sets
24 Higher resolution than CIFAR-based benchmarks (6464 vs 3232)
25 Larger number of classes (200 total)
112


--- Page 113 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
26 Greater visual complexity and within-class variation
27 Tests scalability of continual learning to more realistic scenarios
28 Unified classification across all tasks at test time
REGULARIZER PROMPT
1 Implement a consolidation penalty to mitigate catastrophic forgetting across tasks.
2 - Maintain any needed task-wise statistics in on_task_start/on_task_end.
3 - compute_penalty(model, step) must be fast; avoid full-dataset passes.
4 - Examples: EWC-style quadratic penalty, L2 pull toward previous parameters, or Fisher/diagonal
approximations.
REPLAY PROMPT
1 Implement a replay buffer with reservoir sampling supporting add/sample/size.
2 - Store (x, y, task_id) triplets; keep memory bounded.
3 - sample(batch) should mix current data with buffer according to a ratio.
4 - Deterministic behavior under fixed seeds is preferred.
SAMPLER PROMPT
1 Mix the current batch with replay data at a fixed ratio.
2 - Handle empty buffer gracefully (fall back to current-only).
3 - Return a dict with keys: x (Tensor), y (Tensor), task_id (Tensor).
4 - Keep batch size consistent with cfg["training"]["batch_size"].
SCHEDULER PROMPT
1 Build a step-based LR scheduler with warmup plus cosine or step decay.
2 - Return an object exposing .step() per update; no metric dependence.
3 - For cosine: linear warmup to base LR, then cosine to zero.
4 - For step: linear warmup, then decay LR by gamma every step_size.
OPTIMIZER PROMPT
1 Build a torch optimizer from config.
2 - Support {"name": "sgd"|"adam"|"adamw"}; use momentum/nesterov for SGD; betas/eps for Adam/AdamW.
3 - Respect weight_decay and lr; return a ready-to-use optimizer over model parameters.
O.5. Greenhouse Gas Prediction
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Greenhouse gas forecasting is a branch of time series analysis focused on predicting future atmospheric
concentrations of climate-relevant gases based on historical measurements. Unlike static prediction
tasks, forecasting requires models to extrapolate beyond observed data, capturing both long-term
trends and periodic patterns to make accurate predictions about future states. The challenge lies in
learning from limited historical records to project concentrations years or decades ahead, requiring
knowledge of the systems and potentially leveraging inductive biases when developing the model.
2
3 Historically, atmospheric monitoring began in the late 1950s with pioneering measurements at remote
observatories designed to track changes in Earth's atmosphere away from local pollution sources.
113


--- Page 114 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Early analysis relied on simple trend fitting and seasonal decomposition methods. The field evolved
through classical time series techniques in the 1970s-1980s (ARIMA, exponential smoothing) to more
sophisticated statistical models incorporating domain knowledge about atmospheric processes. The core
task of observing historical concentrations, identifying patterns, and projecting future values
remains fundamental to climate science and policy planning.
4
5 The objective of greenhouse gas forecasting is to learn a function that maps temporal features to future
concentration values with minimal prediction error. Methods vary from classical statistical
approaches that explicitly model trend and seasonality components, to machine learning methods that
learn representations directly from data, to hybrid approaches that combine both paradigms. Success
in forecasting requires balancing model complexity with available data, capturing both secular trends
and cyclical patterns, and appropriately quantifying uncertainty in long-range predictions.
6
7 In practice, greenhouse gas forecasting supports climate modeling, policy evaluation, emissions
monitoring, and scientific understanding of atmospheric processes. The choice of modeling approach
should reflect the characteristics of the data-including temporal resolution, length of historical
record, strength of seasonal cycles, and smoothness of trends-as these factors fundamentally shape
what patterns can be learned and how far into the future accurate predictions remain possible.
8
9 Below, we provide descriptions of the datasets (time series of atmospheric gas concentrations) that you
can use to develop forecasting algorithms. While you will train on specific gases with known temporal
patterns, be aware that any code you develop may be applied to other atmospheric time series, and
you will be assessed on generalization to held-out datasets-hence, ensure that your approach is
adaptable to different temporal characteristics and forecast horizons.
DATASET: CH4
1 DESCRIPTION
2 This dataset contains monthly methane (CH4) concentration measurements from NOAA's Global Monitoring
Laboratory network, representing globally-averaged atmospheric levels from 1983 to 2014. Methane is a
potent greenhouse gas with both natural and anthropogenic sources, including wetlands, agriculture,
fossil fuel extraction, and waste decomposition. The task is to forecast future CH4 concentrations
from 2015 to 2025 based on historical patterns.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a time-stamped measurement with the following features:
6
7 Day of month: Approximated as 15 for all monthly measurements
8 Month: Integer from 1-12
9 Year: 1983-2014 (training period)
10 Day of year: Approximated from month (e.g., January
15, February
46)
11 CH4 concentration: Parts per billion (ppb)
12
13 Data format: NumPy array of shape (N, 5) where N is the number of monthly observations.
14
15 TARGET SPACE
16 Continuous prediction of CH4 concentration in parts per billion (ppb) for future time points.
17
18 TEMPORAL STRUCTURE
19 Training period: January 1983 - December 2014 (32 years)
20 Evaluation period: January 2015 - December 2025 (11 years)
21 Sampling frequency: Monthly
22 Forecast horizon: Up to 132 months (11 years) into the future
23
24 EVALUATION METRICS
25 Models are evaluated using Mean Squared Error (MSE) on predictions for 2015-2025:
26
27 MSE = (1/N)
(predicted - actual)2
28 Lower MSE indicates better forecasting performance
29 Penalizes large errors more heavily than small ones
30
31 TASK OBJECTIVE
114


--- Page 115 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
32 Develop a time series forecasting model that captures both the long-term upward trend in atmospheric
methane and any seasonal or cyclical patterns present in the data. The model must extrapolate 11
years beyond the training period while maintaining accuracy.
DATASET: CO2
1 DESCRIPTION
2 This dataset contains daily carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration measurements from the Mauna Loa
Observatory in Hawaii, spanning 1970 to 2010. Located at 3,200 meters above sea level on an isolated
mid-Pacific volcano, Mauna Loa has provided the world's longest continuous record of atmospheric CO2
since 1958, making it the definitive benchmark for tracking global climate change. The task is to
forecast daily CO2 levels from 2010 to 2025.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a daily measurement with the following features:
6
7 Year: 1970-2010 (training period)
8 Month: Integer from 1-12
9 Day: Integer from 1-31
10 Fractional year: Precise decimal representation (e.g., 1974.3781)
11 CO2 concentration: Parts per million (ppm)
12
13 Data format: NumPy array of shape (N, 5) where N is the number of daily observations.
14
15 TARGET SPACE
16 Continuous prediction of CO2 concentration in parts per million (ppm) for future dates.
17
18 TEMPORAL STRUCTURE
19 Training period: 1970-2010 (40 years)
20 Evaluation period: 2010-2025 (15 years)
21 Sampling frequency: Daily
22 Forecast horizon: Up to ~5,475 days (15 years) into the future
23
24 EVALUATION METRICS
25 Models are evaluated using Mean Squared Error (MSE) on daily predictions for 2010-2025:
26
27 MSE = (1/N)
(predicted - actual)2
28 Lower MSE indicates better forecasting accuracy
29
30 TASK OBJECTIVE
31 Develop a time series forecasting model that accurately captures both the secular trend in atmospheric
CO2 and the regular seasonal oscillations. The model must extrapolate 15 years beyond training while
maintaining daily-level precision, requiring understanding of both long-term forcing and periodic
biological cycles.
DATASET: N2O
1 DESCRIPTION
2 This dataset contains monthly nitrous oxide (N2O) concentration measurements from NOAA's Global
Monitoring Laboratory network, representing globally-averaged atmospheric levels from 2001 to 2014.
Nitrous oxide is a long-lived greenhouse gas and ozone-depleting substance with sources including
agricultural fertilizers, industrial processes, and natural soil emissions. The task is to forecast
N2O concentrations from 2015 to 2025.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a time-stamped measurement with the following features:
6
7 Day of month: Approximated as 15 for all monthly measurements
8 Month: Integer from 1-12
9 Year: 2001-2014 (training period)
115


--- Page 116 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
10 Day of year: Approximated from month
11 N2O concentration: Parts per billion (ppb)
12
13 Data format: NumPy array of shape (N, 5) where N is the number of monthly observations.
14
15 TARGET SPACE
16 Continuous prediction of N2O concentration in parts per billion (ppb) for future time points.
17
18 TEMPORAL STRUCTURE
19 Training period: January 2001 - December 2014 (14 years)
20 Evaluation period: January 2015 - December 2025 (11 years)
21 Sampling frequency: Monthly
22 Forecast horizon: Up to 132 months (11 years) into the future
23
24 EVALUATION METRICS
25 Models are evaluated using Mean Squared Error (MSE) on predictions for 2015-2025:
26
27 MSE = (1/N)
(predicted - actual)2
28 Lower MSE indicates better forecasting performance
29
30 TASK OBJECTIVE
31 Develop a time series forecasting model that captures the long-term trend in atmospheric nitrous oxide
and any seasonal or cyclical patterns. The model must extrapolate nearly as far into the future as
the available training history spans, testing generalization beyond the observed regime.
DATASET: SF6
1 DESCRIPTION
2 This dataset contains monthly sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) concentration measurements from NOAA's Global
Monitoring Laboratory network, representing globally-averaged atmospheric levels from 1997 to 2014.
SF6 is an entirely synthetic compound used as an electrical insulator in high-voltage equipment and
has the highest global warming potential of any known substance. Its presence in the atmosphere is
purely anthropogenic, making it a unique tracer of industrial activity. The task is to forecast SF6
concentrations from 2015 to 2025.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 Each observation is a time-stamped measurement with the following features:
6
7 Day of month: Approximated as 15 for all monthly measurements
8 Month: Integer from 1-12
9 Year: 1997-2014 (training period)
10 Day of year: Approximated from month
11 SF6 concentration: Parts per trillion (ppt)
12
13 Data format: NumPy array of shape (N, 5) where N is the number of monthly observations.
14
15 TARGET SPACE
16 Continuous prediction of SF6 concentration in parts per trillion (ppt) for future time points.
17
18 TEMPORAL STRUCTURE
19 Training period: January 1997 - December 2014 (18 years)
20 Evaluation period: January 2015 - December 2025 (11 years)
21 Sampling frequency: Monthly
22 Forecast horizon: Up to 132 months (11 years) into the future
23
24 EVALUATION METRICS
25 Models are evaluated using Mean Squared Error (MSE) on predictions for 2015-2025:
26
27 MSE = (1/N)
(predicted - actual)2
28 Lower MSE indicates better forecasting performance
29
30 TASK OBJECTIVE
116


--- Page 117 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
31 Develop a time series forecasting model that captures the long-term trend in atmospheric sulfur
hexafluoride. Unlike other greenhouse gases, SF6 exhibits primarily secular growth with minimal
seasonal modulation, making trend extrapolation the primary challenge. The model must forecast 11
years into the future based on 18 years of historical data.
MODEL PROMPT
1 You should change the model file, which can be found in `model.py`. Try and choose a model that is
appropriate for the task.
DATA PROCESSING PROMPT
1 You should change the data processing file, which can be found in `data_processing.py`. Try and choose a
data processing that is appropriate for the task.
O.6. Language Modelling
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 # Language Modelling
2
3 Language modelling is a fundamental task in natural language processing that involves predicting the next
token in a sequence of text. This task forms the foundation for many modern large language models (
LLMs) and serves as a key benchmark for understanding how well neural networks can learn patterns in
sequential data.
4
5 In this task, you will work with autoregressive transformer models trained on text corpora. The goal is
to minimize perplexity (or equivalently, cross-entropy loss) on held-out validation data. The task
provides opportunities to experiment with different architectures, optimization strategies, and loss
functions to improve language model performance.
DATASET: LMFINEWEB
1 DESCRIPTION
2 LMFineWeb (10B variant) is a curated web text corpus derived from the larger FineWeb dataset by Hugging
Face. The dataset prioritizes quality through aggressive filtering of Common Crawl data, removing low
-quality content, duplicates, and non-English text. This 10B token variant represents a substantial
downsample of the full dataset, designed specifically for rapid experimentation and iteration during
language model development.
3
4 CONTENT
5 The dataset consists of cleaned web pages spanning diverse topics and domains, with each example
containing:
6
7 High-quality natural language text
8 Metadata including source URLs and filtering scores
9 Multi-sentence coherent passages suitable for language modeling
10
11 DATASET STRUCTURE
12 Training split: Approximately 10 billion tokens
13 Downsampled from the full FineWeb corpus for efficiency
14 Preserves the quality distribution of the parent dataset
15 Suitable for pretraining small to medium-sized language models
16
17 PREPROCESSING
18 Extensive deduplication at document and paragraph levels
117


--- Page 118 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
19 Language filtering to retain primarily English content
20 Quality filtering based on heuristics and model-based scoring
21 Removal of adult content, spam, and machine-generated text
DATASET: OPCFINEWEBCODE
1 DESCRIPTION
2 OPC-FineWeb-Code is a specialized corpus of code-related web content extracted from FineWeb using
fastText-based retrieval in iterative rounds. Originally developed for the OpenCoder pretraining
pipeline, this dataset focuses on web pages containing programming tutorials, documentation, code
snippets, and technical discussions. The implementation uses the first 20% of the full dataset (~30GB
) to balance corpus size with training efficiency.
3
4 CONTENT
5 The dataset consists of code-centric web pages including:
6
7 Programming tutorials and documentation
8 Technical blog posts with code examples
9 Stack Overflow discussions and solutions
10 GitHub repository documentation
11 Code snippets with natural language explanations
12
13 DATASET STRUCTURE
14 Training split: ~80% of the 20% subset (original dataset is ~150GB total)
15 Validation split: 1% of data (created during preprocessing)
16 Test split: Remaining ~19% of the 20% subset
17 Approximately 30GB total size after downsampling
18 Multiple programming languages and frameworks represented
19
20 PREPROCESSING
21 fastText-based retrieval to identify code-relevant content
22 Automatic skipping of corrupted or unsafe files
23 Validation split created from training data (not present in original)
24 Filtered for code density and technical content quality
DATASET: OPCFINEWEBMATH
1 DESCRIPTION
2 OPC-FineWeb-Math is a curated collection of mathematics-related web content recalled from FineWeb through
iterative fastText-based retrieval. Created as part of the OpenCoder data collection effort, this
dataset provides high-quality mathematical text including proofs, explanations, problem-solving
discussions, and educational content. The corpus is designed to enhance language models' capabilities
in mathematical reasoning and technical communication.
3
4 CONTENT
5 The dataset consists of math-centric web pages including:
6
7 Mathematical explanations and tutorials
8 Problem-solving discussions and solutions
9 Academic and educational math content
10 LaTeX-formatted equations and proofs
11 Math-focused forums and Q&A platforms
12
13 DATASET STRUCTURE
14 Total rows: Approximately 5.24 million
15 Training split: 99% of data
16 Validation split: 1% of data (created during preprocessing)
17 Original dataset contains only training data
18
19 PREPROCESSING
118


--- Page 119 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
20 fastText-based retrieval targeting mathematical content
21 Preservation of mathematical notation and formatting
22 Quality filtering for coherence and correctness
23 Validation split synthetically created from training data
DATASET: TINYSTORIES
1 DESCRIPTION
2 TinyStories is a synthetic dataset of short stories generated by GPT-3.5 and GPT-4, created by Ronen
Eldan and Yuanzhi Li. The stories are deliberately simple, coherent, and limited in vocabulary,
making them ideal for training and evaluating small language models. This dataset enables research on
whether models with constrained capacity can achieve fluency and coherence when trained on
appropriately simplified data.
3
4 CONTENT
5 The dataset consists of LLM-generated short stories characterized by:
6
7 Simple vocabulary and sentence structures
8 Coherent narrative arcs
9 Age-appropriate content suitable for children
10 Consistent story formatting
11 Limited complexity to match small model capacity
12
13 DATASET STRUCTURE
14 Training examples: Multiple splits available
15 Validation split: Provided for model evaluation
16 Each example contains a complete short story
17 Stories vary in length but maintain simplicity throughout
18
19 DESIGN PHILOSOPHY
20 The dataset tests the hypothesis that small language models can achieve strong performance when trained
on data matched to their representational capacity, rather than being trained on complex web text
designed for much larger models. This makes TinyStories particularly valuable for:
21
22 Training small, efficient language models
23 Educational purposes and research on model scaling
24 Evaluating coherence and fluency in constrained settings
25 Rapid prototyping of language model architectures
OPTIM PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer file, which can be found in `optim.py`. In deep learning, optimization is
used to descend the gradient of a loss function with respect to the parameters of a neural network.
Your task is to implement the `OptimizerConfig` dataclass with appropriate hyperparameters and the `
create_optimizers` function. This function should create and return a list of optimizers and a list
of learning rate schedulers for training the language model. You may use different optimizers for
different parts of the model (e.g., embedding layers, transformer blocks, output head) if desired.
The function receives the model and config as inputs and must return two lists: `optimizers` and `
schedulers`.
LOSS PROMPT
1 You should change the loss file, which can be found in `loss.py`. In language modeling, the loss provides
an objective to minimize for next token prediction. Your task is to implement the `compute_loss`
function that takes model logits of shape [batch_size, seq_len, vocab_size] and target tokens of
shape [batch_size, seq_len], and returns a scalar loss value. Make sure to ignore padding tokens (
where target is -1). You should not change the name of the function `compute_loss` or its input/
output signature.
119


--- Page 120 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
NETWORKS PROMPT
1 You should change the network file, which can be found in `networks.py`. In deep learning, the network
provides the architecture of the model and specifies the number of parameters, layer dimensions, and
types of connections. Your task is to implement the `ModelConfig` dataclass with model
hyperparameters and the `Model` class. The Model must have a `forward` method that takes input token
indices of shape [batch_size, seq_len] and returns logits of shape [batch_size, seq_len, vocab_size].
The Model must also have a `get_config` method that returns the model configuration. You should not
change the name or interface of these methods.
O.7. Model Unlearning
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Machine unlearning for large language models (LLMs) is a technique focused on selectively removing the
influence of specific training data from a model's learned representations, without requiring
complete retraining. Unlike traditional model updating approaches that involve retraining from
scratch, unlearning methods efficiently modify model weights or behaviors to "forget" targeted
information-such as sensitive personal data, copyrighted content, or harmful knowledge-while
preserving the model's overall capabilities and performance on unrelated tasks.
2
3 The need for unlearning has emerged from practical concerns around data privacy, safety, and regulatory
compliance. LLMs trained on massive datasets often inadvertently memorize sensitive information,
copyrighted material, or harmful content. With ever-increasing costs of pre-training and post-
training (often involving billions of tokens and substantial computational resources), retraining
models from scratch in response to data deletion requests is prohibitively expensive. This has
motivated the development of efficient post-training interventions that can selectively eliminate
undesirable knowledge while maintaining model utility.
4
5 The objective of LLM unlearning is twofold: (1) **Removal** - ensuring that the influence caused
specifically by the "forget set" (the data to be removed) is substantially erased from the model, and
(2) **Retention** - maintaining the model's utility and performance on unrelated downstream tasks
and general capabilities. Formally, given an original model trained on data containing a forget set,
the unlearning process yields an unlearned model where the forget set's influence is eliminated. The
efficacy is assessed using evaluation metrics that quantify remaining influence (such as extraction
strength, membership inference attacks, and truth ratio) while utility metrics ensure preserved
performance on general tasks.
6
7 Unlearning methods vary in their approach. While some are prompting-based, detecting sensitive queries at
inference time and deploying obfuscation mechanisms, the most practical and scalable approaches
directly modify model weights. These weight-modification techniques include: fine-tuning with
tailored loss functions that encourage forgetting on the forget set while maintaining performance on
a retain set; preference optimization methods that steer the model away from generating content
related to the forget set; and representation-level interventions that modify internal activations.
Success in unlearning requires careful balancing between thorough forgetting (avoiding any residual
knowledge) and maintaining utility (preventing degradation of general capabilities).
8
9 Below, we provide descriptions of the unlearning datasets and benchmarks which you will be working with.
However, be aware that any methods you develop should ideally generalize to other unlearning
scenarios and benchmarks as well.
DATASET: MUSE
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The MUSE (Machine Unlearning of Sensitive Entities) News Benchmark is designed to evaluate machine
unlearning capabilities in large language models (LLMs) with respect to copyrighted news content.
This task specifically focuses on news articles from various reputable sources covering diverse
topics, providing a realistic testbed for assessing whether models can selectively forget specific
content while maintaining general knowledge and capabilities. The goal is to train the model to "
unlearn" specific copyrighted news articles (forget set) while preserving knowledge of other news
120


--- Page 121 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
content (retain set).
3
4 DATASET COMPOSITION
5 Training data from the MUSE-News dataset:
6
7 - Forget corpus: 889 news articles to be unlearned
8 - Retain corpus (retain1): 1,777 news articles to maintain model capabilities
9 - Format: Raw text passages for pretraining-style unlearning
10
11 EVALUATION DATASET COMPOSITION
12 Evaluation data from the MUSE-News dataset:
13
14 - Knowledge memorization (knowmem): 100 QA pairs from forget set (forget_qa split), 100 QA pairs from
retain set (retain_qa split)
15 - Verbatim memorization (verbmem): Text completion tasks on forget set to test exact memorization
16
17 TASK OBJECTIVE
18 The primary goal is to implement an unlearning algorithm that satisfies:
19
20 1. Content Forgetting: Remove the model's ability to reproduce or recall specific details from the forget
set
21 2. Knowledge Retention: Maintain strong performance on the retain set
22
23 EVALUATION METRICS
24 The task uses 5 evaluation metrics:
25
26 1. forget_knowmem_ROUGE: ROUGE-L F1 score on 100 forget QA pairs from forget_qa split (lower is better,
indicates reduced knowledge recall)
27 2. retain_knowmem_ROUGE: ROUGE-L F1 score on 100 retain QA pairs from retain_qa split (higher is better,
indicates preserved knowledge)
28 3. forget_verbmem_ROUGE: ROUGE-L F1 score on text completions from forget split testing verbatim
memorization (lower is better, indicates reduced memorization)
29 4. privleak: Privacy leakage metric using min_k% probability on forget split (lower is better, indicates
successful unlearning)
30 5. extraction_strength: Exact extraction capability measured on forget split verbatim memorization tasks
(lower is better, indicates reduced memorization)
31
32 The goal is to optimize for all of them, from which a final score will be computed.
DATASET: TOFU
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The TOFU (Task of Fictitious Unlearning) dataset is a benchmark designed to evaluate machine unlearning
capabilities in large language models (LLMs). It consists of question-answer pairs derived from
autobiographies of 200 entirely fictitious authors. The synthetic nature ensures the data is distinct
from any pretraining corpus, providing a controlled environment for testing selective forgetting.
The goal is to train the model to "unlearn" specific authors (forget set) while preserving its
knowledge of other authors (retain set) and general world knowledge.
3
4 DATASET COMPOSITION
5 The TOFU dataset contains:
6
7 - 200 Fictitious Authors: Each with a complete fictional biography and associated QA pairs
8 - Question-Answer Pairs: Covering biographical details, writing styles, and life events of each author
(20 QA pairs per author)
9 - Total Size: 4,000 QA pairs across all authors
10 - Format: Conversational QA format compatible with instruction-tuned models
11
12 TASK CONFIGURATION
13 This task uses the following splits from the TOFU dataset:
14
15 - forget10: 10% of the dataset (20 authors) - information to be unlearned
121


--- Page 122 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
16 - retain90: 90% of the dataset (180 authors) - information to be preserved
17 - holdout10: 10% holdout set for evaluation purposes
18
19 TASK OBJECTIVE
20 The primary goal is to implement an unlearning algorithm that satisfies:
21
22 1. Selective Forgetting: Remove the model's ability to recall information about the 20 authors in the
forget set
23 2. Knowledge Retention: Maintain strong performance on the 180 authors in the retain set
24
25 EVALUATION METRICS
26 The task uses 6 evaluation metrics:
27
28 1. forget_quality: KS test comparing truth ratio distributions (correct vs perturbed answers) on forget
set (higher is better)
29 2. forget_Q_A_Prob: Probability assigned to correct answers on forget set (lower is better)
30 3. forget_Q_A_ROUGE: ROUGE-L recall between generated and correct answers on forget set (lower is better)
31 4. model_utility: Harmonic mean aggregate across 9 sub-metrics measuring retention on retain set, real
authors, and world facts (higher is better)
32
- Retain set (180 authors): probability, ROUGE-L, truth ratio
33
- Real authors: normalized probability, ROUGE-L, truth ratio
34
- World facts: normalized probability, ROUGE-L, truth ratio
35 5. privleak: Membership inference attack vulnerability using min_k metric (lower is better)
36 6. extraction_strength: Measures model's ability to memorize/extract information from forget set (lower
is better)
37
38 The goal is to optimize for all of them, from which a final score will be computed.
DATASET: WMDP CYBER
1 DESCRIPTION
2 The WMDP (Weapons of Mass Destruction Proxy) Cyber Benchmark is designed to evaluate and mitigate
hazardous cybersecurity knowledge in large language models (LLMs). It consists of 1,987 multiple-
choice questions covering sensitive cybersecurity topics including reconnaissance, vulnerability
discovery, exploitation techniques, and cyber tactics. The goal is to unlearn hazardous cybersecurity
knowledge (forget corpus) while preserving general language capabilities (retain corpus).
3
4 DATASET COMPOSITION
5 The WMDP Cyber dataset contains:
6
7 - Forget corpus: 1,000 text documents containing hazardous cybersecurity information
8 - Retain corpus: 4,473 text documents of general content for maintaining model utility
9 - Format: Pretraining-style text data and multiple-choice evaluation questions
10
11 TASK CONFIGURATION
12 This task uses the following components:
13
14 - cyber-forget-corpus: Text data containing hazardous cybersecurity knowledge to be unlearned
15 - cyber-retain-corpus: General text data to maintain model capabilities
16
17 TASK OBJECTIVE
18 The primary goal is to implement an unlearning algorithm that satisfies:
19
20 1. Hazardous Knowledge Removal: Reduce the model's ability to answer questions about sensitive
cybersecurity topics
21 2. General Capability Preservation: Maintain strong performance on general language tasks
22
23 EVALUATION METRICS
24 The task uses 2 evaluation metrics:
25
26 1. wmdp_cyber/acc: Accuracy on the 1,987-question WMDP Cyber multiple-choice benchmark (lower is better)
122


--- Page 123 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
27 2. mmlu_stem/acc: Accuracy on the STEM subsection of Massive Multitask Language Understanding (MMLU)
benchmark containing 3,153 questions, tested via multiple-choice questions from lm_eval harness (
higher is better)
28
29 The goal is to optimize for both of them, from which a final score will be computed.
LOSS PROMPT
1 You must modify the `loss.py` file in order to implement the loss logic for your unlearning method. In
machine unlearning, the loss balances two objectives: unlearning specific knowledge from the forget
set while preserving performance on the retain set. You should not change the name of the class, `
CustomUnlearnTrainer`, or the signature of the `compute_loss` method, but you are allowed to define
and use new parameters or methods provided you respect the logic.
O.8. Off-Policy RL
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Reinforcement learning is a branch of machine learning focused on training agents to make sequences of
decisions in an environment to maximize a notion of cumulative reward. Unlike supervised learning,
where models learn from labeled examples, RL agents learn through trial and error, receiving feedback
in the form of rewards or penalties based on their actions. The core idea is that the agent explores
the environment, evaluates the outcomes of its actions, and gradually improves its decision-making
policy to achieve better long-term results.
2
3 Historically, RL draws inspiration from behavioral psychology, particularly the study of how animals
learn from rewards and punishments. Early formalizations in the 1950s and 1960s laid the groundwork
for algorithms that could handle Markov decision processes (MDPs), a mathematical framework for
modeling decision-making under uncertainty. The agent-environment interaction loop-where the agent
observes the state of the environment, takes an action, and receives a reward-remains central to all
RL formulations.
4
5 The objective of reinforcement learning is to find a policy-a mapping from states to actions-that
maximizes the expected cumulative reward over time. RL algorithms vary in approach, from value-based
methods, which estimate the expected reward of actions, to policy-based methods, which directly
optimize the agent's behavior. Success in RL requires balancing exploration (trying new actions to
discover rewards) and exploitation (leveraging known actions that yield high rewards).
6
7 In practice, RL has been applied to robotics, game playing, resource management, and recommendation
systems, among other areas, where sequential decision-making is key. Understanding the principles of
reward, policy, and environment dynamics is essential before implementing an RL algorithm, as these
components shape how the agent learns and adapts.
8
9 You will be assisting in developing algorithms for Value-based Reinforcement Learning, which focuses on
estimating the expected return (value) of states or state-action pairs under a policy. The agent
learns a value function either the state-value function V(s) or the action-value function Q(s, a)-and
derives an optimal policy by selecting actions that maximize these estimates. Existing algorithms
iteratively update value estimates using the Bellman equation, enabling the agent to approximate the
optimal policy without explicitly modeling the environment's dynamics.
10
11 Below, we provide a description of the environment which you will be training in. However, be aware that
any code you develop may be applied to other RL environments too.
CONFIG PROMPT
1 You should change the config file, which can be found in `config.py`. The goal of config is to provide
the hyperparameters for the training loop. You should not change the name of the dict `config`. You
are allowed to make whatever changes you like, but you should ensure that your config is compatible
123


--- Page 124 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
with the rest of the codebase.
OPTIM PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer file, which can be found in `optim.py`. In deep learning, optimization is
used to descend the gradient of a loss function with respect to the parameters of a neural network.
The correct functional form should implement a class, 'scale_by_optimizer', with functions 'init_fn'
and 'update_fn'. Besides this, you are allowed to make whatever changes you like. You will be using a
fixed learning rate which is tuned to your algorithm.
Q UPDATE PROMPT
1 You should change the q update file, which can be found in `q_update.py`. The goal of q_loss_fn is to
compute a scalar loss that guides learning of the Q-function-typically by comparing predicted and
target action values-but it may represent any differentiable objective that drives the agent toward
better value estimation and decision-making. You should not change the name or interface of the
function `q_loss_fn`.
NETWORKS PROMPT
1 You should change the network file, which can be found in `networks.py`. In deep learning, the network
provides the architecture of the model, and specifies the number of parameters, width of layers, and
type of connections that those layers should have. You should not change the name or interface of the
function `ActorCritic`. The network takes at input an observation from the RL environment, and must
output a policy and a value.
POLICY PROMPT
1 You should change the policy file, which can be found in `policy.py`. The goal of policy is to select
actions based on the current state of the environment and the Q-values. This involves balancing the
exploration-exploitation tradeoff: deciding whether to explore new actions to gather more information
about their potential rewards, or to exploit known actions that currently yield the highest
estimated return. You should not change the name or interface of the function `explore` and `exploit
`.
RB PROMPT
1 You should change the replay buffer file, which can be found in `rb.py`. The goal of the replay buffer is
to store and sample experience from the environment. You should not change the name or interface of
the function `get_replay_buffer`.
TRAIN PROMPT
1 You should change the train file, which can be found in `train.py`. In modern reinforcement learning, the
train loop is responsible for collecting data from the environment, processing it (possibly multiple
times), and then using it to update the parameters of the model. You should not change the name or
interface of the function `train`. You are allowed to make whatever changes you like, but you should
ensure that your training loop is compatible with the rest of the codebase. You should never change
the logic for computing the return during or after training. Some useful function calls have been
provided, though possibly not in the optimal place.
124


--- Page 125 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
O.9. On-Policy RL
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Reinforcement learning is a branch of machine learning focused on training agents to make sequences of
decisions in an environment to maximize a notion of cumulative reward. Unlike supervised learning,
where models learn from labeled examples, RL agents learn through trial and error, receiving feedback
in the form of rewards or penalties based on their actions. The core idea is that the agent explores
the environment, evaluates the outcomes of its actions, and gradually improves its decision-making
policy to achieve better long-term results.
2
3 Historically, RL draws inspiration from behavioral psychology, particularly the study of how animals
learn from rewards and punishments. Early formalizations in the 1950s and 1960s laid the groundwork
for algorithms that could handle Markov decision processes (MDPs), a mathematical framework for
modeling decision-making under uncertainty. The agent-environment interaction loop-where the agent
observes the state of the environment, takes an action, and receives a reward-remains central to all
RL formulations.
4
5 The objective of reinforcement learning is to find a policy-a mapping from states to actions-that
maximizes the expected cumulative reward over time. RL algorithms vary in approach, from value-based
methods, which estimate the expected reward of actions, to policy-based methods, which directly
optimize the agent's behavior. Success in RL requires balancing exploration (trying new actions to
discover rewards) and exploitation (leveraging known actions that yield high rewards).
6
7 In practice, RL has been applied to robotics, game playing, resource management, and recommendation
systems, among other areas, where sequential decision-making is key. Understanding the principles of
reward, policy, and environment dynamics is essential before implementing an RL algorithm, as these
components shape how the agent learns and adapts.
8
9 Below, we provide a description of the environment which you will be training in. However, be aware that
any code you develop may be applied to other RL environments too.
OPTIM PROMPT
1 You should change the optimizer file, which can be found in `optim.py`. In deep learning, optimization is
used to descend the gradient of a loss function with respect to the parameters of a neural network.
The correct functional form should implement a class, 'scale_by_optimizer', with functions 'init_fn'
and 'update_fn'. Besides this, you are allowed to make whatever changes you like. You will be using a
fixed learning rate which is tuned to your algorithm.
LOSS PROMPT
1 You should change the loss file, which can be found in `loss.py`. In deep learning, the loss provides an
objective to minimize; in reinforcement learning, minimizing this objective corresponds to maximising
the return of an agent. You should not change the name of the function, `loss_actor_and_critic`, or
its inputs.
NETWORKS PROMPT
1 You should change the network file, which can be found in `networks.py`. In deep learning, the network
provides the architecture of the model, and specifies the number of parameters, width of layers, and
type of connections that those layers should have. You should not change the name or interface of the
function `ActorCritic`. The network takes at input an observation from the RL environment, and must
output a policy and a value.
TRAIN PROMPT
125


--- Page 126 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
1 You should change the train file, which can be found in `train.py`. In modern reinforcement learning, the
train loop is responsible for collecting data from the environment, processing it (possibly multiple
times), and then using it to update the parameters of the model. You should not change the name or
interface of the function `train`. You are allowed to make whatever changes you like, but you should
ensure that your training loop is compatible with the rest of the codebase. You should never change
the logic for computing the return during or after training. Some useful function calls have been
provided, though possibly not in the optimal place.
O.10. Unsupervised Environment Design
DOMAIN DESCRIPTION
1 Reinforcement learning is a branch of machine learning focused on training agents to make sequences of
decisions in an environment to maximize a notion of cumulative reward. Unlike supervised learning,
where models learn from labeled examples, RL agents learn through trial and error, receiving feedback
in the form of rewards or penalties based on their actions. The core idea is that the agent explores
the environment, evaluates the outcomes of its actions, and gradually improves its decision-making
policy to achieve better long-term results.
2
3 Historically, RL draws inspiration from behavioral psychology, particularly the study of how animals
learn from rewards and punishments. The agent-environment interaction loop-where the agent observes
the state of the environment, takes an action, and receives a reward-remains central to all RL
formulations. In this loop, the environment defines the challenges the agent must overcome.
4
5 While traditional RL focuses on mastering a fixed environment, a key challenge is ensuring agents can
generalize to new, unseen situations. This has led to the field of Unsupervised Environment Design (
UED), where the goal is to automatically generate a curriculum of training environments that
progressively challenge an agent. Instead of a static world, a UED algorithm acts as a "teacher,"
creating a series of tasks that are neither too easy nor too hard, pushing the "student" agent to
develop robust and widely applicable skills.
6
7 Your task is to design a novel Unsupervised Environment Design algorithm. This involves creating a system
that adaptively generates environment parameters to effectively train a separate RL agent. The
objective is no longer just to find a policy that maximizes reward, but to design an environment
generation process that produces a final agent with broad, generalizable capabilities. This requires
balancing the generation of novel, challenging environments with those that remain solvable for the
agent at its current skill level.
8
9 Below, we provide a description of a base environment whose parameters your UED algorithm will control.
Your algorithm will be responsible for generating distributions over these parameters to create a
curriculum. Be aware that the UED methodology you develop should be general enough to be applied to
other families of parametric RL environments.
DATASET: MINIGRID
1 DESCRIPTION
2 JAXUED Minigrid is a JAX-accelerated grid-world maze navigation environment designed for Unsupervised
Environment Design research. An agent must navigate through procedurally generated mazes to reach a
goal location. The environment provides a partially observable view around the agent, showing only a
local window of the maze rather than the full layout. The implementation is fully jittable and runs
on GPU or TPU, enabling training on thousands of parallel environments simultaneously. Maze layouts
are procedurally generated to create diverse navigation challenges, making the environment ideal for
studying curriculum learning, exploration, and generalization in reinforcement learning.
3
4 OBSERVATION SPACE
5 The observation is a 4-dimensional ndarray with shape (view_size, view_size, 3), where view_size is
typically 5 or 7. This represents the agent's partial field of view centered on its current position.
Each cell in the view contains encoded information about the grid tile:
6
7 Channel 0: Tile type ID (wall, empty floor, goal, lava, door, key, etc.)
126


--- Page 127 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
8 Channel 1: Color ID for the tile
9 Channel 2: State information (for example, whether a door is open or closed)
10
11 The observations are not image pixels but rather integer encodings of tile properties. The agent can only
observe a local window around its current position and orientation, which means it must explore the
environment and potentially use memory to navigate successfully through larger mazes.
12
13 ACTION SPACE
14 The action space consists of 6 discrete actions:
15
16 0: move_forward - Move one cell in the direction the agent is facing
17 1: turn_left - Rotate the agent's orientation 90 degrees counterclockwise
18 2: turn_right - Rotate the agent's orientation 90 degrees clockwise
19 3: pick_up - Pick up an object located in front of the agent
20 4: put_down - Drop the currently held object
21 5: toggle - Activate a switch or open/close a door
22
23 In pure maze navigation tasks, typically only actions 0, 1, and 2 are relevant, as the task involves
moving to the goal without interacting with objects.
24
25 TRANSITION DYNAMICS
26 The agent operates on a discrete 2D grid, commonly of size 1313 or 1515 cells. The agent maintains a
directional state, facing one of four cardinal directions: north, south, east, or west. When the move
_forward action is taken, the agent attempts to advance one cell in its facing direction, but this
movement is blocked if a wall occupies that cell. The turn_left and turn_right actions change the
agent's orientation by 90 degrees without changing its position. The goal is reached by moving the
agent onto the goal tile. All transitions are fully deterministic given the current state and chosen
action. Unlike the Kinetix environments, there is no physics simulation; the environment uses
discrete state transitions on the grid.
27
28 REWARD
29 The reward structure depends on the configuration chosen for the environment. In the default sparse
reward setting, the agent receives a reward of +1 for reaching the goal tile and 0 at all other
timesteps. In the optional dense reward setting, the agent receives a small negative reward per step
(for example, -0.01) to encourage efficient solutions, plus +1 for reaching the goal. Some variants
use distance-based reward shaping to provide guidance. The sparse reward structure combined with
procedural maze generation creates significant exploration challenges, as the agent must discover the
goal through exploration without intermediate feedback.
30
31 STARTING STATE
32 The agent is spawned at a designated start position, often near a corner or edge of the maze. The agent's
initial orientation is randomly selected from the four cardinal directions. The maze layout is
generated procedurally using various algorithms including random obstacle placement, recursive
division, depth-first search maze generation, and other methods that can be controlled by
Unsupervised Environment Design algorithms. The goal position is placed in the maze, typically
positioned far from the start location to create a meaningful challenge. The maze generation process
ensures that a valid path exists from the start to the goal.
33
34 EPISODE END
35 The episode ends if either of the following happens:
36
37 - Termination: The agent reaches the goal tile
38 - Truncation: The length of the episode reaches the maximum number of timesteps, which is typically 250
to 500 depending on the maze size and difficulty
SAMPLE LEVELS PROMPT
1 You should change the `sample_and_score_fn` function, which is defined inside the `make_sample_and_score_
fn` factory in the file `sample_levels.py`. In Unsupervised Environment Design (UED), the goal is to
automatically generate a curriculum of environments to train a robust agent. This function is a core
component of that process. It is responsible for sampling a batch of potential training levels,
evaluating the current agent's performance on them, and then assigning a "score" to each level.
127


--- Page 128 ---
Procedural Generation of Algorithm Discovery Tasks in Machine Learning
Levels with higher scores are more likely to be selected for the agent's subsequent training. Your
task is to **replace the placeholder scoring logic**. Currently, it uses a naive implementation that
scores all levels equally: `level_scores = jnp.ones_like(returns)`. You must implement a more
meaningful scoring function that identifies levels that are most beneficial for training the agent.
For example, you might want to score levels based on the agent's uncertainty, the variance of returns
, or whether the agent is making progress (but not finding it too easy or too hard). You should not
change the name or interface of the `sample_and_score_fn` function. You must ensure that it returns
the same data structure: a tuple containing the `train_state` and another tuple of `(env_instances,
level_scores, extra_dict)`. Note that you have access to the full trajectory data (`traj_batch`) from
the agent's rollout, which includes rewards, values, dones, and other information that can be used
to compute your scores.
128
