--- Page 1 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
1
Agentic AI–Driven UAV Network Deployment: A
LLM–Enhanced Exact Potential Game Approach
Xin Tang, Qian Chen, Binhan Liao, Yaqi Zhang, Jianxin Chen, Changyuan Zhao, Junchuan Fan, Junxi Tian,
Xiaohuan Li, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicular Networks (UAVNs) are
envisioned to provide flexible connectivity, wide-area coverage,
and low-latency services in dynamic environments. From an
agentic artificial intelligence (Agentic AI) perspective, UAVNs
naturally operate as multi-agent systems, where autonomous
UAVs act as intelligent agents that coordinate deployment and
networking decisions to achieve global performance objectives.
However, the strong coupling between discrete link decisions
and continuous deployment parameters makes UAVN topology
optimization a mixed-integer nonconvex problem, resulting in
challenges in scalability, efficiency, and solution consistency
under dynamic network conditions. This paper proposes a dual
spatial-scale UAVN topology optimization framework based on
exact potential games (EPGs), enhanced by Agentic AI. At the
large spatial scale, a log-linear learning based EPG (L3-EPG)
algorithm is developed to optimize inter-UAV link configurations,
enabling sparse yet connected network topologies while reducing
redundant links and interference. At the small spatial scale, an
approximate gradient based EPG (AG-EPG) algorithm jointly
optimizes UAV deployment, transmission power allocation, and
ground user (GU) association to improve network throughput and
latency. To further enhance adaptability across heterogeneous
scenarios, a large language model (LLM) is incorporated as a
knowledge-driven decision enhancer to automatically generate
utility weights according to network characteristics, alleviating
reliance on manual parameter tuning. Simulation results demon-
strate that the proposed framework consistently outperforms
baseline methods in terms of energy consumption, end-to-end
latency, and system throughput.
Index Terms—Agentic artificial intelligence (AI), unmanned
aerial vehicular network, deployment optimization, large lan-
guage model (LLM), intent, exact potential game.
I. INTRODUCTION
X. Tang, B. Liao, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Fan, and J. Tian are with the Guangxi
University Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networking and Scenario System
(School of Information and Communication, GUET), Guilin, 541004, China
(e-mails:tangx@mail.guet.edu.cn; guetlbh@126.com; zhangyaqi8@163.com;
chenjianxin792@gmail.com; fanjunchuan@mails.guet.edu.cn).
Q. Chen is with the School of Architecture and Transportation Engineering,
GUET, Guilin, 541004, China (e-mail: chenqian@mails.guet.edu.cn).
C. Zhao is with the College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore, and CNRS@CREATE, 1 Create Way,
08-01 Create Tower, Singapore 138602 (e-mail: zhao0441@e.ntu.edu.sg).
Xiaohuan Li is with the Guangxi University Key Laboratory of Intelligent
Networking and Scenario System (School of Information and Communication,
GUET), Guilin, 541004, China, and also with National Engineering Labo-
ratory for Comprehensive Transportation Big Data Application Technology
(Guangxi), Nanning, 530001, China (e-mail: lxhguet@guet.edu.cn).
This work was supported in part by the Guangxi Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grant 2025GXNSFAA069687, in part by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China under Grant U22A2054. (Corresponding author:
Xiaohuan Li).
A
GENTIC artificial intelligence (Agentic AI) has re-
cently emerged as a promising paradigm for building
autonomous and goal-oriented intelligent systems. Unlike con-
ventional data-driven AI models that focus on perception or
prediction, Agentic AI emphasizes decision-making, action
execution, and long-term objective optimization through in-
teractions among multiple agents [1]. Such systems typically
consist of autonomous agents equipped with sensing, compu-
tation, and communication capabilities, enabling them to adapt
their behaviors according to environmental dynamics and task
requirements. Unmanned aerial vehicle networks (UAVNs)
naturally serve as an important physical embodiment of Agen-
tic AI in wireless communication systems [2]. Despite these
advantages, enabling effective agentic intelligence in UAVNs
remains highly challenging. UAVs are subject to strict energy
constraints, which limit network endurance and operational
continuity [3]. Moreover, air–ground communication links are
vulnerable to blockage and interference, making it difficult
to maintain reliable connectivity [4]. In addition, UAVNs
typically operate in highly dynamic environments and must
jointly optimize multiple performance metrics, such as cover-
age, system throughput, energy consumption, and end-to-end
latency. These factors collectively result in a highly complex
and multi-objective optimization problem for UAVNs.
Challenge 1: Bottlenecks in mixed integer non-convex mod-
eling and centralized solving for UAVN topology optimiza-
tion. UAVN topology optimization is typically modeled as
a Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programming (MINLP) problem
[5], involving discrete variables such as link connectivity and
user allocation, as well as continuous variables such as UAV
location and transmit power. Essentially, it is an NP-hard prob-
lem, making it difficult to obtain a globally optimal solution
using precise methods [6].Although convex relaxation methods
[7], centralized linear solvers [8], and nonlinear programming
approaches [9] can provide approximate solutions for small-
scale static problems, they incur high computational and
communication overhead. Moreover, their centralized nature
introduces single-point failures and privacy risks, making them
unsuitable for dynamic distributed UAVNs [10].
Challenge 2: Insufficient efficiency and deployability of
heuristic and learning-based methods in dynamic UAVNs.
To alleviate the complexity of centralized optimization, re-
searchers have proposed heuristic methods such as genetic al-
gorithms [11], particle swarm optimization [12], and simulated
annealing [13]. However, these methods usually rely on global
information, have high computational complexity, are prone
to getting trapped in local optima, and lack convergence guar-
arXiv:2603.07456v1  [cs.DC]  8 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
2
antees [14]. Although UAVN topology optimization methods
based on DRL have certain environmental adaptability [15]
[16] [17], they rely on a large number of interaction samples
and training computations, and the feasibility of actual network
deployment is still limited [18].
Challenge 3: Limited global consistency and generalization
ability in game theory distributed optimization. Game theory
methods are widely used in UAVN optimization because they
are suitable for describing distributed interactions between
multiple agents [19], and have achieved certain results in
problems such as spectrum allocation [20], power control [21],
and user association [22]. However, most game models are
difficult to optimize for global utility and are prone to getting
trapped in local optima [23]. By associating individual utility
changes with the overall situation function, potential games
can guaranty the convergence and consistency of the game.
Exact Potential Games (EPG) further ensure the existence of a
pure strategy Nash equilibrium [24]. However, its adaptability
and generalization ability in complex multi-scenario environ-
ments are limited, and it still relies on manual parameter
tuning, making network optimization difficult.
This paper proposes a UAVN topology optimization method
based on EPG. This method first decomposes the complex
MINLP problem into a dual spatial scale optimization method
of discrete links and continuous parameters. At large spa-
tial scales, this paper proposes an EPG algorithm based on
Log-Linear Learning (L3). This algorithm achieves a sparse
configuration of network links through a probabilistic policy
update mechanism, reducing redundant communication links
and link interference while optimizing network connectivity.
At small spatial scales, this paper proposes an approximate
gradient based EPG (AG-EPG), which optimizes the en-
ergy consumption, deployment, power, and user allocation
of UAVNs in a distributed environment to improve system
throughput and reduce latency. Both algorithms require only
local information interaction among nodes to make decisions,
without relying on a central control node. Furthermore, to
improve the adaptability and generalization ability of these
algorithms in multiple scenarios and reduce the complexity of
manual parameter tuning, this paper introduces a LLM and
a self-built knowledge base to automatically generate utility
functions and weight coefficients. The main contributions of
this paper are as follows:
• Framework: A Agentic AI-driven low-altitude UAVN
deployment model is constructed. A MINLP optimization
problem is established, involving discrete decision vari-
ables such as the number of communication links between
UAVs and the selection of ground user (GU) access
associations, and continuous decision variables such as
the coordinates of the UAVs and the transmission power
configuration. We employ Agentic AI to decompose high-
level deployment objectives into structured sub-problems,
where decision-making agents interact with the network
environment and generate actions through game-based
learning dynamics.
• Problem and Solution: A dual-spatial-scale optimization
strategy is proposed to solve the discrete link topol-
ogy optimization and continuous parameter optimization
problems respectively. At a large spatial scale, an EPG
algorithm based on log-linear learning (L3-EPG) is pro-
posed to effectively eliminate redundant communication
links while ensuring network connectivity. At a small spa-
tial scale, an approximate gradient based EPG (AG-EPG)
algorithm is proposed to achieve joint optimization of
UAV coordinate adjustment, differentiated transmission
power allocation, and GU load balancing.
• LLM Enhancement Solution: A dedicated domain
knowledge base for UAVN topology optimization is con-
structed, covering wireless communication theory, basic
principles of game theory, and related optimization cases.
Combining the Retrieval Enhanced Generation (RAG)
framework, a Agentic AI is used to automatically retrieve
relevant knowledge and generate weight coefficients in
the utility function based on specific feature parameters
such as node size, user distribution characteristics, and
environmental occlusion degree of the current network
scenario. This work improves the algorithm’s adaptability
and generalization ability under different network config-
urations.
• Validation: Extensive experiments are conducted to ver-
ify the performance of LLM-based knowledge retrieval,
the convergence of the EPG, and topology optimization,
and to demonstrate the substantial advantages of the
proposed approach over baseline algorithms in terms of
energy consumption, end-to-end latency, and throughput.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section
II reviews the related literature. Section III describes the
system model. Section IV formulates the optimization problem
and further decomposes it into tractable subproblems. Section
V develops an EPG based optimization framework for UAVNs.
Section VI introduces an LLM enhanced utility function
design and weight generation method. Section VII presents
the simulation results and performance analysis, followed by
concluding remarks in Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
A. UAV network deployment optimization
The authors in [25] proposed dynamic topology organization
and maintenance algorithms for autonomous UAV swarms,
focusing on distributed methods to maintain network con-
nectivity and robustness. The authors in [26] studied opti-
mal measurement strategies for linear measurement systems
and applied them to UAV network topology prediction. In
[27] explored biological robustness to design reliable multi-
UAVNs, proposing the bio-LINK scheme to make the network
resilient to UAV node failures. LoS coverage in UAV-based
THz communication networks was analyzed in [28], towards
3D visualization of wireless networks, emphasizing topology
optimization in high-frequency bands to improve coverage and
performance. The authors in [29] introduced formation-aware
UAV network self-organization based on game-theoretic dis-
tributed topology control, aiming to optimize self-organization
performance in multi-hop UAVNs. However, existing studies
predominantly focus on UAV navigation, communication tech-
nologies, and civilian applications. The system modeling in


--- Page 3 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
3
this field often neglects the optimization of network topology
specific to low-altitude environments.
B. Heuristic algorithm-based network optimization
The authors in [14] utilize bi-objective ant colony optimiza-
tion to jointly minimize energy consumption and completion
time in UAV-assisted systems. In [13], a hybrid heuristic
algorithm is designed to optimize multi-UAV routing paths for
time-dependent data collection tasks. In [30], a multi-objective
optimization approach is applied to handle resource scheduling
in UAV-aided device-to-device communication networks. The
authors in [12] propose a hybrid enhanced particle swarm
optimization technique to solve complex UAV path planning
problems. In [31], an elite-driven differential evolution algo-
rithm is developed to jointly optimize the deployment and
flight planning of multi-UAVs.The authors in [6] address the
joint optimization problem of task offloading and resource al-
location in aerial-terrestrial networks. However, these methods
often rely on global information, entail high computational
complexity, and easily fall into local optima without conver-
gence guarantees. However, these methods often face inherent
limitations, including a reliance on difficult-to-obtain global
information, high computational complexity, and a tendency
to converge to local optima without rigorous convergence
guarantees. Moreover, many applied game-theoretic models
lack strict assurances for global utility, potentially resulting
in suboptimal overall system performance.
C. AI-based network optimization
In [20], the author proposed a multi-agent reinforcement
learning scheme to optimize relay selection and power allo-
cation, enhancing the robustness and anti-jamming capability
of UAV swarm communication networks. In [18], the author
investigated the joint optimization of trajectory planning and
network formation topology by integrating Bayesian opti-
mization with DRL, thereby improving network connectivity
and transmission efficiency. In [23], the author proposed an
energy-efficient fast routing protocol for FANETs based on
reinforcement learning, achieving a better trade-off between
network latency and energy consumption. The authors in [32]
investigated the use of LLMs for global resource optimization
in space–air–ground integrated networks by jointly optimizing
user association and UAV coordinates. In [33] and [34], the
authors proposed an interactive generative AI agent framework
for satellite networks by integrating LLMs with retrieval-
augmented generation and a mixture-of-experts transmission
mechanism. However, the practical deployment of such AI
methods, particularly DRL, faces significant hurdles. These
include their heavy reliance on data-intensive and computa-
tionally expensive training with safe environmental interaction,
poor cross-scenario generalization, and a high dependency
on expert tuning, which collectively increase optimization
complexity and hinder real-world application.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
The system model is illustrated in Fig. 1. This scenario ad-
dresses the requirements of urban emergency communication
applications, utilizing multiple UAVs to form an aerial commu-
nication platform that provides wireless access services to GU
equipment. A self-organizing backbone network is formed by
the UAVs via A2A to enable data forwarding and cooperative
communication, while access services for GUs are established
via A2G. Simultaneously, a LLM is introduced, leveraging
multi-source knowledge base collaborative RAG technology,
to assist UAV network architects in generating the utility
functions and weight coefficients required for EPG models,
thereby realizing scenario-adaptive weight configuration.
The design objective of this system model is to maximize
network throughput while minimizing energy consumption
and network latency, by optimizing UAV coordinates, net-
work topology, transmit power, and the number of served
GU devices, under the premise of guaranteeing network
connectivity. The total network operation time T is divided
into several discrete time slots T
= {1, 2, . . . , t, . . . , T},
during which the UAV coordinates, link states, and channel
conditions remain constant. The network consists of N UAV
nodes and M GUs. The set of UAV nodes is denoted as
N = {1, 2, . . . , i, j, . . . , N}, where i ̸= j, and the set of
GU nodes is M = {1, 2, . . . , m, . . . , M}. The coordinates
of UAV i at time t are qi(t) = (xi(t), yi(t), zi(t)), where
xi(t) and yi(t) are the horizontal coordinates, and zi(t) is
the flight altitude. To ensure flight safety, the flight altitude
of the UAVs is determined based on low-altitude airspace
management regulations, terrain topography, and task require-
ments [35], such that zmin ≤zi(t) ≤zmax, ∀i ∈N, where
zmin and zmax represent the minimum and maximum flight
altitudes, respectively. The coordinates of GU m is denoted as
qm(t) = (xm(t), ym(t), 0), assuming that the moving speed
of GUs is typically much lower than that of the UAVs.
Fig. 1.
Agentic AI–driven UAV network deployment model. The model
presents an intent-driven UAV network deployment framework. A Agentic
AI system translates high-level deployment intents into structured parameters
for an EPG. Each UAV optimizes its coordinates and transmit power in
a distributed manner, leading to dynamic topology evolution. The network
converges to a stable Nash equilibrium aligned with the specified deployment
intent.


--- Page 4 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
4
A. Topology Model
The topology of the UAV network is modeled as an undi-
rected graph G(t) = (N, E(t)), where E(t) is the set of
communication links at time t. To ensure the cooperative
communication capability and information transmission reach-
ability of the network, G(t) is required to remain connected
at any given time, implying that there exists at least one
communication path between any two UAV nodes in the
network. The network topology is modeled as a symmetric
adjacency matrix A(t) = [aij(t)]N×N, with elements defined
as follows:
aij(t) =





1,
if a communication link exists
between UAV i and j
0,
otherwise
.
(1)
Since the network is an undirected graph, the adjacency
matrix satisfies symmetry:
aij(t) = aji(t),
aii(t) = 0.
(2)
The maximum communication radius of a UAV is Rc,
which is jointly determined by the UAV’s transmit power,
reception sensitivity, antenna gain, and channel propagation
characteristics. In practical systems, to ensure link quality
and communication reliability, constraints on the Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (SNR) or Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio
(SINR) thresholds are typically considered. The Euclidean
distance between UAV i and j at time t is expressed as follows:
dij(t) = ||qi(t) −qj(t)||
=
q
(xi(t)−xj(t))2+(yi(t)−yj(t))2+(zi(t)−zj(t))2.
(3)
This paper defines the Line-of-Sight (LoS) link indicator
ζij(t) ∈{0, 1} as follows:
ζij(t) =













1,
if a Line-of-Sight (LoS) link
exists between UAVs i and j,
0,
if the link between UAVs i and
j is Non-Line-of-Sight (NLoS).
(4)
The determination of an LoS link is based on the altitudes
of the UAVs, their horizontal distance, and the distribution of
obstacles in the environment. Specifically, ζij(t) = 1 when
the direct path between UAVs i and j is not obstructed by
buildings, terrain, or other obstacles; otherwise, ζij(t) = 0.
Network connectivity can be determined via the algebraic
properties of the graph’s Laplacian matrix L(t) = ∇(t) −
A(t), where ∇(t) = diag(δ1, δ2, . . . , δN) is the degree matrix,
and δi = P
j∈N aij(t) is the degree of node i. A necessary and
sufficient condition for graph connectivity is that the second
smallest eigenvalue (algebraic connectivity) of the Laplacian
matrix is greater than zero.
B. Communication Model
The communication links in the UAV network are classified
into two categories: A2A and A2G. A2A typically possess
Line-of-Sight (LoS) conditions but are still subject to path
loss, small-scale fading, and Doppler effects. A2G have more
complex channel conditions due to the influence of building
blockage, terrain undulation, and ground reflection.
1) A2A Communication
The path loss model adopts the equivalent free-space prop-
agation model form:
LA2A(dij(t)) = 20 log10
4πfcdij(t)
3 × 108

+ ξLoS,
(5)
where fc denotes the carrier frequency, and ξLoS represents the
additional loss for LoS links, including atmospheric absorption
and weather effects. The channel power gain from UAV i to
UAV j is hij = GtxGrx · 10−P LA2A(dij(t))/10, where Gtx and
Grx are the gains of the transmitting and receiving antennas,
respectively. PLA2A is the path loss of the A2A.
When UAV j receives a signal, it suffers from interfer-
ence from other simultaneously transmitting UAVs k (k ̸=
i, k ∈N). The total interference-plus-noise power is Ij(t) =
P
k̸=i,k∈N pk(t)hkj +σ2, where σ2 = κBT0B is the power of
additive white Gaussian noise, κB is the Boltzmann constant,
T0 is the absolute temperature, and B is the system bandwidth.
The SINR of the link from UAV i to j is expressed as
follows:
γij =
P rx
ij
P
k̸=i,k∈N pk(t)hkj + σ2 ,
(6)
where P rx
ij = pi(t)hij is the signal power received by UAV j
from UAV i, and pi is the transmit power of UAV i.
Based on the Shannon formula, the instantaneous data
transmission rate of the UAV link (i, j) is expressed as follows:
rij(t) = B log2(1 + γij).
(7)
2) A2G Communication
According to ITU-R P.1410 recommendation [36], the LoS
probability PLoS of the A2G is related to the elevation angle
θ:
PLoS(θ) =
1
1 + ϑ exp(−β[θ −ϑ]),
(8)
where θ = arctan

zi(t)
√
(xi(t)−xm(t))2+(yi(t)−ym(t))2

is the
angle between the GU’s horizontal plane and the A2G, and
ϑ, β are environmental parameters.
The path loss of the A2G distinguishes between LoS and
NLoS (Non-Line-of-Sight) cases:
LA2G(dim(t)) =



20 log10

4πfcdim(t)
3×108

+ ξLoS,
LoS
20 log10

4πfcdim(t)
3×108

+ ξNLoS,
NLoS
,
(9)
where dim(t) = |qi(t) −qm(t)| represents the distance
between UAV i and user m, and ξNLoS is the additional NLoS
loss.
Considering interference caused by multiple UAVs trans-
mitting simultaneously, the SINR for user m is:
γim =
P rx
im
P
k̸=i,k∈N pk(t)hkm + σ2 ,
(10)


--- Page 5 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
5
where hkm is the channel power gain from UAV k to user m,
denoted as hkm = GtxGrx · 10−P LA2G(dkm(t))/10 · |ϑ|2. Here,
ϑ is the small-scale fading coefficient, determined by PLoS
(Rician fading for LoS, Rayleigh fading for NLoS).PLA2G is
the path loss of the A2G. P rx
im = pi(t)him is the signal power
received by user m from UAV i.
The data transmission rate of the A2G is:
rim(t) = B log2(1 + γim).
(11)
3) Throughput
The total throughput of A2A is:
ThA2A =
X
i∈N
X
j>i,j∈N
aij(t)rij(t).
(12)
The total throughput of A2G is:
ThA2G =
X
i∈N
X
m∈M
cim(t)rim(t),
(13)
where cim(t) is the coverage indicator variable; if user m
communicates with UAV i, then cim(t) = 1, otherwise
cim(t) = 0. The throughput of UAV i at time t is Thi(t),
and the network throughput is the sum of A2A and A2G
throughputs:
Thtotal =
X
i∈N
Thi(t) = ThA2A + ThA2G.
(14)
C. Energy Consumption Model
The total energy consumption of a UAV comprises commu-
nication energy consumption and flight energy consumption.
These are critical factors constraining network performance
and task duration.
1) Communication Energy
The communication energy consumption of UAV i includes
transmission energy and circuit energy:
Ecom,i(t) = pi(t)tcom + Pcirc(t)tcom,
(15)
where pi(t) is the transmit power, and tcom represents the
communication duration, with length ∆t. Pcirc(t) is the radio
frequency circuit power, including the power consumption
of amplifiers, mixers, filters, ADCs (Analog to Digital Con-
verter), etc. The communication energy of UAV i simplifies
to:
Ecomm,i(t) = (pi(t) + Pcirc(t))∆t.
(16)
2) Flight Energy
UAV flight energy consumption consists of several com-
ponents: blade profile power, induced power, parasite power,
and acceleration energy. The blade profile power is used to
overcome air resistance during rotor blade rotation: Pblade(t) =
δ
8ρairSκ3
tip, where δ is the profile drag coefficient, ρair is
the air density, S is the rotor disk area, κtip is the blade
tip speed. Induced power is used to generate lift to support
the UAV weight: Pinduced(t) = (1+κb)W 3/2
√2ρairS
, where W is the
UAV weight (frame, battery, payload), and κb is the induced
power correction factor. This power is maximum at hover and
decreases slightly with increased flight speed. Parasite power
accounts for air resistance on the fuselage during forward
flight: Pparasite(t) = 1
2dfvi(t)3, where df is the fuselage drag
coefficient, and vi(t) is the flight speed of UAV i.
The total flight power of UAV i during flight is Pflight,i(t) =
Pblade(t)+Pinduced(t)+Pparasite(t). Within ∆t, the flight energy
consumption is Eflight,i(t) = Pflight,i∆t. When the UAV accel-
erates or decelerates, additional energy is required to change
its kinetic energy: Eaccel,i(t) = 1
2(|vi(t+∆t)|2−|vi(t)|2)W/g,
where g is the gravitational acceleration. The total flight energy
is:
Eflight,i(t) = Pflight,i∆t + Eaccel,i(t).
(17)
The energy consumption of UAV i at time t is Ei(t), and
the energy consumption of all UAVs in the network is:
Etotal =
X
i∈N
Ei(t) =
X
i∈N
Ecomm,i(t) + Eflight,i.
(18)
D. Latency Model
Transmission latency is the time required to send a packet
over the link, depending on the packet size and transmission
rate.
Ttrans,ij(t) = Ldata
rij(t),
(19)
where Ldata is the packet size. Propagation latency is the time
required for the signal to travel through space:
Tprop,ij(t) =
dij(t)
3 × 108 .
(20)
The average latency for UAV i is Ti(t), and the network
latency is the sum of the latencies for all links:
Ttotal =
X
i∈N
Ti(t)
=
X
i∈N
X
j>i,j∈N
aij(t) (Ttrans,ij(t) + Tprop,ij(t))
+
X
i∈N
X
m∈M
cim(t) (Ttrans,ij(t) + Tprop,ij(t)) .
(21)
E. Mobility Model
The mobility characteristics of UAVs directly affect network
topology dynamics and link stability. Under the discrete time
slot model, the UAV coordinates update equation is:
qi(t + 1) = qi(t) + vi(t)∆t.
(22)
Expanding this vector equation into three coordinate com-
ponents:





xi(t + 1) = xi(t) + vx
i (t)∆t
yi(t + 1) = yi(t) + vy
i (t)∆t
zi(t + 1) = zi(t) + vz
i (t)∆t
.
(23)
The UAV velocity is controlled by acceleration:
vi(t + 1) = vi(t) + ˙vi(t)∆t,
(24)
where ˙vi(t) is the acceleration vector.


--- Page 6 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
6
Fig. 2. The decomposition process of the Agentic AI-driven UAVN deployment problem. Agentic AI is capable of decoupling high-level tasks, generate sub-
problems, plan actions, and interact with other tools or environments with human [1]. First, the network deployment problem is divided into two subproblems.
Then, these subproblems are solved using L3-EPG and AG-EPG, respectively. Finally, the RAG-LLM module is used to generate adaptive weight coefficients
for the utility function through multi-source knowledge retrieval and logical verification, aiming to obtain a network deployment scheme and parameters that
meet the actual needs of the network.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The optimization objectives for the UAV network are to
minimize the number of communication links between UAVs,
maximize network throughput, and minimize UAV energy
consumption and network latency:
P :
min
A,P,Q,C
 X
i∈N
X
j>i,j∈N
aij(t)
−ΥThtotal + µEtotal + τTtotal

(25)
s.t.
X
i∈N
cim(t) ≥1,
∀m ∈M,
(25a)
dim(t) ≤Rc,
if cim(t) = 1, ∀i ∈N, m ∈M, (25b)
pmin ≤pi(t) ≤pmax,
∀i ∈N,
(25c)
qi(t) ∈R3,
∀i ∈N,
(25d)
λ2(L(t)) > 0,
(25e)
Ei(t) ≤Emax
i
,
(25f)
where A is the adjacency matrix, P is the power allocation
vector, Q is the coordinates vector, and C is the user as-
sociation matrix. Υ, µ, and τ are weighting factors. Rc is
the coverage radius, and pmin and pmax are the minimum
and maximum transmit powers, respectively. R3 denotes the
3D movement region of the UAVs. (25a) represents the user
coverage constraint, ensuring that every GU m is covered by
at least one UAV i providing communication service. (25b)
represents the communication distance constraint; when user
m establishes a connection with UAV i, the Euclidean distance
dim(t) must not exceed the maximum communication radius
Rc. (25c) represents the UAV transmit power constraint, where
pmin and pmax denote the minimum and maximum allowable
transmit powers, respectively. (25d) specifies the spatial coor-
dinate constraints for the UAV, requiring that the coordinates
qi(t) of UAV i must be located within the permissible flight re-
gion R3. (25e) is the network connectivity constraint, ensuring
that the network graph G(t) remains connected at all times by
requiring the second smallest eigenvalue λ2 of the Laplacian
matrix L(t) to be greater than zero. (25f) indicates the upper
bound of energy consumption for UAV i, where Emax
i
is
the initial battery energy of UAV i. Since the multi-objective
optimization problem of UAV network topology involves both
discrete and continuous variables and contains non-convex
constraints, P is a MINLP problem. It belongs to the class
of NP-hard problems, with variables coupled to each other
[6]. The strategy space of its discrete variables grows rapidly
with the scale of the UAV network. Directly solving it jointly
would lead to a drastic increase in computational complexity.
Agentic AI is capable of decoupling high-level tasks, gen-
erate sub-problems, plan actions, and interact with other tools
or environments with human [1]. The Fig. 2 depicts an agen-
tic AI–driven network deployment framework, where UAV
network deployment is formulated as a high-level decision
task, decomposed into coupled discrete and continuous sub-
problems (i.e. P1 and P2), and solved through game-theoretic
agents interacting with the environment, with LLMs serving
as knowledge-guided utility designers. Since the adjacency
matrix aij(t) consists of discrete variables, P1 represents
a discrete variable optimization. This paper describes P1
as minimizing the number of communication links between
UAVs:
P1 : min
A
X
i∈N
X
j>i,j∈N
aij(t).
(26)
Furthermore, since network throughput Thtotal, UAV energy
consumption Etotal, and network latency Ttotal are continuous
variables, P2 is a continuous variable optimization. P2 is
formulated to minimize the number of communication links


--- Page 7 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
7
between UAVs:
P2 : max
P,Q,C
 X
i∈N
Thi(t) −
X
i∈N
Ei(t) −
X
i∈N
Ti(t)
!
.
(27)
V. UAV NETWORK DEPLOYMENT BASED ON EPG
P1 is modeled as an EPG model F1, which is utilized to
minimize communication links between UAVs and optimize
discrete variables. P2 is modeled as an EPG model F2,
which is utilized to optimize global throughput, UAV energy
consumption, and network latency by optimizing continuous
variables. Utility functions and potential functions satisfying
the conditions of EPGs are designed for F1 and F2. This
ensures that the change in the utility function caused by a
unilateral strategy change of any UAV is consistent with the
change in the potential function. The game achieves a global
optimal solution through the Nash Equilibrium, ensuring the
convergence of the distributed optimization.
Algorithm 1 L3-EPG
Input: N, Rc, Tmax
Output: A∗
1: Generate initial coordinates based on K-Means, construct
G(0) and A(0)
2: Initialize: aij(0) ←1, ∀i ∈N; t ←0
3: while ∥P aij(t) −P aij(t −1)∥≥1 and t < Tmax do
4:
for each i ∈N do
5:
Calculate ρi1(Γi1, Γ−i1)
6:
if aij(t) = 1 & ζij(t) = 1 then
7:
Update
Γi1(t
+
1)
with
probability
exp[ρi1(Γi1, Γ−i1)]/ P exp[ρi1]
8:
aij(t + 1) ←0
9:
end if
10:
end for
11:
Construct candidate adjacency matrix A′(t + 1)
12:
if λ2(L(t)) > 0, isConnected(A′(t + 1)) then
13:
A(t + 1) ←A′(t + 1)
14:
else
15:
A(t + 1) ←A(t)
16:
end if
17:
t ←t + 1
18: end while
19: return A∗←A(t)
A. Log-Linear Learning based EPG
L3-EPG is utilized to optimize the number of communi-
cation links between UAVs in the network,in Algorithm 1.
The L3 method is based on reinforcement learning principles
and adopts a probabilistic strategy selection mechanism. In
this mechanism, each UAV acts as an independent participant
and autonomously decides whether to maintain or disconnect
a communication link based on local information encoded in
the adjacency matrix. This decision process is guided by log-
linear learning rules, balancing exploration and exploitation
by allocating action probabilities proportional to utility. This
mechanism ensures that UAVs adaptively optimize their strate-
gies during the iteration process, minimizing redundant links
while maintaining necessary network connectivity.The EPG
model is defined as F1 = {N, {Γi1}i∈N , {ρi1}i∈N }, where
ρi1 represents the utility of UAV i. Γ1
i = {aij(t), i, j ∈N}
represents the strategy space of the UAV, meaning the strategy
of each UAV is to adjust the communication link aij with other
UAVs.
Each UAV enables the UAV network to achieve an optimal
connection topology by adjusting communication links be-
tween UAVs and maximizing its local utility. A utility function
is designed to reflect the reduction of redundant communi-
cation links between UAVs while simultaneously lowering
interference and communication energy consumption. The
utility function for UAV i is defined as:
ρi1(Γi1, Γ−i1) = −(η1
X
j∈N
aij(t)+
η2Ii(t) + η3Ecomm,i(t)),
(28)
where
Γ−i1
represents
the
strategies
of
other
UAVs,
P
j∈N aij(t) is the number of links connected to UAV i, and
η1, η2, η3 are weight coefficients.
The potential function can directly represent the changes in
the utility functions of the game participants, ensuring that the
utility of any participant is consistent with the global objective.
To align individual decisions with the global optimal network
topology, the global potential function is defined as:
Φ1(Γ) =
X
i∈N
ρi1(Γi1, Γ−i1).
(29)
Furthermore, based on the iterative update mechanism [37]
of BRD, each UAV calculates and selects the best action that
enhances its local utility after receiving strategy information
from other UAVs:
Γi1(t + 1)=argmaxρi1(Γi1, Γ−i1(t)).
(30)
L3-EPG addresses the link selection problem involving dis-
crete parameters, and its optimization process focuses primar-
ily on global optimality at the link topology level. Although
occlusion factors have been considered in the utility function
and links less affected by occlusion are prioritized, individual
links may still be partially obstructed by buildings under
certain initial UAV coordinates. This issue will be resolved
in the subsequent continuous parameter optimization phase of
the algorithm V-B.
B. Approximate Gradient based EPG algorithm
AG-EPG enables each UAV to iteratively optimize its de-
cision space via gradient-based best responses and historical
action results, identifying optimal actions consistent with
network objectives derived from the strategies of other UAVs.
This method includes a random exploration process wherein
UAVs utilize updated condition evaluation strategies through
an ACK broadcast mechanism, ensuring necessary real-time
data sharing. The AG-EPG algorithm performs continuous
parameter optimization on the basis of the optimization com-
pleted by the L3-EPG algorithm. Unlike BRD, which selects


--- Page 8 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
8
Fig. 3. Framework of RAG-based Large Language Model assisted UAV network optimization. The framework consists of four modules: 1⃝Knowledge Vector
Database Module, which performs text segmentation and vector embedding on the pre-constructed knowledge base and literature to establish a retrievable
database; 2⃝Knowledge Retrieval Module, which receives the network manager’s intent and retrieves the most relevant knowledge fragments via cosine
similarity calculation; 3⃝Result Generation Module, which feeds the retrieved domain knowledge into the LLM as contextual prompts; and 4⃝Iterative
Refinement Module, where the LLM generates initial utility functions and weighting coefficients. The manager provides feedback for the LLM to refine the
results by integrating knowledge base information until the generated parameters satisfy the specific network requirements.
the optimal action solely based on the current strategies of
other participants, the proposed AG-EPG algorithm combines
approximate gradient information with historical decision re-
sults for best response calculation and introduces a random ex-
ploration mechanism to avoid falling into local optima, thereby
enhancing the algorithm’s global search capability. The EPG
model is defined as F2 = {N, {Γi2}i∈N , {ρi2}i∈N }, where
Γi2 = {qi(t), pi(t), ci(t)} represents the strategy space of
the UAVs. The strategy of each UAV involves adjusting its
coordinates qi(t), transmission power pi(t), and the GU equip-
ment ci(t)={cim(t), m∈M} with which it communicates.
The utility function for UAV i is defined as:
ρi2(Γi2, Γ−i2) = ψ1Thi(t)–ψ2Ei(t)–ψ3Ti(t)
(31)
where Γ−i2 represents the strategies of other UAVs, and
ψ1, ψ2, ψ3 are weight coefficients. All participants aim to
maximize their own utility, i.e., maxρi2(Γi2, Γ−i2).
Since the utility function encourages UAVs to improve
global throughput, UAVs will adjust their flight altitude to
reduce the communication distance to GUs, provided that UAV
links are not altered. Therefore, fine-tuning of the UAVs’ 3D
coordinates is required to ensure comprehensive coverage of
GUs by the UAVs.
The global potential function is defined as:
Φ2(Γ) =
X
i∈N
ρi2 (Γi2, Γ−i2) .
(32)
Furthermore, each UAV updates its link strategy [38] ac-
cording to the probability update mechanism of L3:
Γi2(t + 1)=argmaxρi2(Γi2, Γ−i2(t)).
(33)
VI. LLM-ENHANCED EPG FOR FUNCTION AND
PARAMETERS GENERATING
A. Knowledge Base Construction
In this paper, the knowledge system of the pre-constructed
knowledge base is extended by integrating an external knowl-
edge base, such as academic papers related to UAV resource
optimization from IEEE Xplore. The final knowledge base
consists of the pre-constructed knowledge base and external
academic papers. To achieve efficient semantic retrieval, these
knowledge bases in raw text format must be converted into
machine-understandable vector representations. Therefore, a
framework for a multi-source knowledge base collaborative
RAG-assisted LLM for constructing optimization problems is
proposed, as shown in Fig. 3. The construction of a knowledge
base requires transforming inputs into semantic information
to facilitate subsequent retrieval and generation processes.
Specifically, for pre-constructed knowledge base documents
or academic texts denoted as U from various sources, an
equidistant segmentation method is employed to partition the
text into a set of knowledge blocks U = {u1, . . . , uo, . . . , uO}.
Consequently, the vector representation of a knowledge block
uo ∈U is given by:
E(uo) = Embed(uo).
(34)
Here, E(·) denotes the process of representing a knowledge
block as a vector utilizing the text embedding model Embed(·).
Possessing robust representation capabilities, the text embed-
ding model can encode natural language into vector formats
processable by neural networks, thereby playing a pivotal role
in realizing human-machine interaction. In this paper, the text-
embedding-ada-002 model is utilized as the text embedding
model [39]. Subsequently, the vector representation E(uo)
of the block is stored in a vector database. The knowledge


--- Page 9 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
9
vectors of all texts collectively constitute the knowledge vector
database, facilitating the subsequent RAG process.
This paper employs RAG for document retrieval and gen-
eration. The RAG process involves retrieving relevant domain
knowledge from the constructed knowledge vector database
to support the LLM in generating the mathematical models
required by the UAV network topology constructor. The RAG
process acquires knowledge by inputting the construction re-
quirement q, and subsequently utilizes the retrieved knowledge
as a prompt to assist the LLM in generating the modeling
solution. The RAG framework comprises a retrieval module
and a generation module, which are detailed as follows:
B. Retrieval Knowledge Base
The retrieval model Uo(uTOP−K|ϱ) is based on a dual-
encoder architecture for semantic retrieval, meaning the se-
mantic encoding of the construction requirement ϱ and the
semantic encoding of the knowledge chunks U are used to
retrieve the most relevant knowledge chunks according to the
construction requirement ϱ to support mathematical modeling.
The retrieval model is expressed as:
Uo(uTOP−K|ϱ) = argmax
K
(CS (E(uo), E(ϱ))) , o ∈O, (35)
where Uo(uTOP−K|ϱ) denotes the truncation of the original
probability distribution using the top-K technique, i.e., select-
ing the top K most relevant knowledge chunks based on the
construction requirement. Eϱ is the vector representation of
the construction requirement, and CS(Euo, Eϱ) represents the
cosine similarity between the construction requirement and the
knowledge chunk uo.
Cosine similarity is utilized to measure the semantic sim-
ilarity between two vectors. The semantic similarity between
vector Euo and vector Eϱ is expressed as:
CS (E(uo), E(ϱ)) =
PO
o=l (E(ϱ)[ℓ]×E(uo)[ℓ])
qPL
ℓ=l (E(ϱ)[ℓ])2qPO
o=l (E(uo)[ℓ])2 ,
(36)
where ℓrepresents the vector index and L represents the length
of the vector. From this, the semantic similarity between the
construction requirement ϱ and the knowledge chunk uo can
be obtained.
C. Result Generation
In this paper, retrieved knowledge chunks are directly used
as prompts input to the generation model. The function of the
generation module is to generate a correct response based on
the given construction requirement ϱ and the corresponding
retrieved knowledge uTOP−K. The generation model UΘ(Ξ |
ϱ, uTOP−K) is expressed as follows:
UΘ(S | ϱ, uTOP−K) =
L
Y
I
pθ(SI | ϱ, uTOP−K, S1:I−1),
(37)
where S represents the generated response sequence of length
L, and the output of each token SI depends on the preceding
I −1 tokens S1:I−1, the construction requirement ϱ, and the
retrieved knowledge chunk uTOP−K.
The generation module is serviced by any LLM, such as
ChatGPT [40], Grok [41], or DeepSeek [42]. In this paper, a
pre-trained GPT is employed to implement the model UΘ(S |
ϱ, uTOP−K), utilizing retrieved knowledge and construction
requirements as input prompts to generate the utility functions
and their weight coefficients for the EPG.
As shown in Fig. 3, the generation of weight coefficients
employs a human-machine collaborative interaction method.
First, the network manager inputs scenario parameters, in-
cluding communication area range, number of UAV nodes
and 3D coordinates, GU equipment distribution, communica-
tion radius, average communication interference power level,
etc., and defines the optimization objectives. Subsequently,
the LLM generates initial utility functions and their weight
coefficients based on the self-built knowledge base. Next,
the LLM confirms with the network manager whether the
generated utility functions meet actual requirements.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
The experiment constructs a low-altitude communication
network scenario comprising 10 UAVs and 20 users, where
users are uniformly and randomly distributed within the area.
The LoS probability, denoted as PLoS(θ), for the A2G adopts
the elevation-angle-dependent model from ITU-R P.1410 [36].
The environmental parameters are set to α = 9.6 and β =
0.28. The system bandwidth is B = 2 MHz, the path loss
exponent is n0 = 2.5, the noise power spectral density is
N0 = −174 dBm/Hz, and the antenna gains are Gt, Gr = 3
dBi. Other simulation parameters are listed in Table I.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Symbol
Meaning
Value
N
Number of UAVs
10
M
Number of GUs
20
R3
Communication area range
10 km × 10 km
[zmin, zmax]
UAV altitude range
[100 m, 300 m]
Rc
Maximum communication radius
4000 m
B
System bandwidth
2 MHz
pmax
Maximum transmit power
2.0 W
pmin
Minimum transmit power
0.5 W
n0
Path loss exponent
2.5
N0
Noise power spectral density
−174 dBm/Hz
Gt, Gr
Antenna gain
3 dBi
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method, the
algorithm is compared with the following four benchmark
parameter optimization algorithms:
• EPG based on Best Response Dynamics (BRD-EPG):
BRD-EPG iteratively updates UAV coordinates, transmit
power, and user association via gradient descent, basing
decisions on the maximization of each UAV’s local utility
[43].
• Non-Cooperative Game Solver based on BRD (BRD-
NCG): BRD-NCG utilizes BRD to iteratively update
UAV strategies to reach a Nash Equilibrium, where strat-
egy updates depend solely on the local utility function of
each individual UAV.
• Evolutionary Game (ETG): This approach employs
Replicator Dynamics [44] to model the evolutionary


--- Page 10 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
10
process of strategies within a population. ETG adjusts
the strategy probability distribution in an online manner.
• Genetic Algorithm (GA): GA utilizes crossover and mu-
tation mechanisms to obtain parameter convergence es-
timates without considering distributed game constraints
[11].
Fig. 4. Retrieval precision under different knowledge block sizes.
(a) L3-EPG
(b) AG-EPG
(c) L3-EPG
(d) AG-EPG
Fig. 5. Verification of convergence and global consistency of algorithms.
A. Analysis of LLM Knowledge Retrieval
As shown in Fig. 4, the knowledge block size and the
value of the retrieval count K significantly influence retrieval
precision. When the block size is small and K is low, the over-
all precision is relatively poor. This is primarily because the
volume of effective information returned during the retrieval
stage is insufficient, leading to a lack of adequate grounding
for the generation stage and consequently degrading retrieval
precision. As the block size increases and K is moderately
raised, the retrieved results can provide more complete context
support, thereby improving precision. However, when the
block size continues to increase or K becomes excessively
high, a decline in precision is observed. The main reason is
that the proportion of irrelevant or weakly relevant information
in the retrieved content rises. With longer input texts, the
LLM is required to filter key conditions and core clues from a
larger scope, which increases the susceptibility to issues such
as unfocused key point extraction and insufficient utilization
of key constraints, ultimately reducing precision. Therefore,
it is evident that larger block sizes and K values are not
necessarily better; instead, a balance must be struck between
information coverage and redundancy control. Considering the
requirements for both retrieval precision and the control of
retrieval text scale, this paper adopts parameter settings that
achieve peak precision while avoiding excessive redundancy,
specifically setting the block size to 4, and K to 3.
B. Convergence of EPG
Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b) demonstrates the correspondence
between changes in local utility and changes in the potential
function, quantified using the correlation coefficient and the
coefficient of determination (R2). Experimental results indi-
cate that the trends in the correlation coefficient and R2 for
both L3-EPG and AG-EPG are consistent and close. Fig. 5(c)
and Fig. 5(d) further presents the convergence trends of 10
UAVs during the iterative process. It can be observed that
although the curves for L3-EPG and AG-EPG exhibit certain
fluctuations in the early stages of iteration, their directions of
change are highly consistent, characterized by a gradual rise
from the initial stage to a final steady state. This convergence
pattern, where individual trends are consistent and ultimately
stable, indicates that the strategy updates of the algorithm
not only enable individual UAVs to achieve improvements
but also ensure that the update directions of different UAVs
do not conflict with each other, demonstrating a feature of
synergistic advancement in the overall iteration. Consequently,
these results demonstrate that the changes in local utility
brought about by unilateral updates remain highly consistent
with the changes in the potential function, thereby avoiding
the oscillatory situations common in distributed updates and
verifying the stable convergence capability of the proposed
method.
C. Topology Optimization
Fig. 6 illustrates the topology evolution process during
discrete link optimization. The initial topology exhibits dense
links with numerous redundant connections. As shown in
Fig. 6(a) and Fig. 6(b), as the L3-EPG iteration proceeds,
redundant links are progressively eliminated under the premise
of satisfying connectivity constraints, resulting in a significant
reduction in the number of links. This result aligns with the
optimization objective of the discrete stage: to prioritize the
retention of critical links while reducing unnecessary ones
under the condition of guaranteeing network connectivity,
thereby creating conditions for minimizing interference and
energy consumption. Fig. 6(c) displays the dynamically ad-
justed topology after a change in GU coordinates (at time


--- Page 11 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
11
(a) Time slot 0 (fully connected)
(b) Time slot t
(c) Time slot t + 32
Fig. 6. Topology optimization process.
(a) 3D topology
(b) Node altitude
Fig. 7. Topology of UAV network.
slot t + 32). It can be observed that the UAV coordinates
have undergone adaptive adjustments, ensuring that all links
successfully bypass or fly over obstacles.
Fig. 7(a) visualizes the 3D structure of the network topol-
ogy. Simultaneously, as observed in Fig. 7(b), which displays
the flight altitudes of network nodes, the flight altitudes of
certain UAVs are significantly higher than the initial altitude
baseline. Their coordinates correspond to adjacent high-rise
buildings, indicating that the continuous stage provides more
adequate LoS conditions for critical connections by increasing
local altitudes, thereby reducing the occurrence of obstructed
links. Meanwhile, the altitudes of the remaining UAVs mostly
remain near the initial altitude, with slight descents to re-
duce network communication distances, which is conducive
to lowering communication latency. These results reflect the
complementarity between the L3-EPG and AG-EPG methods.
D. Network Performance
Fig. 8 presents a comparison of energy consumption, la-
tency, and network throughput among different algorithms
under varying numbers of UAVs. AG-EPG achieves the highest
throughput while maintaining lower total energy consumption
and total latency across different UAV quantities. As the
number of UAVs increases, the total energy consumption of
all algorithms shows an upward trend, as shown in Fig. 8(a).
Similarly, the total latency of all algorithms exhibits a slight
upward trend with the increase in UAVs, as shown in Fig. 8(b).
This is because maintaining network links and communication
overhead increases correspondingly with the number of UAVs.
However, since AG-EPG can reduce unnecessary connections
during the topology optimization stage, the network energy
consumption and latency based on AG-EPG remain the lowest.
Furthermore, in the continuous optimization stage, by adjust-
ing the 3D coordinates and transmit power of the UAVs, the
communication distances of some links are reduced, and trans-
mit power is optimized, thereby improving link transmission


--- Page 12 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
12
(a) UAV energy consumption
(b) Network latency
(c) Network throughput
Fig. 8. Comparison of network performance.
conditions. Compared with the four benchmark algorithms
under different network scales, the network throughput is
improved by approximately 8.4%, as shown in Fig. 8(c).
VIII. CONCLUSION
The paper studied the deployment problem in UAVNs,
which involves coupled discrete link decisions and continu-
ous resource configurations. To address the resulting mixed-
integer nonconvex formulation, a dual spatial-scale optimiza-
tion framework based on EPGs was proposed. At the large
spatial scale, L3-EPG was adopted to optimize network link
configurations, while at the small spatial scale, AG-EPG were
used to jointly optimize UAV deployment, transmission power,
and user association. In addition, a LLM–based mechanism
was incorporated to assist utility weight generation, reducing
manual parameter tuning and improving adaptability across
different scenarios. Simulation results validated the conver-
gence of the proposed methods and demonstrated performance
improvements over baseline schemes in terms of energy con-
sumption, latency, and throughput.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Liu, C. Zhao, J. Wang, Y. Xu, D. Niyato, J. Kang,
Y. Li, S. Mao et al., “Toward edge general intelligence with agentic ai
and agentification: Concepts, technologies, and future directions,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 28, pp. 4285–4318, 2026.
[2] J. Li, G. Sun, L. Duan, and Q. Wu, “Multi-objective optimization for
uav swarm-assisted iot with virtual antenna arrays,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4890–4907, 2023.
[3] X. Tang, Q. Chen, R. Yu, and X. Li, “Digital twin-empowered task
assignment in aerial mec network: A resource coalition cooperation ap-
proach with generative model,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science
and Engineering, 2024.
[4] R. Zhang, H. Du, Y. Liu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, S. Sun, X. Shen, and
H. V. Poor, “Interactive ai with retrieval-augmented generation for next
generation networking,” IEEE Network, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 414–424,
2024.
[5] C. Zhan, H. Hu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, and S. Mao, “Tradeoff between age of
information and operation time for uav sensing over multi-cell cellular
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 23, no. 4, pp.
2976–2991, 2024.
[6] G. Sun, L. He, Z. Sun, Q. Wu, S. Liang, J. Li, D. Niyato, and V. C.
Leung, “Joint task offloading and resource allocation in aerial-terrestrial
uav networks with edge and fog computing for post-disaster rescue,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 8582–8600,
2024.
[7] J. Wang, L. Bai, Z. Fang, R. Han, J. Wang, and J. Choi, “Energy-
efficient communication networks via multiple aerial reconfigurable
intelligent surfaces: Drl and optimization approach,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 73, no. 7, pp. 9755–9770, 2024.
[8] A. Gaydamaka, A. Samuylov, D. Moltchanov, M. Ashraf, B. Tan,
and Y. Koucheryavy, “Dynamic topology organization and maintenance
algorithms for autonomous uav swarms,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4423–4439, 2024.
[9] Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, C. Huang, H. Huang, and A.-T. Nguyen, “Joint
optimization of deployment and flight planning of multi-uavs for long-
distance data collection from large-scale iot devices,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 791–804, 2024.
[10] Y. He, X. He, R. Jin, and H. Dai, “Location privacy-aware and energy-
efficient offloading for distributed edge computing,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 7975–7988, 2023.
[11] Y. Gao, J. Tang, B. Li, D. Niyato, and D. I. Kim, “Joint trajectory
and power optimization for leo satellite-assisted uav communications:
A stackelberg game approach,” IEEE Transactions on Communications,
vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 538–552, 2024.
[12] J. Wu, Y. Sun, J. Bi, and C. Chen, “A novel hybrid enhanced particle
swarm optimization for uav path planning,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, 2025.
[13] P. Wan, S. Wang, G. Xu, Y. Long, and R. Hu, “Hybrid heuristic-based
multi-uav route planning for time-dependent data collection,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 13, pp. 24 134–24 147, 2024.
[14] Y. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Huang, and F. Xiao, “Bi-objective ant colony
optimization for trajectory planning and task offloading in uav-assisted
mec systems,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 23, no. 12,
pp. 12 360–12 377, 2024.
[15] S. Fu, X. Feng, A. Sultana, and L. Zhao, “Joint power allocation and
3d deployment for uav-bss: A game theory based deep reinforcement
learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 736–748, 2023.
[16] J. Chen, X. Lyu, K. Wang, Y. Zhang, K. Li, T. Hong, and C. S. Hong,
“Deep reinforcement learning based resource allocation in multi-uav-
aided mec networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71,
no. 1, pp. 296–309, 2023.
[17] C. Dai, K. Zhu, and E. Hossain, “Multi-agent deep reinforcement
learning for joint decoupled user association and trajectory design in full-
duplex multi-uav networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing,
vol. 22, no. 10, pp. 6056–6070, 2023.
[18] S. Gong, M. Wang, B. Gu, W. Zhang, D. T. Hoang, and D. Niyato,
“Bayesian optimization enhanced deep reinforcement learning for tra-
jectory planning and network formation in multi-uav networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 72, no. 8, pp. 10 933–10 948,
2023.
[19] Z. Du, S. Wang, X. Wang, and J. Chen, “Formation-aware uav net-
work self-organization with game-theoretic distributed topology con-
trol,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking,
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 3470–3485, 2025.
[20] Z. Lv, L. Xiao, Y. Du, G. Niu, C. Xing, and W. Xu, “Multi-agent rein-
forcement learning based uav swarm communications against jamming,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 12, pp.
9063–9075, 2023.
[21] Z. Liu, X. Liu, Y. Liu, V. C. Leung, and T. S. Durrani, “Uav assisted inte-
grated sensing and communications for internet of things: 3d trajectory
optimization and resource allocation,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 9346–9361, 2024.
[22] K. Meng, Q. Wu, J. Xu, W. Chen, Z. Feng, R. Schober, and A. L.
Swindlehurst, “Throughput maximization for uav-enabled integrated


--- Page 13 ---
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON XX , VOL. X, NO. X, X 2026
13
periodic sensing and communication,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 671–687, 2023.
[23] J. Li, L. Xiao, X. Qi, Z. Lv, Q. Chen, and Y.-J. Liu, “Reinforcement
learning based energy-efficient fast routing for fanets,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Communications, vol. 72, no. 11, pp. 7063–7076, 2024.
[24] R. Zhang, Z. Ren, and N. Li, “Decentralized reinforcement learning
in markov potential games,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control,
vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 7867–7874, 2024.
[25] A. Gaydamaka, A. Samuylov, D. Moltchanov, M. Ashraf, B. Tan,
and Y. Koucheryavy, “Dynamic topology organization and maintenance
algorithms for autonomous uav swarms,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 4423–4439, 2024.
[26] Y. Sadi and S. C. Ergen, “Optimal measurement policy for linear mea-
surement systems with applications to uav network topology prediction,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 1970–
1981, Feb 2020.
[27] S. K. Yoo, S. L. Cotton, L. Zhang, and W. G. Scanlon, “Exploring bio-
logical robustness for reliable multi-uav networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 8034–8047, Dec 2021.
[28] M. Polese, M. Giordani, T. Zugno, A. Venugopal, and M. Zorzi, “Los
coverage analysis for uav-based thz communication networks: Toward
3-d visualization of wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 8782–8796, Dec 2023.
[29] Z. Du, S. Wang, X. Wang, and J. Chen, “Formation-aware uav net-
work self-organization with game-theoretic distributed topology con-
trol,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking,
vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 3470–3485, Oct 2025.
[30] H. Pan, Y. Liu, G. Sun, P. Wang, and C. Yuen, “Resource scheduling
for uavs-aided d2d networks: A multi-objective optimization approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 5, pp.
4691–4708, 2023.
[31] Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, C. Huang, H. Huang, and A.-T. Nguyen, “Joint
optimization of deployment and flight planning of multi-uavs for long-
distance data collection from large-scale iot devices,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 791–804, 2023.
[32] L. Liu, W. Li, and F. Zhou, “Enhancing 6g iot communications: Uav
relayed satellite d2d with large language model optimization,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, 2025.
[33] R. Zhang, H. Du, Y. Liu, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, A. Jamalipour,
and D. I. Kim, “Generative ai agents with large language model for
satellite networks via a mixture of experts transmission,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, 2024.
[34] J. Wang, H. Du, G. Sun, J. Kang, H. Zhou, D. Niyato, and J. Chen,
“Optimizing 6g integrated sensing and communications (isac) via expert
networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00408, 2024.
[35] IEEE Communication Society, “Ieee standard for a framework for
structuring low-altitude airspace for unmanned aerial vehicle (uav)
operations,” IEEE, Tech. Rep. IEEE Std 1939.1-2021, 2021.
[36] ITU-R, “Propagation data and prediction methods required for the design
of terrestrial broadband radio access systems operating in a frequency
range from 3 to 60 ghz,” International Telecommunication Union, Tech.
Rep. Recommendation ITU-R P.1410-5, 2019.
[37] Z. Zhao, Y. Feng, J. Li, Y. Xu, and N. Cheng, “Multi-agent deep
reinforcement learning for task offloading in uav-assisted mobile edge
computing,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 21,
no. 9, pp. 6949–6960, 2022.
[38] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, and L. Song, “Coalition formation game for
joint spectrum sensing and channel access in cognitive radio networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 2, pp.
1496–1510, 2021.
[39] OpenAI, “New and improved embedding model,” https://openai.com/
blog/new-and-improved-embedding-model, 2022.
[40] S. K. Singh, S. Kumar, and P. S. Mehra, “Chat gpt & google bard ai: A
review,” in 2023 International Conference on IoT, Communication and
Automation Technology (ICICAT).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–6.
[41] xAI, “Grok: A large language model,” https://x.ai/blog/grok, 2024.
[42] DeepSeek-AI, “Deepseek llm: Scaling open-source language models
with longtermism,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02954, 2024.
[43] H. Tembine, E. Altman, R. ElAzouzi, and Y. Hayel, “Evolutionary
games in wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics, Part B (Cybernetics), vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 634–646, 2010.
[44] Y. Yang, J. Wu, L. Huang, X. Xu, Q. Wu, and R. Schober, “Multi-uav-
enabled load-balance mobile-edge computing for iot networks,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 10, no. 16, pp. 14 463–14 478, 2023.
