--- Page 1 ---
Continuous Optimization for Satisfiability Modulo Theories on Linear Real Arithmetic
Yunuo Cen,1, ∗Daniel Ebler,2, † and Xuanyao Fong1, ‡
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore
2School of Computing and Data Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
(Dated: March 25, 2026)
Efficient solutions for satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) are integral in industrial applications
such as hardware verification and design automation. Existing approaches are predominantly based
on conflict-driven clause learning, which is structurally difficult to parallelize and therefore scales
poorly. In this work, we introduce FourierSMT as a scalable and highly parallelizable continuous-
variable optimization framework for SMT. We generalize the Walsh-Fourier expansion (WFE), called
extended WFE (xWFE), from the Boolean domain to a mixed Boolean-real domain, which allows
the use of gradient methods for SMT. This addresses the challenge of finding satisfying variable as-
signments to high-arity constraints by local updates of discrete variables. To reduce the evaluation
complexity of xWFE, we present the extended binary decision diagram (xBDD) and map the con-
straints from xWFE to xBDDs. We then show that sampling the circuit-output probability (COP)
of xBDDs under randomized rounding is equivalent to the expectation value of the xWFEs. This
allows for efficient computation of the constraints. We show that the reduced problem is guaranteed
to converge and preserves satisfiability, ensuring the soundness of the solutions. The framework is
benchmarked for large-scale scheduling and placement problems with up to 10,000 variables and
700,000 constraints, achieving 8-fold speedups compared to state-of-the-art SMT solvers.
These
results pave the way for GPU-based optimization of SMTs with continuous systems.
INTRODUCTION
Satisfiability modulo theories (SMT) is a class of de-
cision problems that ask whether a variable assignment
exists that satisfies an abstract set of constraints. The
constraints are referred to as first-order logic and com-
bine Boolean logic with, for example, real-valued inequal-
ities [1]. SMTs extend the problem of Boolean satisfiabil-
ity (SAT) with greater expressiveness [2], which is essen-
tial when addressing complex scientific and engineering
challenges, particularly in operations research [3, 4], for-
mal verification [5, 6], and artificial intelligence [7, 8],
among others.
SMT problems, such as SAT, are gen-
erally NP-complete [9], making it highly challenging to
scale solutions to real-life applications.
Practical SMT solvers are mainly based on conflict-
driven clause learning (CDCL), which is an exact method
that has first achieved engineering success in solving
SAT problems
[10–13]. CDCL combines Boolean con-
straint propagation with non-chronological backtrack-
ing, efficiently pruning the search space [14].
To ad-
dress the more general structure of the constraints
in SMT, the solvers employ an extended framework
known as CDCL(T ), which integrates CDCL with the-
ory solvers [2]. In practice, this means that the solvers
explore possible combinations of truth values for proposi-
tional constraints while simultaneously checking that the
corresponding numerical constraints are mathematically
consistent. Prominent solver instances include Z3 [15],
CVC5 [16],
Yices2 [17],
OpenSMT2 [18],
SMT-
∗cenyunuo@u.nus.edu
† eblerd@hku.hk
‡ kelvin.xy.fong@nus.edu.sg
RAT [19] and MathSAT5 [20].
However, CDCL(T )-
based solvers often suffer from long runtimes and show
poor parallelizability on multi-core architectures. This
leads to strongly limited scalability. In addition, the per-
formance of the CDCL(T ) methods is highly problem-
specific, and local search techniques were shown to some-
times outperform CDCL(T ) on benchmarks such as
SMT-LIB with low cutoff times [21], as well as concrete
applications [22].
Alternative approaches based on continuous local
search (CLS) have been proposed for SAT solving, such
as FourierSAT [23], GradSAT [24], and FastFouri-
erSAT [25], which transform Boolean constraints into
continuous multilinear polynomials [26] and refine solu-
tions with gradient descent on the objective function.
This allows for strong parallelization on multi-threading
architectures such as GPUs and FPGAs, dramatically
reducing computation times and allowing for scaling to
large and complex problem instances [25]. However, the
core theory in CLS, spectrum analysis, is inherently de-
fined over Boolean domains and does not extend to real-
valued variables. Consequently, CLS has been incompat-
ible with SMT.
In this work, we propose a scalable and highly par-
allelizable CLS-based solver approach for SMT, called
FourierSMT, with a focus on linear real arithmetic
(LRA) constraints.
To enable CLS for SMT, we in-
troduce a generalization of the Walsh-Fourier expansion
(WFE) [26] from the Boolean to the mixed Boolean-real
domain to explicitly incorporate LRA constraints (see
Fig. 1b). This allows us to encode the SMT constraints in
piecewise multilinear functions, called extended Walsh-
Fourier expansion (xWFE) (see Fig. 1c). To identify sat-
isfying variable assignments with gradient-based meth-
ods, we construct a smooth surrogate function through
arXiv:2603.22877v1  [cs.AI]  24 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
Figure 1. The overall flow of FourierSMT. (a) A variety of combinatorial problems target to optimize propositional and
real variables. (b) These problems can be encoded using an SMT(LRA) formula, which is a SAT formula with additional
LRA theory. (c) A constraint in the SMT(LRA) formula can be transformed into a polynomial called xWFE. The amplitudes
show the coefficients of the xWFE, described in Eq. (2). (d) The expectation of the xWFE can be obtained by randomized
rounding on the Boolean variable and the Gaussian sampling on the real variables. (e) However, the xWFE has an exponential
number of terms. We show that the circuit output probability of xBDDs is equivalent to the expectation of the xWFE. This
avoids state enumeration and thereby preserves computation efficiency. (f) We recover the minima of the original function by
annealing of the sampling parameters, gradually restoring the original piecewise objective.
randomized rounding of Boolean variables and Gaussian
sampling of real variables (see Fig. 1d). The number of
terms in an xWFE grows exponentially with the num-
ber of variables in the corresponding constraint.
To
avoid this overhead, we extend the data structure of ex-
tended binary decision diagram (xBDD) to efficiently en-
code Boolean-continuous constraints (see Fig. 1e). We
then show equivalence between the expectation value of
a xWFE and the circuit-output probability (COP) of the
xBDD, which allows one to optimize the COP instead.
This leads to a drastic reduction in complexity. The op-
timality of the solution is shown to be preserved if we
optimize the smooth surrogate objective while gradually
reducing the smoothness of the original piecewise mul-
tilinear function (see Fig. 1f). This allows for efficient
gradient-based optimization under annealing of the opti-
mization landscape. We benchmark FouerierSMT on
scheduling and placement problems with up to 10,000
variables and 700,000 constraints and show substantial
performance gains of up to 8× shorter runtimes.
The
results highlight the practical applicability of Fouri-
erSMT for complex real-world computational tasks.
RESULTS
Satisfiability Modulo Theories
SMT defines the class of problems that pose the ques-
tion of whether a set of Boolean constraints is satisfiable
with respect to a theory T . They were first introduced
in the context of extending purely Boolean constraints
in SAT to specific mathematical theories [27–29], such as
Reals, BitVectors [30, 31], and Arrays [32, 33]. For
Reals, this allows us to combine propositional variables
with inequalities on real-valued variables, connected by
Boolean connectivities such as ∧, ∨, ⊕, →, =.
Mathematically, an SMT formula F is defined as the
conjunction of constraints c from a finite set of Boolean
constraints C, as
F =
^
c∈C
c .
Solving F requires an assignment of all variables that
satisfies all constraints c ∈C.
For example, a typical
SMT formula is F = (x1 ⊕x2) ∧(x1 ∨(y ≤0)), where
x1, x2 are Boolean and y ∈R.
SMT solvers are commonly derived from SAT solvers
and follow the approach of CDCL [10–13] and discrete
local search (DLS) [34–38]. Here, CDCL is at its core
an exhaustive tree-search on variable assignments, such
that for practical scenarios with a large number of con-
straints compared to the number of decision variables,
CDCL-based approaches need an infeasibly long time to
converge.
More recently, CLS has been explored as a
novel complement to CDCL, particularly for the problem
class of hybrid SAT solving, where Boolean constraints
are combined with other types of constraints such as not-
all-equal, XOR, or pseudo-Boolean constraints [23, 24].
CLS has demonstrated orders-of-magnitude speedups
over CDCL solvers on selected benchmarks [25].
Ex-
isting CLS approaches, however, only support Boolean
variables and do not extend to SMT.
In the following, we introduce FourierSMT as a novel
CLS-based solution framework for SMT, with a focus on


--- Page 3 ---
3
the theory of LRA. In this theory, the constraints assume
linear inequalities subject to real numbers. SMT(LRA)
has a variety of applications, including formal verifica-
tion [39], artificial intelligence [40], computational biol-
ogy [41]. The framework enables continuous optimization
techniques to tackle theory-rich constraints that are cur-
rently beyond the capability of existing CLS methods.
Walsh-Fourier Expansions
The Walsh-Fourier transform was previously stud-
ied as a mathematical tool in theoretical computer sci-
ence [42, 43], mainly to analyze the spectral properties
of Boolean functions and to prove results in circuit com-
plexity [44], threshold phenomena in mathematics [45],
and social choice theory [46].
Formally, given a function f : {±1}n →R defined
on a Boolean hypercube, there exists a unique way of
expressing f as a multilinear polynomial [26], as
f(x) =
X
S⊆[n]
 
ˆf(S) ·
Y
i∈S
xi
!
.
(1)
Here, ˆf(S) ∈R is called the Walsh-Fourier coefficient,
the variables xi, i = 1, 2, ..., n are Boolean variables that
assume values ±1, and each term in the sum corresponds
to a subset of [n] = {1, 2, ..., n}.
While the conventional WFE applies to purely Boolean
domains, SMT problems involve richer structures that in-
clude real variables in LRA. To extend the WFE to SMT,
we generalize the map in the following to an xWFE.
We begin by constructing an atom αi, which in the
theory of LRA is a linear equality or inequality of the
form
αi :
m
X
j=1
qi,jyj −qi,0 ▷◁0,
where ▷◁∈{=, <, ≤, >, ≥}, the coefficients qi,j are num-
bers that must have a finite syntactic representation so
that formulas can be encoded and reasoned about sym-
bolically, and the yj are real-valued variables. We asso-
ciate with each atomic constraint a Boolean indicator
δi(y) =
(
−1,
if αi is True
1,
else.
Let c be a constraint consisting of n propositional vari-
ables and k atoms. In SMT(LRA), c can be represented
as a function fc : {±1}n × Rm →{±1}. Then, there
is a unique way of expressing fc as a piecewise multilin-
ear polynomial, where each term corresponds to a pair of
subsets of [n] and [k], as (see Supplementary Note 1)
fc (x, y) =
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
,
(2)
where ˆfc(S, T) ∈R is the extended Walsh-Fourier coef-
ficient. The expression indicates that each constraint in
an SMT(LRA) formula admits a unique piecewise multi-
linear Walsh-Fourier representation. By aggregating the
expansions of all constraints, weighted according to their
importance, we obtain the global optimization objective
of the original SMT(LRA) problem:
Fw(x, y) =
X
c∈C
wc · fc(x, y) .
(3)
Here, weight wc ∈R+ corresponds to the constraint c.
Rounding and Sampling
The objective function defined in Eq. (3) is piecewise
multilinear, while the argument x ∈{±1}n is discrete.
To make the objective applicable to CLS, we relax the
propositional variables x to the continuous hypercube
[−1, 1]n and optimize the resulting multilinear extension.
Randomized rounding R : [−1, 1]n →{±1}n then
maps the variables back onto the Boolean hypercube, as
(
P[R(a)i = −1] = 1−ai
2
P[R(a)i = +1] = 1+ai
2
(4)
where i ∈{1, · · · , n} and a ∈[−1, 1]n. The correspond-
ing probability on a Boolean vector is then defined as
Sa(x) = P[R(a) = x] .
This provides a probabilistic representation of the xWFE.
Concretely, we express the xWFE as its expectation un-
der randomized rounding. Let fc denote the xWFE of
a constraint c ∈C. Lem. 1 (see Supplementary Note 2)
states that, for any real point (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, the
expectation of fc with respect to the distribution Sa is
E
x∼Sa
[fc(x, b)] = fc(a, b),
(5)
and we have
E
x∼Sa
[Fw(x, b)] = Fw(a, b) ,
(6)
where we sampled x from the probability distribution Sa.
The following theorem establishes that the global min-
ima of the relaxed problem still encode solutions to the
original discrete problem.
Theorem 1 (Soundness). Let Fw be the weighted objec-
tive function with weights wc ∈R+ for each constraint
c ∈C. Then the SMT(LRA) formula F is satisfiable if
and only if Eq. (6) satisfies
min
a∈[−1,1]n
b∈Rm
Fw(a, b) = −
X
c∈C
wc .


--- Page 4 ---
4
Figure 2. Optimization trajectories and energy landscapes under different sampling parameters. The number of
gradient steps required to reach an ϵ-projected critical point is shown for ϵ = 10−2. (a) The colorbar indicates the inverse
sampling parameter 1/σ. 1. When σ →∞(i.e., 1/σ = 0), the gradient with respect to the real-valued variables y vanishes,
as the smoothing effect becomes arbitrarily strong. 2. Moderately large sampling parameters, i.e., 1/σ ∈{0.1, . . . , 0.5}, yield
slower convergence to the global minimum. 3. In contrast, smaller values of σ, corresponding to 1/σ ∈{0.6, . . . , 2.0}, lead to
faster convergence to a local minimum. 4. The dashed gradient-colored curve denotes the annealing schedule, in which 1/σ is
gradually increased in increments of 0.1, achieving both rapid convergence and a final solution close to the global optimum.
(b) Visualization of the objective landscape and the corresponding optimization trajectory for different σ. The horizontal and
the vertical axes of each subplot correspond to x and y in the domain [−1, 1]. Each subplot shows the smoothed objective (Cσ,
greyscale background) and the path taken by the gradient descent (colorline, the color refers to the color bar in panel (a) as
1/σ). The optimization trajectories start at the same initial point (black edge circle) and follow the gradients to global (red
edge circle) or local minima (green edge circle).
The proof of Thm. 1 is in the Supplementary Notes 9.
The function in Eq. (6) is smooth in a ∈[−1, 1]n, but
non-smooth in b ∈Rm, so that the gradient with re-
spect to b vanishes.
To address this, we introduce a
sampling-based smoothing technique that provides a con-
tinuous approximation of the atoms. For b ∈Rm, a sam-
pling point di(b) drawn from the Gaussian distribution
N(b, σ2I) can be wrtiten as
di(b) =
E
y∼N(b,σ2I) δi(y)
= erf


Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
q
2 Pm
j=1 q2
i,jσ


(7)
where the second equation is the analytical expression
derived when δi(y) corresponds to a linear constraint of
the form q⊤
i y ≤qi,0, (see the Supplementary Note 2,
proof of Lem. 1).
Thm. 4 in the Supplementary Note 2 states that, for
any point (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, we have
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] =
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
di(b)
!
,
(8)
which is the expectation of Eq. (2) under relaxation of
variables xi and δi to ai and di.
The number of terms in Eq. (8) grows exponentially
as O(2n+k). This is because xWFE enumerates all pos-
sible states. In the following, we present an equivalent
approach that significantly reduces the complexity. The
Cor. 2 in the Supplementary Note 4 establishes that the
expectation of an xWFE can be expressed as a COP of
a probablistic circuit,
COPc =
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] .
(9)
Further, let Cσ(a, b) = P
c∈C wc · COPc. Then, we have
Cσ(a, b) =
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[Fw(x, y)] .
(10)
We show in the Supplementary Note 5 that running
the probability assignment algorithm on an xBDD can
produce such a COP (see [24, 47] for an introduction
to BDDs, and the Supplementary Note 3 for our ex-
tension to xBDD). This allows us to use the COP of
xBDDs as an optimization surrogate instead of the ex-
pectation of xWFE. In addition, the COP of an xBDD
can be efficiently evaluated [48] (see also the Supplemen-
tary Note 4), avoiding the problem of state enumeration.
In the Supplementary Note 5, Thm. 5 and Thm. 6 estab-
lished that the computational complexity of evaluating
the COP scales is O (|Vc|), while the complexity of com-
puting its gradient scales is O (m · |Vc|), where |Vc| de-
notes the number of nodes in the decision diagram repre-
senting constraint c. Especially when the literals are sym-
metric, the complexity of evaluating the COP reduces to
O
 (n + k)2
[49]. This offers substantial reductions in
computational cost [50–52].


--- Page 5 ---
5
Algorithm 1: FourierSMT
Input: A constraint set C, constraint weights {wc},
initial point (a, b), sampling parameter σ
Output: Result SAT or Unknown
1 for c ∈C do
2
Transform c into xWFE fc and COPc ;
// Corollary 1 & Supplementary Notes 1-4
3 while ||g(a, b)||2 > ϵ2 do
4
for i ∈range(n) do
5
pi ←1−ai
2
;
// Rounding, Eq. (4)
6
for i ∈range(m) do
7
pi+n ←1−di(b)
2
;
// Sampling, Eq. (7)
8
Get the projected gradient g(a, b) by Eq. (13);
9
Update the assignment (a, b) ←(a, b) −η · g(a, b);
10 Rounded assignment (x, y) ←(sgn(a), b);
11 if Fw(x, y) = −P
c wc then
12
return SAT ;
// Theorem 1
13 else
14
return Unknown ;
// CLS is incomplete
FourierSMT - A Gradient-Based Optimizer for SMT
The theoretical framework established above sets the
foundation for FourierSMT, a CLS-based optimizer for
SMT. We refer to Alg. 1 for the following discussion, and
to Supplementary Notes 1-5 for a detailed analysis of the
algorithm.
Alg. 1 starts by transforming the mixed Boolean-real
constraints into continuous functions (lines 1 and 2). The
corresponding xBDD can be efficiently constructed using
existing decision diagram packages such as CUDD [53].
This enables a gradient-based approach to solve the con-
tinuous objective in Eq. (10), where the minima encode
the solution to the original discrete problem. The vari-
ables are transformed to probabilities due to rounding
and sampling (lines 4-7). Then, FourierSMT runs pro-
jected gradient descent (PGD) until it converges to an
ϵ-projected-critical point (see Methods).
At each gra-
dient step, FourierSMT computes the gradient of the
COP of each constraint c (line 8). The gradients can be
computed efficiently by top-down and bottom-up mes-
sage propagations through xBDDs (see the Supplemen-
tary Note 5, Alg. 3 and Alg. 4). The projected gradient
mapping is then computed by Eq. (13), through convex
quadratic programming (QP) (see Methods, Prop. 1).
Line 10 executes the randomized rounding on the propo-
sitional variables x, mapping the assignment back to the
original mixed Boolean-real domain. Given the hardness
of optimizing non-convex functions [54], it is more practi-
cal to converge to local optima and check with Theorem 1
if any optimum is global (line 12).
The performance of CLS, measured by the number of
steps until convergence, is critically dependent on the
smoothness of the objective.
We show in the Supple-
mentary Note 6, Thm. 7 that the PGD in FourierSMT
converges to an ϵ-projected-critical point in O( αL
ϵ2 ) iter-
ations, where α is the sum of the constraint weights and
L is the gradient Lipschitz constant. In the Supplemen-
tary Note 6, Prop. 2, we showed that L depends on the
number of variables, constraints, theory atoms, and the
sampling parameter σ. These parameters jointly deter-
mine the convergence rate of each PGD trail.
We examine the empirical behavior of the projected
gradient method with a concrete example, see Fig. 2.
Here, we study the conjunction of the two constraints
¬x⊕(y > 0) and x∧(y > 0), which has a local minimum
on x = 1, δ(y) = 1 and a global minimum on x = −1,
δ(y) = −1. A larger variance σ in the Gaussian sampling
distribution N(b, σ2I) generally produces a smoother and
better-conditioned objective landscape. For σ > 2, the
Gaussian smoothing covers a wider portion of the en-
ergy landscape, enabling the optimizer to capture global
structural information and eventually reach the global
minimum. However, we observe that trials with larger σ
exhibit slower convergence toward the ϵ-projected-critical
point, because excessive smoothing reduces the effective
update step size.
In contrast, when σ < 2, the sam-
pling becomes more localized, the energy landscape ap-
pears sharper, and the optimization rapidly converges to
a nearby local minimum.
To mitigate this issue, we adopt an annealing strategy,
in which optimization begins with a large variance σ and
gradually reduces it according to a schedule. An effective
annealing schedule should allow iterations to cross tran-
sition regions (see the Supplementary Note 7, Cor. 3)
quickly, while subsequently reducing σ to recover the ex-
act objective.
In the limit of σ →0, we recover the
exact multilinear objective as in Eq. (3). This leads to a
global exploration of the landscape and identification of
the right neighborhood of solutions. As σ reduces, the
transition regions become tighter, effectively narrowing
the landscape down to the neighborhood of a minimum.
This is formalized by the following
Theorem 2 (Optimality). When σ = 0, Eq. (10) has
no local optima within the open domain (−1, 1)n × Rm,
i.e., projected gradient will converge to the boundary of
[−1, 1]n × Rm.
The proof of Thm. 2 is in the Supplementary Note 8.
Thm. 2 states that reduction of the sampling parame-
ter σ to zero recovers the soundness property of Thm. 1,
as it ensures that the smoothing mechanism introduced
for optimization does not alter the semantics of the un-
derlying SMT(LRA) formulation. At the same time, the
theoretical guarantees at σ = 0 do not fully characterize
the behavior of the optimization dynamics at finite σ. In
practice, the overall performance of the solver depends
on several factors, including the optimization method,
initialization, and, in particular, the annealing schedule
used to decrease σ.
As in other annealing-based opti-
mization frameworks, the schedule influences how effec-
tively the algorithm explores the landscape before local-
izing the search to specific regions, and thus plays an im-


--- Page 6 ---
6
portant role in determining empirical performance [55–
57]. In Fig. 2b, we illustrate a trial in which σ decreases
at each gradient step. In step 19, the point converges to
a ϵ-projected critical point.
The above analysis confirms both the convergence and
soundness of the proposed annealing-based optimization
scheme, ensuring that the obtained solutions are theoreti-
cally grounded. We next validate these properties empir-
ically through extensive experiments on random hybrid
benchmarks and large-scale combinatorial problems.
Performance Analysis and Application to
Combinatorial Problems
To evaluate the performance of FourierSMT, we first
conduct experiments on a benchmark set of random prob-
lem instances, each consisting of hybrid constraints fol-
lowing the setting in [23], i.e., cardinality (card), not-
all-equal (nae), and parity (xor) constraints. Such con-
straints are versatile for encoding a wide range of com-
binatorial problems. We vary n ∈{100, 200, . . . , 1000}
to generate 10 benchmark instances for each n. Each in-
stance contains n Boolean variables and n real variables
(this choice is arbitrary, and our solver works for any
proportion of Boolean and real variables). We set the
number of each type of constraint to mcard = mnae =
n/5, and mxor = n/50, while their respective constraint
lengths are lcard = lnae = min(50, n/5) and lxor = 50.
The behavior and interactions of such hybrid Boolean
constraints have been studied extensively in prior work,
and transitions in the hardness of the problems were
studied in [58–60]. We extend the setting here to Boolean
and real variables. In addition, each instance includes n
LRA atoms, enabling the extension of the benchmark to
continuous variables. The details of the random bench-
mark are given in the Methods.
We compare FourierSMT with representative SMT
solvers, including Z3 [15], Z3++ [21], CVC5 [16],
Yices2 [17], SMTS [18], MathSAT5 [20], and SMT-
RAT [19]. All solvers are applied to the corresponding
SMT(LRA) encodings, where the Boolean backbone is
expressed in conjunctive normal form. For reference, we
also report two virtual best solvers: VBS1, defined as
the best performance achievable across all solvers, and
VBS2, defined as the best performance excluding Fouri-
erSMT. The gap between VBS1 and VBS2 quantifies
the advantage of FourierSMT compared to the current
state-of-the-art. The solver performance is assessed us-
ing the metric called PAR-2 (penalized average runtime
2) score, as in Eq. (15). This is the most common metric
used in SMT and SAT solving [61]. For all problems, we
set a 1000-second time limit for the benchmark problems.
The solvers are executed on AMD EPYC 9654 CPUs,
while FourierSMT is run on NVIDIA L40S GPUs, see
Methods for more details.
For CDCL(T )-based solvers, the encoding of instances
generated with n ≤500 in CNF form creates an over-
head such that the encoded formulas contain up to
64,000 variables and 127,000 clauses (see Methods sec-
tion). For FourierSMT, only 1000 variables (n Boolean
variables and n real variables) are needed. As a conse-
quence, all solvers except FourierSMT fail to solve in-
stances for which n ≥500.
FourierSMT scales to
problems with up to n = 1000.
This would involve
more than 130,000 variables and 250,000 clauses for
CDCL(T )-based solvers, rendering problems of this mag-
nitude extremely challenging for current state-of-the-art
SMT solvers.
Despite this hardness,
FourierSMT successfully
solves all 100 instances. In contrast, the portfolio of all
competing solvers, i.e., VBS2, solves only 50 small- to
medium-scale instances.
This demonstrates the supe-
rior scalability and robustness of FourierSMT on large
random hybrid benchmarks. From Fig. 3a we can ob-
serve that, although FourierSMT is relatively slower
on small-scale instances (n = 100), it achieves 100×
speedup on medium-scale instances (n = 500) and is ca-
pable of solving instances that are at least twice as large
as those handled by competing solvers within this bench-
mark.
Within the maximum runtime of VBS1 across
all instances (37.84 seconds), VBS2 only solves 20 in-
stances, reflecting a five-fold improvement in scalability
contributed by FourierSMT (see per-instance results
in the Supplementary Note 10, Table IV).
To determine the extent of GPU-induced speedup, we
conducted an additional experiment that compares the
gradient evaluation time of FourierSMT on CPU and on
GPU. For each instance, we measure the average gradient
computation time on a total of 10,000 random points. As
shown in Fig. 3b, for the smallest instance category, the
CPU is 2.55× faster than the GPU. This is expected, as
the workload is insufficient to saturate the GPU’s mas-
sively parallel architecture, and the runtime is dominated
by fixed overheads such as kernel-launch latency and de-
vice synchronization. As the instance size increases, the
GPU amortizes these fixed costs, whereas the runtime re-
mains nearly constant until the hardware becomes fully
saturated. In contrast, the CPU exhibits approximately
linear growth in runtime as the instance size increases.
For the largest instance category, the GPU achieves a
6.67× speedup over the CPU, demonstrating the scala-
bility advantages of GPU-accelerated gradient computa-
tion. The detailed result is provided in the Supplemen-
tary Note 11.
We next evaluate FourierSMT on two classes of com-
binatorial optimization problems, scheduling and place-
ment, which are widely used as benchmarks due to their
computational hardness and constraint nature [3, 62].
For both problem classes, SMT solvers are considered to
be state-of-the-art. To better reflect practical scenarios,
we design benchmark instances in which constraints are
encoded with Boolean and real-valued variables, thereby
extending beyond purely discrete formulations. We com-
pare FourierSMT against state-of-the-art SMT solvers
in two benchmark suites comprising 380 instances.


--- Page 7 ---
7
Figure 3. Benchmark results on random instances with mixed Boolean-real hybrid constraints. (a) The results show
the number of solved instances and runtime efficiency (average PAR-2 score of the solvers). It can be seen that the virtual-best
solver (VBS1, including FourierSMT) is 62.45× faster and solves 50 more instances than its counterpart (VBS2, excluding
FourierSMT). The 20 easy instances (small-scale) are solved more efficiently by CDCL(T ) solvers, whereas all larger instances
are solved most efficiently by FourierSMT. This pattern demonstrates that FourierSMT is substantially more scalable. (b)
The average gradient computation time of FourierSMT using CPU (AMD EPYC 9654) and GPU (NVIDIA L40S). For each
problem instance, we measure the time required to compute a single gradient step. The GPU exhibits near-constant runtime
across all sizes, reflecting efficient parallel amortization of fixed overheads, e.g., kernel launch, memory movement. In contrast,
CPU runtime increases steadily with instance size, scaling approximately linearly.
Figure 4. Performance comparison of SMT solvers on combinatorial problems. The results show the number of
solved instances and runtime efficiency (average PAR-2 score of the solvers). (a) Scheduling problems, which mainly consist
of non-overlap, feasibility, and task-dependency constraints. The virtual-best solver (VBS1, including FourierSMT) is 8.18×
faster and solves 20 more instances than the counterpart (VBS2, excluding FourierSMT). (b) Placement problems, which
mainly consist of non-overlap, feasibility, and routing-aware constraints.
In this category, Z3 and Z3++ achieve the best
performance cross CDCL(T ) solvers. VBS1 is 4.93× faster and solves 10 more instances than VBS2. All solvers operate
on identical encodings, indicating that the performance gain stems purely from the optimization framework rather than from
encoding-free advantages.
Scheduling Problems. We consider a continuous-time
variant of the scheduling problem, where a number nj of
jobs are assigned to nw workers, and execution can be-
gin at any real-valued time stamp rather than at discrete
intervals. This formulation remains NP, but generalizes
the problem to more practical scenarios involving contin-
uous scheduling. The goal is to find the assignment of all
jobs within the given time budget. A full description of
the problem is given in the Methods.
Benchmark instances were generated by varying the
number of workers nw and the ratio between jobs
and workers r = nj/nw.
Specifically, we set nw ∈
{16, 32, 64, 128, 256} and chose r ∈{2, 3, 4, 5}. We gen-
erate 10 instances for each nw and r. Precedence con-
straints among jobs capture task dependencies. For each
configuration, we created ten benchmark instances, with
time budgets specified by a greedy heuristic.
Fig. 4a summarizes the results, where FourierSMT
achieves the lowest PAR-2 score. The strongest baseline,
SMTS, records 259.01 seconds, whereas FourierSMT
is 6.34× faster.
Relative to widely deployed solvers,
speedups are even more pronounced: 14.2× over Yices2,
14.5× over Z3++, 16.3× over Z3, 22.4× over CVC5,
23.8× over MathSAT5, and 41.1× over SMT-RAT.


--- Page 8 ---
8
Notably, SMTS is fastest on 79 out of 180 instances,
followed closely by FourierSMT on 76, while the lat-
ter dominates the larger-scale instances. Yices2 and Z3
lead on 38 and 8 instances, respectively.
In small- to
medium-scale instances, FourierSMT exhibits a warm-
up phase as a result of exploration of the local objective
landscape, leading to slightly slower runtimes. Crucially,
on the largest instances, where other solvers fail to scale,
FourierSMT solves all cases within the 1000-second
time limit (see per-instance results in the Supplementary
Note 10, Table V).
To further assess generality, we next consider another
NP-complete problem with different structural charac-
teristics: the placement problem.
Placement Problems. In VLSI physical design, place-
ment assigns components to precise positions on chiplets
subject to area and non-overlap constraints. Our bench-
mark focuses on the 3D variant, where modules may be
stacked across multiple layers. The solution of the bench-
mark problem encodes the spatial coordinates of all mod-
ules subject to the constraints.
Instances were generated by varying the number of
macros nm ∈{2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64} and the number of lay-
ers nl ∈{2, 4, 8}. We generate 10 instances for each nm
and nl. Routing-aware constraints were applied: mod-
ules within the same macro were colocated, modules on
the same layer were placed adjacently, and cross-layer
modules were connected via through-silicon vias, thereby
reducing downstream routing cost (see Methods).
We find that FourierSMT again delivers the lowest
PAR-2 score, see Fig. 4b.
Interestingly, here Z3 sur-
passes SMTS as the strongest CDCL(T )-based baseline.
Its variant Z3++, which augments Z3 with local search,
shows mixed behavior: outperforming Z3 in scheduling
but falling behind in placement. This behavior arises be-
cause, in placement instances where local search offers
limited improvement, the additional search overhead re-
duces the time available for CDCL(T ) reasoning, causing
Z3++ to underperform relative to pure Z3. In general,
FourierSMT is 3.15× faster than Z3 and 3.54× faster
than Z3++. Relative improvement are larger compared
to other baselines: 7.4× over SMTS, 8.69× over Yices2,
17.95× over CVC5, 21.8× over MathSAT5, and 36.0×
over SMT-RAT. It can be seen that FourierSMT ex-
cels primarily on the largest 30 instances, which are in-
tractable for the other solvers (see per-instance results in
the Supplementary Note 10, Table VI).
In conclusion, on the problems of scheduling and place-
ment, FourierSMT demonstrates superior scalability
while retaining efficiency. In particular, VBS1 achieves
speedups of 8.18× and 4.93× over VBS2. This advantage
arises from the use of continuous relaxations, Gaussian
smoothing, and projected gradient methods to efficiently
navigate high-dimensional search spaces, allowing effec-
tive handling of instances where traditional CDCL(T )
heuristics stagnate. Furthermore, the CLS framework al-
lows ForierSMT to achieve shorter runtimes due to strong
parallelizability on multi-core hardware, which is very
challenging for CDCL(T )-based approaches.
DISCUSSION
We introduced FourierSMT, a continuous optimiza-
tion framework to solve SMT problems with linear real
arithmetic (LRA) constraints. While most state-of-the-
art solvers are based on conflict-driven clause learning,
FourierSMT is a CLS-based approach, which allows
gradient-dynamics for SMT. Concretely, we encode the
SMT clauses in piecewise-linear functions with an ex-
tended Walsh-Fourier expansion (xWFE). We then re-
duce the number of terms in the xWFE, which grow ex-
ponentially in the number of variables and atoms, by
introducing an efficient data structure called extended
binary decision diagrams (xBDDs). The output proba-
bility of such xBDDs has been proven to be equivalent
to the expectation value of xWFE. This allows us to find
solutions to the SMT with gradient-based search on the
output distribution of xBDDs. To boost convergence, we
smooth the xBDD output distribution with randomized
rounding and Gaussian sampling techniques. We adopt
an annealing schedule, which scans the global landscape
first and later localizes the search to a suitable region.
This approach was shown to efficiently search the land-
scape while maintaining the optimality of the solutions.
Benchmarking FourierSMT both on random SMT in-
stances as well as combinatorial optimization problems,
such as scheduling and 3D placement, reveals superior
scalability, surpassing previous state-of-the-art solvers in
particular for large problem instances.
A key advantage of the framework is its compatibility
with modern parallel hardware: gradient-based proce-
dures map naturally to GPUs, enabling substantial ac-
celeration at scale. This combination of theoretical nov-
elty and computational efficiency suggests that Fouri-
erSMT can serve as a foundation for solving industrial
combinatorial problems at scale.
For future directions, extending the FourierSMT
framework to nonlinear real arithmetic (NRA) would
allow one to address nonlinear atomic constraints that
induce highly nonconvex feasible regions and generally
lack tractable closed-form expectations under Gaussian
smoothing.
Such an extension would broaden the ap-
plicability to domains such as hybrid system verifica-
tion [63] and biological network analysis [64], while offer-
ing a fresh perspective on scalable algorithms for NRA.
Moreover, generalizing Proposition 1 to accommodate
nonlinear constraints would provide efficient projection
mechanisms for complex feasible sets, thereby further in-
tegrating continuous optimization with symbolic reason-
ing. In this way, extending FourierSMT to NRA would
help establish a unifying framework that complements
complete methods such as cylindrical algebraic decom-
position [65] and MCSAT [66].


--- Page 9 ---
9
METHODS
Projected Gradient Descent
In PGD, each iteration updates the current point by
following the negative gradient.
If the updated point
lies outside the feasible domain, it is mapped back by a
projection operator:
(a′, b′) = (a, b) −η∇Cσ(a, b),
(11)
(a, b) = projD(a′, b′).
(12)
where D denotes the feasible set. Next, we formally de-
fine the projection operation and analyze its computa-
tional properties.
Definition 1 (Projection). Let (a′, b′) ∈Rn+m denote
the point obtained after a gradient step. The projection
of (a′, b′) onto the feasible set D is defined as
projD(a′, b′) = arg min
(a,b)
(∥a −a′∥2 + ∥b −b′∥2 + ID(a, b))
where ID is an indication.
ID(a, b) is 0 (resp.
∞) if
(a, b) ∈D (resp. /∈).
Based on Definition 1, we can establish that the pro-
jection problem is a convex QP.
Proposition 1. The projection defined in Definition 1
is a convex QP problem.
min
a,b
n
X
i=1
 a2
i −2a′
iai

+
m
X
i=1
 b2
i −2b′
ibi

s.t.
−1 ≤ai ≤1, ∀i
m
X
k=1
qj,kbk −qj,0 ▷◁0, ∀unit atomic constraint
where a unit atomic constraint refers to a constraint that
only has an atomic constraint without propositional vari-
ables.
Substituting Eq. (12) into Eq. (11) yields the projected
gradient mapping g:
g(a, b) = 1
η ((a, b) −projD((a, b) −η∇Cσ(a, b))).
(13)
Annealing with Weight Adaptation
FourierSMT integrates an annealing strategy with
an adaptive clause-weighting scheme based on exponen-
tial recency-weighted averaging (ERWA), as outlined in
Algorithm 2. The optimization proceeds in a smoothed
objective landscape, where the sampling parameter σ is
gradually decreased according to a predefined anneal-
ing schedule.
At early iterations, a large σ yields a
Algorithm 2: CLS with Annealing
Input: A constraint set C, initial constraint weights
wc’s, an initial point (a, b), a decay factor β, a
scaling base γ, a update iteration τ, an
annealing schedule {σ1, σ2, . . . , σT }
Output: Result SAT or Unknown
1 Initialize hc ←0 for all constraint c ∈C;
2 for σt ∈{σ1, σ2, . . . , σT } do
3
Local minimum (a, b) ←ProjGradDesc(a, b, σt, w);
4
Rounded assignment (x, y) ←(sgn(a), b);
5
#Unsat ←0;
6
for c ∈C do
7
uc ←1
2fc(x, y) + 1
2;
8
hc ←ρ · hc + uc;
9
#Unsat←#Unsat+uc;
10
if t mod τ = 0 then
11
wc ←wc · γhc;
// update weight
12
hc ←1;
// reset history
13
if #Unsat = 0 then
14
return SAT;
15 return Unknown;
highly smoothed objective, enabling efficient descent to-
ward promising regions. As σ decreases, the optimization
progressively sharpens around the original combinatorial
objective, allowing the algorithm to refine candidate so-
lutions.
To guide the search away from local minima, we main-
tain dynamic clause weights with ERWA. At each iter-
ation, for every constraint c ∈C, FourierSMT checks
whether the rounded assignment satisfies c. The expo-
nentially decayed history hc is then updated as
hc[t + 1] = ρ · hc[t] + [fc(R(a), b) = 1] ,
where fc(R(a)) = 1 indicates that the rounded assign-
ment of a violates constraint c, and ρ ∈(0, 1) is a decay
rate controlling the memory of past violations. After a
fixed number of iterations T, clause weights are updated
multiplicatively as
ωc[t] ←ωc[t] · γhc[t]
with scaling base γ > 1.
This update rule exponen-
tially emphasizes recently falsified clauses while atten-
uating the influence of earlier ones, adaptively biasing
the search toward persistent sources of violation.
FourierSMT repeatedly invokes Alg. 2 with different
random seeds until either a SAT result is returned or the
time limit is reached. For the benchmark experiments,
we set ρ = 0.5, γ = 2, and τ = 1.
Projected Critical Point
The ϵ-projected critical point is a concept used in the
convergence analysis of projected gradient methods — it


--- Page 10 ---
10
refers to a point where the projected gradient mapping
has small norm, i.e., the optimization has nearly reached
a stationary point within the feasible set.
Formally, in the FourierSMT framework, the projected
gradient mapping is defined in Eq. (13). Then, a point
(a∗, b∗) is said to be an ϵ-projected critical point if
||g(a∗, b∗)||2 ≤ϵ2,
(14)
meaning the norm of the projected gradient is smaller
than a small threshold ϵ, i.e., the optimization has nearly
converged.
Evaluation Metrics
The PAR-2 score is a standard metric that balances
runtime efficiency and robustness by penalizing timeouts:
PAR-2 = 1
N
N
X
i=1

ti · 1[ti ≤T] + 2T · 1[ti > T]

,
(15)
where 1(·) is the indicator function and T denotes the
time limit, set to 1000 seconds in our experiments.
Benchmark Problem Descriptions
Random Hybrid Constraints The random bench-
mark consists of cardinality, not-all-equal, and parity
constraints, where these constraints are called hybrid
constraints. WFE-based CLS approaches, i.e., Fouri-
erSAT [23] and FastFourierSAT [25], achieve perfor-
mance competitive with SOTA CDCL-based SAT solvers
on random hybrid constraint problems.
As Fouri-
erSMT is an extended version of FourierSAT that
natively supports real-valued variables, we construct the
benchmark instances using the following types of con-
straints.
cardinality :
n
X
i=1
li ≤k
not-all-equal :¬ (l1 = l2 = · · · = ln)
parity : (l1 ⊕l2 ⊕· · · ⊕ln)
li are the literals, which can be propositional variables
xj, inequalities with real-valued variables for Reals αk
or their’s negation ¬xj, ¬αk.
For FourierSMT, the coefficients of the xWFE are
computed following [23], as the hybrid constraints are
symmetric (For non-symmetric constraints, we can con-
struct the xBDD as in [24]). For the SMT solver competi-
tors, the hybrid constraints are encoded into disjunctive
clauses, where each clause is the disjunction of literals.
The cardinality constraints are encoded using the cardi-
nality encoding in PySAT [67, 68]. The NAE constraints
are encoded using the standard two-clause encoding that
eliminates the all-true and all-false assignments.
The
XOR constraints use the encoding in [69].
Scheduling with Continuous Time The scheduling
problem is a classical combinatorial optimization prob-
lem that involves assigning a set of jobs (or tasks) to a set
of workers (or machines, processors, or other resources)
subject to various constraints. Constraint programming
solvers, such as Google’s OR-Tools CP-SAT [70], are
highly effective in handling discrete logical constraints
and have achieved state-of-the-art performance on many
discrete scheduling benchmarks. There exist numerous
variants of the scheduling problem, differing in the char-
acteristics of jobs, resources, and temporal dependencies,
each leading to distinct formulations and computational
challenges. In this study, we focus on continuous-time
scheduling problems, where both discrete logical deci-
sions and real-valued timing constraints coexist.
Such
problems can be naturally encoded and solved by SMT
solvers, which integrate logical reasoning with LRA.
We encode the problem with the following variables:
• Worker index: for each job j, we use a variable
Xid,j ∈{0, ..., nw −1} to encode which worker it is
assigned to. Xid,j is Booleanized as follows
Xid,j =
log2(nw)−1
X
i=0
2i · [xi,j = True].
• Job start time: job j is launched at yj ∈R.
We generate instances by the following parameters.
• Worker start time: worker will start admitting job
after did ∈R time, which is sampled from U(0, 1).
• Job run time: to complete job j need tj ∈R time,
which is sampled from U(0, 1).
• Cutoff time: all workers will stop after did+T time,
where T is a solution from a greedy heuristic to
ensure feasibility.
The problems include the following constraints
• Task dependency: if the input of a job j depends
on the output of another job j′, then j has to be
executed after j′.
yj ≥yj′ + tj′
• Non-overlap: one worker can run only one job at a
time. Hence, for every pair of jobs (j, j′),
(x0,j ⊕x0,j′) ∨. . . ∨
 xlog2(nw)−1,j ⊕xlog2(nw)−1,j′
∨(yj −yj′ ≥tj′) ∨(yj′ −yj ≥tj).
• Feasibility: the job can only run on a worker if the
worker is active. Hence, for each job j,
(¬x0,j) ∨. . . ∨
 ¬xlog2(nw)−1,j

∨(yj ≥did) ∨(yj ≤did + T −tj).


--- Page 11 ---
11
3D Placement.
The placement problem is another
canonical combinatorial problem, widely studied in elec-
tronic design automation (EDA). It involves assigning
a set of components (or modules) to specific spatial lo-
cations on a chip, board, or layout region while satisfy-
ing geometric and connectivity constraints. In integrated
circuit and 3D chiplet design, placement determines the
exact coordinates of macros and standard cells to min-
imize wirelength, delay, and congestion, while avoiding
overlaps among modules. Traditional approaches in the
EDA design flow are mostly heuristic approaches [71].
Recent advances in SMT have enabled efficient model-
ing of placement problems by combining Boolean logic
for non-overlap and connectivity constraints with linear
real arithmetic for geometric relationships [72]. In this
study, we evaluate a 3D placement problem, where mod-
ules are distributed across multiple layers and intercon-
nected through through-silicon vias, posing additional
spatial and connectivity challenges.
The
placement
of
a
module
is
represented
by
Booleanized indices and real-valued coordinates:
• Macro index: for each module j, a variable Mid,j ∈
{0, . . . , nm −1} encodes the macro assignment,
Booleanized as
Mid,j =
log2(nm)−1
X
i=0
2i · [mi,j = True].
• Layer index: a variable Lid,j ∈{0, . . . , nℓ−1} en-
codes the assigned layer, Booleanized as
Lid,j =
log2(nl)−1
X
i=0
2i · [li,j = True].
• Coordinates: each module j has continuous posi-
tion variables (xj, yj) ∈R2.
Each instance contains:
• nm macros, each occupying 1 × 1 nm.
• nm large process elements (0.4×0.4 nm) and nm·nℓ
small process elements (0.2 × 0.2 nm).
• nm large memory elements (0.1×0.1 nm) and nm·nℓ
2
small memory elements (0.1 × 0.05 nm).
Randomization is applied by alternating the alignment
of small memory elements along the x- or y-axis. The di-
mensions of each module are denoted by wj (width along
x) and dj (height along y).
The problems include the following constraints Three
classes of constraints are enforced:
• Routing-aware: each large process is paired with
a large memory, and each small process with two
small memories. For associated modules (j, j′) and
∀i ∈[0, log2(nm) −1],
n
(mi,j = mi,j′) ,
(xj −xj′ ≤wj′),
(xj′ −xj ≤wj)
(yj −yj′ ≤hj′),
(yj′ −yj ≤hj)
o
i.e., they should be placed in the same macro and
should be adjacent to each other. Such that the
length of the metal wire can be reduced in the pre-
ceding routing stage.
• Non-overlap: modules sharing the same macro and
layer must not overlap. For pairs (j, j′):
(m0,j ⊕m0,j′) ∨
 mlog2(nm)−1,j ⊕mlog2(nm)−1,j′
(l0,j ⊕l0,j′) ∨
 llog2(nl)−1,j ⊕llog2(nl)−1,j′
∨(xj −xj′ ≥wj′) ∨(xj′ −xj ≥wj)
∨(yj −yj′ ≥hj′) ∨(yj′ −yj ≥hj)
• Feasibility:
all modules must remain within the
macro boundary,
{(xj ≥0), (xj ≤1 −wj), (yj ≥0), (yj ≤1 −dj)}
Experimental Setup
All experiments were conducted on a high-performance
computing node equipped with 2× AMD EPYC 9654
CPUs, 24×96 GB of DRAM, and 8× NVIDIA L40S
GPUs. Baseline solvers were permitted to use up to 64
threads of the CPUs.
Because SAT solvers are highly
memory-intensive due to clause database management,
naive parallelization via multi-threaded racing, without
inter-thread clause sharing, typically yields limited per-
formance gains. Consequently, MathSAT5, which lacks
multithreading support, was executed in single-threaded
mode.
Our proposed solver, FourierSMT, leverages
GPU acceleration. Eight independent replicas were exe-
cuted across the eight available GPUs, and we report the
median runtimes to provide more robust results. A time-
out of 1000 seconds was imposed per benchmark instance
for all solvers.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The benchmark instances that support the results of
this study are available from the corresponding author
upon request.
CODE AVAILABILITY
The algorithms are described in the main text and the
supplementary notes. The code is available from the cor-
responding author upon request.


--- Page 12 ---
12
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Re-
search Foundation under the Prime Minister’s Office, Sin-
gapore, through the Competitive Research Programme
(project ID NRF-CRP24-2020-0002 and NRF-CRP24-
2020-0003); in part by the Ministry of Education, Sin-
gapore, through the Academic Research Fund Tier 2
(project ID MOE-T2EP50221-0008); and in part by the
National University of Singapore, through the Microelec-
tronics Seed Fund (FY2024).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Y.C. conceived the research idea, developed the the-
oretical framework, and implemented the methodology.
X.F. supervised the project and provided conceptual
guidance. Y.C. and D.E. designed the experiments, and
X.F. configured the hardware environment for experi-
mental evaluations. All authors analyzed the experimen-
tal results and wrote the manuscript.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The authors declare no competing interests.
CORRESPONDENCE
Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to Yunuo Cen and Xuanyao Fong.
[1] A. Biere, M. Heule, and H. van Maaren, Handbook of
satisfiability, Vol. 185 (IOS press, 2009).
[2] C. Barrett and C. Tinelli, Satisfiability modulo theories,
in Handbook of model checking (Springer, 2018) pp. 305–
343.
[3] C. Ans´otegui, M. Bofill, M. Palahı, J. Suy, and M. Vil-
laret, Satisfiability modulo theories:
An efficient ap-
proach for the resource-constrained project schedul-
ing problem, in Proceedings of the 9th Symposium on
Abstraction, Reformulation and Approximation (SARA
2011) (2011) pp. 2–9.
[4] M. Bofill, J. Coll, J. Suy, and M. Villaret, Smt encod-
ings for resource-constrained project scheduling prob-
lems, Computers & Industrial Engineering 149, 106777
(2020).
[5] S. Lahiri and S. Qadeer, Back to the future: revisiting
precise program verification using smt solvers, ACM SIG-
PLAN Notices 43, 171 (2008).
[6] N. S. Bjørner, K. L. McMillan, and A. Rybalchenko,
Program verification as satisfiability modulo theories.,
SMT@ IJCAR 20, 3 (2012).
[7] X. Ye, Q. Chen, I. Dillig, and G. Durrett, Satlm:
Satisfiability-aided language models using declarative
prompting, Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 36, 45548 (2023).
[8] G. Spallitta, G. Masina, P. Morettin, A. Passerini, and
R. Sebastiani, Enhancing smt-based weighted model in-
tegration by structure awareness, Artificial Intelligence
328, 104067 (2024).
[9] S. A. Cook, The complexity of theorem-proving proce-
dures, in Proceedings of the third annual ACM symposium
on Theory of computing (1971) pp. 151–158.
[10] N. E´en and N. S¨orensson, An extensible sat-solver, in In-
ternational conference on theory and applications of sat-
isfiability testing (Springer, 2003) pp. 502–518.
[11] G. Audemard and L. Simon, Lazy clause exchange pol-
icy for parallel sat solvers, in International Confer-
ence on Theory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing
(Springer, 2014) pp. 197–205.
[12] J. H. Liang, Machine learning for SAT solvers, Ph.D.
thesis, University of Waterloo (2018).
[13] A. Fleury and M. Heisinger, Cadical, kissat, paracooba,
plingeling and treengeling entering the sat competition
2020, Sat Competition 2020, 50 (2020).
[14] J. P. Marques-Silva and K. A. Sakallah, Grasp: A search
algorithm for propositional satisfiability, IEEE Transac-
tions on Computers 48, 506 (2002).
[15] L. De Moura and N. Bjørner, Z3: An efficient smt solver,
in International conference on Tools and Algorithms for
the Construction and Analysis of Systems (Springer,
2008) pp. 337–340.
[16] H. Barbosa, C. Barrett, M. Brain, G. Kremer, H. Lach-
nitt, M. Mann, A. Mohamed, M. Mohamed, A. Niemetz,
A. N¨otzli, et al., cvc5: A versatile and industrial-strength
smt solver, in International Conference on Tools and Al-
gorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems
(Springer, 2022) pp. 415–442.
[17] B. Dutertre, Yices 2.2, in International Conference on
Computer Aided Verification (Springer, 2014) pp. 737–
744.
[18] R. Bruttomesso, E. Pek, N. Sharygina, and A. Tsi-
tovich, The opensmt solver, in International Conference
on TOOLS and Algorithms for the Construction and
Analysis of Systems (Springer, 2010) pp. 150–153.
[19] F. Corzilius, U. Loup, S. Junges, and E. ´Abrah´am, Smt-
rat: An smt-compliant nonlinear real arithmetic toolbox:
(tool presentation), in International Conference on The-
ory and Applications of Satisfiability Testing (Springer,
2012) pp. 442–448.
[20] A. Cimatti, A. Griggio, B. J. Schaafsma, and R. Sebas-
tiani, The mathsat5 smt solver, in International Confer-
ence on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and
Analysis of Systems (Springer, 2013) pp. 93–107.
[21] B. Li and S. Cai, Local search for smt on linear and
multi-linear real arithmetic, in 2023 Formal Methods in
Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD) (2023) pp. 1–10.
[22] B. Li,
D. Li,
M. Fu, and S. Cai, Smt-layout:
A
maxsmt-based approach supporting real-time interaction
of real-world gui layout, arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12271
(2024).


--- Page 13 ---
13
[23] A. Kyrillidis, A. Shrivastava, M. Vardi, and Z. Zhang,
Fouriersat: A fourier expansion-based algebraic frame-
work for solving hybrid boolean constraints, in Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 34 (2020) pp. 1552–1560.
[24] A. Kyrillidis, M. Vardi, and Z. Zhang, On continuous
local bdd-based search for hybrid sat solving, in Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
Vol. 35 (2021) pp. 3841–3850.
[25] Y. Cen, Z. Zhang, and X. Fong, Massively parallel con-
tinuous local search for hybrid sat solving on gpus, in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, Vol. 39 (2025) pp. 11140–11149.
[26] R. O’Donnell, Analysis of boolean functions (Cambridge
University Press, 2014).
[27] C. W. Barrett, D. L. Dill, and A. Stump, Checking satis-
fiability of first-order formulas by incremental translation
to sat, in International Conference on Computer Aided
Verification (Springer, 2002) pp. 236–249.
[28] H. Ganzinger, G. Hagen, R. Nieuwenhuis, A. Oliveras,
and C. Tinelli, Dpll (t): Fast decision procedures, in In-
ternational Conference on Computer Aided Verification
(Springer, 2004) pp. 175–188.
[29] R. Nieuwenhuis and A. Oliveras, On sat modulo theo-
ries and optimization problems, in International confer-
ence on theory and applications of satisfiability testing
(Springer, 2006) pp. 156–169.
[30] S. Jha, R. Limaye, and S. A. Seshia, Beaver: Engineer-
ing an efficient smt solver for bit-vector arithmetic, in In-
ternational Conference on Computer Aided Verification
(Springer, 2009) pp. 668–674.
[31] A. C. Wright et al., Modular SMT-based verification of
rule-based hardware designs, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (2021).
[32] R. Brummayer and A. Biere, Boolector: An efficient smt
solver for bit-vectors and arrays, in International Confer-
ence on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and
Analysis of Systems (Springer, 2009) pp. 174–177.
[33] S. Ghilardi and S. Ranise, Backward reachability of
array-based systems by smt solving: Termination and in-
variant synthesis, Logical Methods in Computer Science
6 (2010).
[34] B. Selman, D. G. Mitchell, and H. J. Levesque, Gener-
ating hard satisfiability problems, Artificial intelligence
81, 17 (1996).
[35] B. Selman, H. A. Kautz, B. Cohen, et al., Noise strategies
for improving local search, in AAAI, Vol. 94 (1994) pp.
337–343.
[36] S. Cai, K. Su, and C. Luo, Improving walksat for ran-
dom k-satisfiability problem with k¿ 3, in Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 27
(2013) pp. 145–151.
[37] A. Balint and U. Sch¨oning, Choosing probability distri-
butions for stochastic local search and the role of make
versus break, in International Conference on Theory and
Applications of Satisfiability Testing (Springer, 2012) pp.
16–29.
[38] S. Cai, C. Luo, and K. Su, Ccanr: A configuration check-
ing based local search solver for non-random satisfiability,
in International Conference on Theory and Applications
of Satisfiability Testing (Springer, 2015) pp. 1–8.
[39] L. Cordeiro and B. Fischer, Verifying multi-threaded soft-
ware using smt-based context-bounded model checking,
in Proceedings of the 33rd International Conference on
Software Engineering (2011) pp. 331–340.
[40] W. Steiner, An evaluation of smt-based schedule synthe-
sis for time-triggered multi-hop networks, in 2010 31st
IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (IEEE, 2010) pp.
375–384.
[41] B. Yordanov, C. M. Wintersteiger, Y. Hamadi, and
H. Kugler, Smt-based analysis of biological computation,
in NASA formal methods symposium (Springer, 2013) pp.
78–92.
[42] A. Bonami, ´etude des coefficients de Fourier des fonctions
de lp(g), Annales de l’Institut Fourier 20, 335 (1970).
[43] J. Kahn, G. Kalai, and N. Linial, The influence of vari-
ables on boolean functions, in [Proceedings 1988] 29th
Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science
(IEEE Computer Society, 1988) pp. 68–80.
[44] A. Tal, Tight bounds on the fourier spectrum of ac0,
in 32nd Computational Complexity Conference (CCC
2017)
(Schloss
Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum
f¨ur
Infor-
matik, 2017) pp. 15–1.
[45] S. Safra, Perspectives from mathematics, computer sci-
ence, and economics, Computational complexity and sta-
tistical physics , 25 (2006).
[46] G. Kalai, A fourier-theoretic perspective on the con-
dorcet paradox and arrow’s theorem, Advances in Ap-
plied Mathematics 29, 412 (2002).
[47] M. Thornton and V. Nair, Efficient spectral coefficient
calculation using circuit output probabilities, Digital Sig-
nal Processing 4, 245 (1994).
[48] R. E. Bryant, Binary decision diagrams and beyond: En-
abling technologies for formal verification, in Proceedings
of IEEE International Conference on Computer Aided
Design (ICCAD) (IEEE, 1995) pp. 236–243.
[49] T. Sasao, M. Fujita, et al., Representations of discrete
functions, Vol. 1 (Springer, 1996).
[50] S. Kolb, M. Mladenov, S. Sanner, V. Belle, and K. Ker-
sting, Efficient symbolic integration for probabilistic in-
ference, in 27th International Joint Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence: IJCAI 2018 (IJCAI Inc, 2018) pp.
5031–5037.
[51] P. Z. Dos Martires, A. Dries, and L. De Raedt, Exact
and approximate weighted model integration with prob-
ability density functions using knowledge compilation, in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence, Vol. 33 (2019) pp. 7825–7833.
[52] S. Kolb, P. Z. Dos Martires, and L. De Raedt, How to
exploit structure while solving weighted model integra-
tion problems, in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
(PMLR, 2020) pp. 744–754.
[53] F. Somenzi, Cudd: Cu decision diagram package, Public
Software, University of Colorado (1997).
[54] P. Jain, P. Kar, et al., Non-convex optimization for ma-
chine learning, Foundations and Trends® in Machine
Learning 10, 142 (2017).
[55] E. Triki, Y. Collette, and P. Siarry, A theoretical study
on the behavior of simulated annealing leading to a new
cooling schedule, European Journal of Operational Re-
search 166, 77 (2005).
[56] S. Morita and H. Nishimori, Mathematical foundation of
quantum annealing, Journal of Mathematical Physics 49
(2008).
[57] F. B¨ohm, T. Inagaki, K. Inaba, T. Honjo, K. Enbutsu,
T. Umeki, R. Kasahara, and H. Takesue, Understanding
dynamics of coherent ising machines through simulation
of large-scale 2d ising models, Nature communications 9,


--- Page 14 ---
14
5020 (2018).
[58] J. M. Dudek, K. S. Meel, and M. Y. Vardi, Combining
the k-cnf and xor phase-transitions, in Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artifi-
cial Intelligence (2016) pp. 727–734.
[59] Y. Pote, S. Joshi, and K. S. Meel, Phase transition be-
havior of cardinality and xor constraints, in Proceedings
of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (2019) pp. 1162–1168.
[60] R. Gupta, S. Roy, and K. S. Meel, Phase transition be-
havior in knowledge compilation, in International Con-
ference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Pro-
gramming (Springer, 2020) pp. 358–374.
[61] R. Amadini, M. Gabbrielli, T. Liu, and J. Mauro, On
the evaluation of (meta-) solver approaches, Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research 76, 705 (2023).
[62] S. M. Saif, M. Dessouky, M. W. El-Kharashi, H. Ab-
bas, and S. Nassar, Pareto front analog layout place-
ment using satisfiability modulo theories, in 2016 Design,
Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition
(DATE) (IEEE, 2016) pp. 1411–1416.
[63] A. Cimatti, S. Mover, and S. Tonetta, A quantifier-free
smt encoding of non-linear hybrid automata, in 2012
Formal Methods in Computer-Aided Design (FMCAD)
(IEEE, 2012) pp. 187–195.
[64] C. McCaig, R. Norman, and C. Shankland, Process al-
gebra models of population dynamics, in International
Conference on Algebraic Biology (Springer, 2008) pp.
139–155.
[65] B. F. Caviness and J. R. Johnson, Quantifier elimination
and cylindrical algebraic decomposition (Springer Science
& Business Media, 2012).
[66] D. Jovanovic, C. Barrett, and L. De Moura, The design
and implementation of the model constructing satisfiabil-
ity calculus, in 2013 Formal Methods in Computer-Aided
Design (IEEE, 2013) pp. 173–180.
[67] A. Ignatiev, A. Morgado, and J. Marques-Silva, PySAT:
A Python toolkit for prototyping with SAT oracles, in
SAT (2018) pp. 428–437.
[68] A. Ignatiev, Z. L. Tan, and C. Karamanos, Towards uni-
versally accessible SAT technology, in SAT (2024) pp.
4:1–4:11.
[69] C. M. Li, Integrating equivalency reasoning into davis-
putnam procedure, AAAI/IAAI 2000, 291 (2000).
[70] L. Perron, F. Didier, and S. Gay, The cp-sat-lp solver, in
29th International Conference on Principles and Prac-
tice of Constraint Programming (CP 2023), Leibniz In-
ternational Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), Vol. 280,
edited by R. H. C. Yap (Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-
Zentrum f¨ur Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2023) pp.
3:1–3:2.
[71] Y. Lin, S. Dhar, W. Li, H. Ren, B. Khailany, and D. Z.
Pan, Dreamplace: Deep learning toolkit-enabled gpu ac-
celeration for modern vlsi placement, in Proceedings of
the 56th Annual Design Automation Conference 2019
(2019) pp. 1–6.
[72] D. Lee, D. Park, C.-T. Ho, I. Kang, H. Kim, S. Gao,
B. Lin, and C.-K. Cheng, Sp&r: Smt-based simultaneous
place-and-route for standard cell synthesis of advanced
nodes, IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of
Integrated Circuits and Systems 40, 2142 (2020).
[73] S. Sanner, K. V. Delgado, and L. N. de Barros, Symbolic
dynamic programming for discrete and continuous state
mdps, in Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Conference
on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI’11 (AUAI
Press, Arlington, Virginia, USA, 2011) p. 643–652.
[74] M. Chavira and A. Darwiche, On probabilistic inference
by weighted model counting, Artificial Intelligence 172,
772 (2008).
[75] Y. Nesterov, Introductory lectures on convex optimiza-
tion: A basic course, Vol. 87 (Springer Science & Busi-
ness Media, 2013).
[76] A. Kyrillidis, A. Shrivastava, M. Y. Vardi, and Z. Zhang,
Solving hybrid boolean constraints in continuous space
via multilinear fourier expansions, Artificial Intelligence
299, 103559 (2021).


--- Page 15 ---
15
Supplementary Note 1: Walsh-Fourier Expansion
In this section, we introduce the Walsh-Fourier expansion (WFE, Thm. 3) and further extend it for adapting real
variables (xWFE, Cor. 1). The results in this section lead to Eq. (2) in the main text.
Theorem 3 (Walsh-Fourier Expansion [26]). Given a function f : {±1}n →R, there is a unique way of expressing
f as a multilinear polynomial, where each term corresponds to a subset of [n], according to:
f(x) =
X
S⊆[n]
 
ˆf(S) ·
Y
i∈S
xi
!
where ˆf(S) ∈R is called Walsh-Fourier coefficient, given S and computed as:
ˆf(S) =
E
x∼{±1}n
 
f(x) ·
Y
i∈S
xi
!
To extend WFE-based CLS methods to SMT(LRA), we generalize Thm. 3 as follows.
Corollary 1 (Extended Walsh-Fourier Expansion, xWFE). Let c be a constraint consisting of n propositional variables
and k atoms. Then c can be represented as a function fc : {±1}n × Rm →{±1}, where −1 denotes True and +1
denotes False.
There is a unique way of expressing fc as a piecewise multilinear polynomial, where each term
corresponds to a pair of subsets of [n] and [k], according to:
fc (x, y) =
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
where ˆf(S, T) ∈R is called Walsh-Fourier coefficient, given S, T, and computed as:
ˆfc(S, T) =
E
x∼{±1}n
δ(y)∼{±1}k
 
fc(x, y) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
Proof of Corollary 1. A constraint c consists of at most n propositional variables and k atomic constraints.
Let
z = (x, δ(y))
˜fc(z) = fc(x, y)
(11)
be a Boolean function ˜fc : {±1}n+k →{±1}. By applying Theorem 3 to ˜fc, we have
˜fc(z) =
X
U⊆[n+k]
 
ˆfc(U) ·
Y
i∈U
zi
!
with coefficient
ˆf(U) =
E
z∼{±1}n
 
˜f(z) ·
Y
i∈S
zi
!
.
By substituting the above equations with Eq. (11), we have
fc (x, y) =
X
U⊆[n+k]
 
ˆfc(U) ·
Y
i∈U
zi
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!


--- Page 16 ---
16
where xi = zi and δi(y) = zi+n, and
ˆfc(S, T) =
E
x∼{±1}n
δ(y)∼{±1}k
 
fc(x, y) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!


--- Page 17 ---
17
Supplementary Note 2: Expectation
In Supplementary Note 1, we extend the WFE to adapt real variables in SMT. The extension is called xWFE and
is still discrete in nature. The objective function in the CLS framework is the expectation of xWFEs. The results
in this section lead to Eq. (5) and Eq. (6) in the main text. Furthermore, we mathematically derive the analytical
expression of di(b).
Lemma 1. Let fc denote the WFE of a constraint c. For any real point (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, the expectation of fc
with respect to the distribution Sa is
E
x∼Sa
[fc(x, b)] =fc(a, b)
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
δi(b)
!
.
Proof of Lemma 1.
E
x∼Sa
[fc(x, y)] =
X
x∈{±1}n
fc(x, δ(y)) · Sa(x)
=
X
x∈{±1}n
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
xi ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
· Sa(x)
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
ˆf(S, T) ·
X
x∈{±1}n
 Y
i∈S
xi · Sa(x)
!
·
 Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
ˆf(S, T) ·
E
x∼Sa
"Y
i∈S
xi
#
·
 Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
=fc(a, y)
di(b) is the expectation of δi(y) given y ∼N(b, σ2I). When δi(y) corresponds to a linear constraint of the form
q⊤
i y ≤qi,0, it can be written as
di(b) = −
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)


m
X
j=1
qi,jyj −qi,0 ≤0

+
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)


m
X
j=1
qi,jyj −qi,0 > 0


= 1 −2
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)


m
X
j=1
qi,jyj −qi,0 ≤0


Let z = Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0 and s2 = σ2 Pm
j=1 q2
i,j.
di(z) = 1 −2
P
z′∼N(z,s2) [z′ ≤0]
= 1 −2Φ
−z
s

= 1 −2 ·
1
2

1 + erf
 −z
s
√
2

= erf
 z
s
√
2



--- Page 18 ---
18
where Φ is the standard cumulative distribution function, and erf is the error function. By substituting b and σ back
to the equation, we have
di(b) = erf


Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
q
2 Pm
j=1 q2
i,jσ


And the differentiation with respect to bj is
∂di(b)
∂bj
=
√
2qi,j
q
π Pm
j=1 q2
i,jσ
exp


−
Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
2
q
2 Pm
j=1 q2
i,jσ
.



Theorem 4 is the consequence of Lemma 1 with Gaussian sampling y ∼N(b, σ2I).
Theorem 4. For any point (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, the expectation of fc(x, y) under x ∼Sa and y ∼N(b, σ2I) is
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] =
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
di(b)
!
.
Moreover, when σ2 = 0, the expectation reduces to
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] = fc(a, b)
Proof of Theorem 4. x is subject a binary ditribution Sa and y is subject to Gaussian distribution N(b, σ2I). For the
expectation on the joint distribution, we have:
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] =
Z
y∈Rm
X
x∈{±1}n
fc(x, δ(y)) · Sa(x) · dy
=
Z
y∈Rm
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
· dy
(Due to Lemma 1)
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
Z
y∈Rm δi(y) · dy
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
E
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δi(y)]
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
di(b)
!


--- Page 19 ---
19
Supplementary Note 3: Decision Diagrams
To explicitly evaluate the WFE of a constraint requires state enumeration. This section introduces decision dia-
grams, an efficient data structure for evaluating the constraints (via the equivalence between the COP of the decision
diagram and expectation of the xWFE, as in Supplementary Note 4).
GradSAT avoids state enumeration by maintaining compact representations of Boolean functions using binary
decision diagrams (BDDs) [24]. A BDD represents Boolean constraints Bn →B as an ordered directed acyclic graph,
where each node corresponds to a variable and each edge encodes a branching decision. Every decision node tests
a Boolean variable and has two outgoing edges, corresponding to the true and false outcomes. To evaluate a BDD,
variables are assigned values, and the diagram is traversed according to the corresponding branches until reaching a
terminal node. The Boolean value at the terminal node is the output of the function for that assignment.
In the extended algebraic decision diagram (xADD) framework [73], linear programming is often used to prune
unreachable nodes (e.g., a branch following y > 1 cannot subsequently satisfy y < 0), thereby yielding a minimal
decision diagram. Motivated by the xADD, we generalize BDDs to handle continuous variables. xBDD provides a
unified representation in which Boolean and real-valued variables are captured within a decision diagram through
piecewise case statements.
However, in our setting, we do not employ such pruning for two reasons.
First, the
canonicity of linear-programming-pruned diagrams remains an open question. Second, in the presence of probabilistic
sampling, deterministically unreachable nodes can still be visited with non-zero probability. For example, if y = 1.1,
samples drawn from y′ ∼N(y, σ2) may still yield y′ < 0. Therefore, we treat an XBDD analogously to a BDD,
interpreting atomic constraints as propositional variables, while acknowledging that minimality and canonicity are
not guaranteed in the extended setting.
Definition 2 (Extended Binary Decision Diagram, xBDD). An xBDD is a directed acyclic graph G(V, E) representing
a multivariate function Bn × Rm →B. Each decision node v ∈V corresponds either to a Boolean variable or to a
theory atom over real variables. Each edge e ∈E is labeled (v, true) or (v, false), depending on the outcome of
evaluating the decision node v. A path p in G is a sequence of edges such that each decision node appears at most
once, with the edge labels indicating the branch taken at that node. Formally, a path can be written as a finite subset
of all possible decision outcomes:
p ⊂{(v1, true), (v1, false), (v2, true), (v2, false), · · · }


--- Page 20 ---
20
Supplementary Note 4: Circuit-Output Probability
In Supplementary Note 3 we present the decision diagram data structure. By running the message propagation
algorithm (Supplementary Note 5) on the decision diagram, we can efficiently evaluate the COP, which is introduced
in this section. The result in this section leads to Eq. (10) in the main text.
The COP is defined as a special case of weighted model counting (WMC). To extend COP to adapt the real variable,
we further discuss weighted model integration (WMI).
Definition 3 (Weighted model counting [74]). Let f be a function over Boolean variables x. Let W : {−1, 1}n →R
be a weight function. The weighted model counting of fc with respect to W is defined as
WMC(W) =
X
x∈{−1,1}n
f(x, y) · W(x),
Here W assigns a weight to each complete assignment, which can be expressed as the product of literal weights associated
with Boolean variables:
W(x) =
Y
xi=−1
ωT
i ·
Y
xi=1
ωF
i
where ωT
i , ωF
i ∈R are the literal weights.
When the weights satisfy ωT
i + ωF
i
= 1, and ωT
i , ωF
i
≥0, the weighted model counting problem reduces to the
circuit-output probability problem. And the weight function becomes an input probability function. The circuit-
output probability (COP) of f is defined as
COP(Sa) =
X
x∈{±1}n
f(x) · Sa(x),
where Sa(x) is the randomized rounding distribution over Boolean variables, i.e., Eq. (3).
Definition 4 (Weighted model integration). Let f be a function over Boolean variables x and real variables y. Let
W : {−1, 1}n × Rm →R be a weight function. The weighted model integration of fc with respect to W is defined as
WMI(W) =
X
x∈{−1,1}n
Z
y∈Rm f(x, y) · W(x, y)dy,
and
W(x, y) =
Y
xi=−1
ωT
i ·
Y
xi=1
ωF
i ·
m
Y
j=1
ωj(yj).
ωj is the weight of the real variable when taking a different value yj.
To generalize circuit-output probability for weighted model integration, the weight of the real variable should satisfy
Z
yj
wj(yj)dyj = 1,
and for yj ∈R, wj(yj) ≥0.
Remark 1 (Circuit-output probability). Let f : {±1}n × Rm →{±1} be a function over propositional variables x
and real variables y. Let Pσ : {±1}n+k →[0, 1] denote the input probability distribution. Then the circuit-output
probability (COP) of f ′ is defined as
COP(Pσ) =
X
x∈{±1}n
X
z∈{±1}k
f(x, y) · Pσ(x, z).
Here, the input probability distribution factorizes as
Pσ(x, z) = Sa(x) ·
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z].
where Py∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z] is the probability that the atomic constraints δ(y) evaluate to z under Gaussian sampling.


--- Page 21 ---
21
Intuitively, the COP measures the probability that a constraint is satisfied under randomized Boolean rounding
and Gaussian perturbation of real variables.
Corollary 2. For any real point (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, let Pσ denote the joint probability distribution induced by Sa
and N(b, σ2I). For an SMT(LRA) constraint c, the circuit-output probability satisfies
COPc(Pσ) =
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)] .
Let Cσ(a, b) = P
c∈C wc · COPc(Pσ), we have
Cσ(a, b) =
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[Fw(x, y)]
Particularly, when σ = 0, the above reduced to
Cσ(a, b) = Fw(a, b)
Proof of Corollary 2. By the definition of circuit-output probability, we have
COPc(Pσ) =
X
x∈{±1}n
X
z∈{±1}k
fc(x, y) · Pσ(x, z)
=
X
z∈{±1}k
X
x∈{±1}n
fc(x, y) · Sa(x) ·
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z]
=
X
z∈{±1}k
E
x∼Sa
[fc(x, y)] ·
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z]
=
X
z∈{±1}k
fc(a, y) ·
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z]
Define ˜fc(x, δ(y)) = fc(x, y), we have
COPc(Pσ) =
X
z∈{±1}k
˜fc(a, z) ·
P
y∼N(b,σ2I)[δ(y) = z]
=
E
y∼N(b,σ2I)
h
˜fc(a, z)
i
=
E
y∼N(b,σ2I) [fc(a, y)]
=
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)]
For the weighted objective, by linearity of expectation,
Cσ(a, b) =
X
c∈C
wc · COPc(Pσ)
=
X
c∈C
wc ·
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
[fc(x, y)]
=
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)
h X
c∈C
wc · fc(x, y)
i
=
E
x∼Sa
y∼N(b,σ2I)

Fw(x, y)

.


--- Page 22 ---
22
Supplementary Note 5: Message Propagation
Direct evaluation or differentiation of E[fc] is, however, intractable, as it requires enumerating O(2n) Boolean
assignments. In contrast, message propagation on the associated xBDD (see Supplementary Notes 3 and 4) provides
an efficient surrogate: both forward and backward traversals scale with the size of the decision diagram rather than
with the exponential size of the Boolean domain. Thus, message propagation yields a tractable upper bound on
computational cost.
The procedure consists of two phases: forward propagation (Alg. 3) and backward propagation (Alg. 4). In the
forward pass, top-down messages are initialized at the root and recursively distributed along decision edges according
to assignment-dependent branching probabilities. The true terminal node accumulates the top-down message, which
encodes the probability that constraint c is satisfied under Gaussian sampling. In the backward pass, bottom-up
messages are initialized at the true terminal and propagated in reverse topological order. Local sensitivity terms are
then computed by contrasting the adjoint contributions of the true and false successors.
By leveraging message passing on xBDDs, we can evaluate the expectation of the objective function without explicit
state enumeration. The following theorem formalizes the correctness and computational complexity of this procedure.
Theorem 5 (Evaluation). Alg. 3 returns the expectation of the objective function in Eq. (3). The complexity of
running Alg. 3 scales at O (P
c |Vc|).
To prove Thm. 5, we first reproduce Lem. 2 in [24].
Lemma 2. Let Gc(Vc, Ec) be an xBDD encoded constraint c and run Alg. 3 on Gc. For a real assignment (a, b) ∈
[−1, 1]n × Rm, we have
P[xi = −1] = 1 −ai
2
,
P[δi(b) = −1] = 1 −di(b)
2
.
Then for each node v ∈Vc, we have
mtd[v] = Pr(Gc, v),
where Pr(Gc, v) is the probability that the node v is on the path generated by x and d(·) on Gc.
Proof of Lemma 2. We prove the statement by structural induction on xBDD Gc. We first denote
z =
 P[x1 = −1] ... P[xn = −1] P[d1(b) = −1] ... P[dk(b) = −1] 
Basic step: For the root node r of Gc,
mtd[v] = 1,
where the statement holds because r is on the path generated by every discrete assignment on Gc.
Inductive step: For each non-root node v of Gc, let parT (v) be the set of parents of v with an edge labeled by True
and parF (v) be the set of parents of v with an edge labeled by False in xBDD Gc. After Alg. 3 terminates, we have
mtd[v] =
X
u∈parT (v)
zi · mtd[u] +
X
u∈parT (v)
(1 −zi) · mtd[u]
By inductive hypothesis,
mtd[v] =
X
u∈parT (v)
zi · Pr(Gc, u) +
X
u∈parT (v)
(1 −zi) · Pr(Gc, u)
= Pr(Gc, v)
The last inequality holds because the events of reaching v from different parents are exclusive.


--- Page 23 ---
23
Algorithm 3: Forward Traversal of XBDDs
Input: A constraint set C, constraint weight wc’s, a real assignment (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, and sampling area σ
Output: Objective function value
1 for i ∈range(n) do
2
pi ←1−ai
2
;
3 for i ∈range(m) do
4
pi+n ←1−di(b)
2
;
5 fval ←0;
6 for c ∈C do
7
Get the XBDD Gc(Vc, Ec);
8
Initialize mtd[v] ←1 if v is the root node; else 0;
9
Sort node index V ←sorted(Vc);
10
for v ∈V do
11
mtd[v.t] ←mtd[v.t] + pid(v) · mtd[v];
12
mtd[v.f] ←mtd[v.f] + (1 −pid(v)) · mtd[v];
13
fval ←fval + wc · (1 −2 · mtd[Vc[T]])
14 return fval;
Algorithm 4: Backward Traversal of XBDD
Input: A constraint set C, constraint weight wc’s, a real assignment (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, and sampling area σ
Output: Gradient of the objective function
1 Run Alg. 1 to get forward message mtd;
2 for i ∈range(1, n + m + 1) do
3
gradi ←0;
4 for c ∈C do
5
Get the XBDD Gc(Vc, Ec);
6
Initialize mbu[v] ←1 if v is the true node; else 0;
7
Sort node index V ←sorted(Vc, reverse = true);
8
for v ∈V do
9
mbu[v] ←mbu[v] + pid(v) · mbu[v.t];
10
mbu[v] ←mbu[v] + (1 −pid(v)) · mbu[v.f];
11
∆= mtd[v] · (mbu[v.F] −mbu[v.T]);
12
if id(v) ≤n then
13
gradid(v) ←gradid(v) + wc · ∆;
14
else
15
for i ∈range(1, m + 1) do
16
gradi+n ←gradi+n + wc ·
∂did(v)(b)
∂bi+n
· ∆;
17 return grad;
Proof of Theorem 5. The above Lemma shows that, after running Alg. 3, we have
mtd[Vc[T]] = Pr(Gc, Vc[T])
= COP c(Pσ)
(By definition of circuit-output probability)
Complexity: Alg. 3 traverse all xBDD Gc for all c ∈C. The topological sort takes O(|Vc| + |Ec|) time by Kahn’s
algorithm. The message propagation takes O(|Ec|) time. Since |Ec| = 2|Vc|, i.e., all non-terminal nodes in xBDD
only have two outgoing edges. Hence, the overall complexity scales at O(|Vc|).
By running Alg. 3 on xBDDs, the expectation can be obtained from top-down messages accumulated at the true
terminal nodes. Darker colors correspond to larger message values, which in the example increase with successive
gradient steps. We now extend this analysis to differentiation. The following theorem establishes the correctness and
complexity of computing gradients of the objective function.
Theorem 6 (Differentiation). Alg. 4 returns the gradient of the expectation of the objective function in Eq. (3). The
complexity of running Alg. 4 scales at O (m · P
c |Vc|).


--- Page 24 ---
24
To prove Thm. 6, we first reproduce Lem. 4 in [24].
Lemma 3. Let Gc(Vc, Ec) be an xBDD encoded constraint c and run Alg. 4 on Gc. For a real assignment (a, b) ∈
[−1, 1]n × Rm, we have
P[xi = −1] = 1 −ai
2
,
P[δi(b) = −1] = 1 −di(b)
2
.
Then, for each node v ∈Vc, let fc,v be the subfunction corresponding to the sub-xBDD generated by regarding v as the
root. The following holds:
mbu[v] = COP c,v(Pσ).
Proof of Lemma 3. We prove the statement by structural induction on xBDD Gc. We first denote
z =
 P[x1 = −1] ... P[xn = −1] P[d1(b) = −1] ... P[dk(b) = −1] 
Basic step: For the terminal nodes, we have
mbu[Vc[T]] = 1,
mbu[Vc[F]] = 0.
Since the subfunctions given by True and False are just Boolean constants, the statement holds.
Inductive step: For each non-terminal node v of Gc, after Alg. 4 terminates, we have
mbu[v] = 1 −zi
2
· mbu[v.T] + 1 + zi
2
· mbu[v.F]
By inductive hypothesis,
mbu[v] = 1 −zi
2
· COPc,v.T (Pσ) + 1 + zi
2
· COPc,v.F (Pσ)
= COPc,v(Pσ)
Proof of Theorem 6. With Lem. 2 and Lem. 3, we are ready to prove Thm. 6. Given an xBDD Gc, we expand all
terminal nodes such that each can have only one parent node. The expanded xBDD is called Gc′, which has a true
terminal set T and a false terminal set F. By repeating the proof of Lem. 2 and Lem. 3 on Gc′, for any non-terminal
node v /∈(T ∪F), we have
m′
td[v] = mtd[v]
m′
bu[v] = mbu[v]
For any true terminal node v ∈T and false terminal node u ∈F, we have
m′
bu[v] = 1
m′
bu[u] = 0
COPc(Pσ) = P[fc = −1|Pσ]
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
Pr(G′
c, v) · P[fc = −1|v, Pσ]
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
m′
td[v] · m′
bu[v]
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
mtd[v] · mbu[v]
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
mtd[v] · (zi · mbu[v.T] + (1 −zi) · mbu[v.F])


--- Page 25 ---
25
Hence we have
∂COPc(Pσ)
∂zi
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
mtd[v] · (mbu[v.T] −mbu[v.F])
∂fc(a, b)
∂zi
=
X
v∈{u:id(u)=i}
mtd[v] · (mbu[v.F] −mbu[v.T])
Complexity: Alg. 3 traverses all xBDD Gc for all c ∈C. The topological sort takes O(|Vc| + |Ec|) time by Kahn’s
algorithm. The message propagation takes O(|Ec|) time. For gradient computation, the worst case is that every literal
is an atomic constraint that consists of all m real variables. Therefore, the gradient computation takes O(m · |Ec|)
time. Since |Ec| = 2|Vc|, i.e., all non-terminal nodes in xBDD only have two outgoing edges. Hence, the overall
complexity scales at O(m · |Vc|).


--- Page 26 ---
26
Supplementary Note 6: Smoothness
This section analyzes the Lipschitz continuity and local convexity of Cσ, both of which are critical for establishing
convergence guarantees.
Proposition 2 (Lipschitz). Let α = P
c wc and Cσ : [−1, 1]n × Rm →[−α, α]. Let β denote the maximum num-
ber of occurrences of any single continuous variable within a constraint. Let γ =
√
2β
√πσ. Then, for any two points
(a′, b′), (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, we have
|Cσ(a′, b′) −Cσ(a, b)| ≤ρ
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥≤L
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2
where ρ = α√n + m max (1, γ) and L =
p
n + mγ2ρ. As a consequence of the Lipschitz continuity [75], we have
Cσ(a′, b′) −Cσ(a, b) −⟨∇aCσ(a, b), a′ −a⟩−⟨∇bCσ(a, b), b′ −b⟩
 ≤L
2
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2
(61)
Proof of Proposition 2.
∇bjdi(b) =
√
2qi,j
√πσ∥qi∥exp


−
Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
2
2σ2∥qi∥2



∇bjdi(b)
 =
√
2 |qi,j|
√πσ∥qi∥exp


−
Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
2
2σ2∥qi∥2



≤
√
2 |qi,j|
√πσ∥qi∥
≤
√
2
√πσ
Therefore, we can have
∇bjCOPc(a, b) = ∇bj
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
di(b)
!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai · ∇bj
 Y
i∈T
di(b)
!!
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]

ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·

X
i∈T
∇bjdi(b) ·
Y
k∈T,k̸=i
di(b)




Suppose a real variable bj appears in the constraint at most β times. Equivalently, let K = {i : bi,j ̸= 0}, then


--- Page 27 ---
27
|K| ≤β. Then the above reduces to
∇bjCOPc(a, b) =
X
j′∈K
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]

ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai · ∇bjdj′(b) ·
Y
i∈T,i̸=j′
di(b)


=
X
j′∈K
∇bjdj′(b) ·
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]

ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T,i̸=j′
di(b)


=
X
j′∈K
∇bjdj′(b) ·
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
di(b)
!
∇bjCOPc(a, b)
 ≤
X
j′∈K
∇bjdi(b)

|
{z
}
≤
√
2
√πσ
·

X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]

ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
k∈T,k̸=i
di(b)



|
{z
}
≤1
≤
√
2β
√πσ
= γ.
Then we have
∇bjCσ(a, b)
 =

X
c∈C
wc · ∇bjCOPc(a, b)

≤
X
c∈C
wc · ∇bjCOPc(a, b)

≤
X
c∈C
|wc| ·
∇bjCOPc(a, b)

≤αγ.
Let a(i) = [a1, · · · , ai−1, a′
i, · · · , an] and b(i) = [b1, · · · , bi−1, b′
i, · · · , b′
m], then we have:
|Cσ(a′, b′) −Cσ(a, b)| ≤
n
X
i=1
Cσ(a(i), b) −Cσ(a(i−1), b)
 +
m
X
i=1
Cσ(a′, b(i)) −Cσ(a′, b(i−1))

=
n
X
i=1
(a′
i −ai)∇aiCσ(a(i−1), b)
 +
m
X
i=1
(b′
i −bi)∇biCσ(a, b(i−1))

≤α
n
X
i=1
|a′
i −ai| + αγ
m
X
i=1
|b′
i −bi|
≤α max (1, γ)
 n
X
i=1
|a′
i −ai| +
m
X
i=1
|b′
i −bi|
!
≤α max (1, γ)
√
n + m
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2
|
{z
}
Due to Cauchy–Schwarz inequality
,
where we denote ρ = α√n + m max (1, γ).
Note that we can view ∇Cσ(a, b) as a vector of n + m multilinear-like functions.


--- Page 28 ---
28
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥2 =
n
X
i=1
(∇aiCσ(a′, b′) −∇aiCσ(a, b))2 +
m
X
j=1
 ∇bjCσ(a′, b′) −∇bjCσ(a, b)
2
≤
n
X
i=1
ρ2  (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
+
m
X
j=1
ρ2γ2  (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
= (n + mγ2)ρ2  (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥≤ρ
p
n + mγ2  ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2
Then we have L = ρ
p
n + mγ2.
We next investigate the local convexity of Cσ and its descent property, which are essential for analyzing gradient-
based methods.
Proposition 3 (Local convexity [75]). Suppose Cσ is locally convex on a convex set ∆.
Let (a∗, b∗)
=
arg min(a,b)∈∆Cσ(a, b). Then, for all (a, b) ∈∆,
⟨∇aCσ(a∗, b∗), a −a∗⟩+ ⟨∇bCσ(a∗, b∗), b −b∗⟩≥0.
The following property of the projected gradient mapping provides a key inequality for convergence analysis.
Proposition 4 (Inequality of gradient mapping [76]). If Cσ is locally convex on a convex set ∆, then for every
(a, b) ∈∆,
⟨∇Cσ(a, b), g(a, b)⟩≥∥g(a, b)∥2.
Equipped with the above results, we present convergence guarantees for our projected gradient approach in the
following lemma and theorem.
Lemma 4 (Descent Lemma). For the objective function Cσ under linear constraints, let g denote its projected gradient.
If the step size satisfies η ≤1
L, then the projected gradient descent sequence obeys
Cσ

a(t+1), b(t+1)
−Cσ

a(t), b(t)
≤−η
2∥g

a(t)
∥2
Proof of Lemma 4. The proof takes the positive side of Eq. (61) to establish the gradient descent step.
Cσ(a, b) ≤Cσ(a′, b′) +

∇Cσ(a′, b′),

a −a′
b −b′

+ L
2
 ∥a −a′∥2 + ∥b −b′∥2
Let (a, b) = (a′, b′) −ηg(a′, b′), the above inequality becomes
Cσ(a, b) ≤Cσ(a′, b′) −η ⟨∇Cσ(a′, b′), g(a′, b′)⟩+ η2L
2 ∥g(a′, b′)∥2.
Applying Proposition 4 and let η ≤1
L, we then have
Cσ(a, b) ≤Cσ(a′, b′) −η∥g(a′, b′)∥2 + η
2∥g(a′, b′)∥2
= Cσ(a′, b′) −η
2∥g(a′, b′)∥2.
Lemma 4 implies that, if projected gradient descent is run for sufficient iterations, the sum of gradient norms is
always bounded by a constant, which further implies convergence to a stationary point, i.e., Theorem 7.
Theorem 7 (Convergence Speed). With step size η = 1
L, the projected gradient descent converges to an ϵ-projected-
critical point (a∗, b∗) in O( αL
ϵ2 ) iterations.


--- Page 29 ---
29
Proof of Theorem 7. From Lemma 4, we can assume η =
1
L. Consider a sequence of points a(t)’s and b(t)’s such
that
 a(t+1), b(t+1)

=
 a(t), b(t)

+ ηg
 a(t), b(t)

. Due to Lemma 4 we have Cσ
 a(t+1), b(t+1)

−Cσ
 a(t+1), b(t)

≤
η
2∥g(a(t), b(t))∥2. Given any initial point a(0), b(0), it will converge to a∗, b∗. After T gradient steps, we have
Cσ(a∗, b∗) −Cσ
 a(0), b(0)

≥
1
2αL
T
X
t=0
∥g(a(t), b(t))∥2
≥T + 1
2αL min
t
∥g(a(t), b(t))∥2,
which can be rewritten as
min
t
∥g(a(t), b(t))∥≤
r
2L
T + 1
q
Cσ(a∗, b∗) −Cσ
 a(0), b(0)

≤
r
2L
T + 1
√
2α
To achieve a point a(T ) such that ∥g(a(t))∥≤ϵ, we require
q
4αL
T +1 ≤ϵ, which implies T ∼O
  αL
ϵ2

.


--- Page 30 ---
30
Supplementary Note 7: Local Lipschitz
In the Supplementary Note 6, Prop. 2, we established global Lipschitz continuity of the smoothed objective and its
gradient over the entire domain. Here, we provide a complementary result showing that Cσ admits tighter local Lips-
chitz constants when the real-valued variables are away from the transition regions induced by the atomic constraints.
This refinement is useful for analyzing convergence behavior in the regions close to the minima.
Corollary 3 (Local Lipschitz). For every atomic constraint αi, we define the transition region ri by





y



m
X
j=1
qi,jyj −qi,0


2
< σ2 ln 2β2
πσ2





,
and R = S
i ri. For any two points points (a′, b′), (a, b) ∈[−1, 1]n × (Rm\R), we have
|C(a′, b′) −C(a, b)| ≤α
√
n + m (∥a′ −a∥+ ∥b′ −b∥) ,
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥≤α(n + m)
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2
Proof of Corollary 3. The transition region ri is defined such that for any point b ∈Rm\ri, we have
∇bjdi(b)
 ≤1
β .
And hence
√
2 |qi,j|
√πσ∥qi∥exp


−
Pm
j=1 qi,jbj −qi,0
2
2σ2∥qi∥2


≤1
β


m
X
j=1
qi,jbj −qi,0


2
≥−2σ2∥qi∥2 ln
√πσ∥qi∥
√
2β |qi,j|
= σ2 ln 2β2
πσ2
For any point b ∈Rm\ri,
∇bjCOPc(a, b)
 ≤
X
j′∈K
∇bjdi(b)

|
{z
}
≤1
β
·

X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]

ˆfc(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
k∈T,k̸=i
di(b)



|
{z
}
≤1
≤β · 1
β
= 1
∇bjCσ(a, b)
 ≤
X
c∈C
|wc| ·
∇bjCOPc(a, b)

≤α · 1
= α.
For the objective function, we have


--- Page 31 ---
31
|C(a′, b′) −C(a, b)| ≤
n
X
i=1
C(a(i), b) −C(a(i−1), b)
 +
m
X
i=1
C(a′, b(i)) −C(a′, b(i−1))

≤α
n
X
i=1
|a′
i −ai| + α
m
X
i=1
|b′
i −bi|
≤α
√
n + m
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2 .
For the gradient, we have
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥2 =
n
X
i=1
(∇aiCσ(a′, b′) −∇aiCσ(a, b))2 +
m
X
j=1
 ∇bjCσ(a′, b′) −∇bjCσ(a, b)
2
≤
n
X
i=1
α2(n + m)
 (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
+
m
X
j=1
α2(n + m)
 (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
= α2(n + m)2  (a′ −a)2 + (b′ −b)2
∥∇Cσ(a′, b′) −∇Cσ(a, b)∥≤α(n + m)
 ∥a′ −a∥2 + ∥b′ −b∥2 1
2


--- Page 32 ---
32
Supplementary Note 8: Optimality
Thm. 2 is the main text states that, when σ = 0, the projected gradient will converge to the boundary of the feasible
domain. This section proves Thm. 2 by finding a gradient direction of the objective function in the open domain. If
the descent direction always exists, then the convergence point will be on the boundary of a closed domain.
Lemma 5 (Gradient Direction). Let f : Rn × Rm →R be expressible as a multilinear-like polynomial:
f(a, b) =
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈S
ai ·
Y
i∈T
δi(y)
!
,
(81)
where ˆf(S, T)’s are the Walsh-Fourier coefficients and at least one coefficient is nonzero.
Then for every point (a, b) ∈Rn × Rm, there exist a region size E > 0 and two directions v+, v−∈Rn such that for
all ϵ ∈(0, E),
f(a + ϵv+, b) > f(a, b),
f(a + ϵv−, b) < f(a, b).
Proof of Lemma 5. Lemma 3 in [76] has shown that any multilinear function h and a point a ∈Rn, there exist a
region size ϵ > 0 and two direction v+, v−∈Rn, such that for all ϵ ∈(0, ϵ+), the following holds
h(a + ϵv+) > h(a)
h(a + ϵv−) < h(a)
Given the multilinear-like function f and any point (a, b) ∈Rn × Rm, the function can be written as
g(a) = f(a, b)
=
X
S⊆[n]
T ⊆[k]
 
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈T
δi(b)
!
·
Y
i∈S
ai
=
X
S⊆[n]
ˆgb(S) ·
Y
i∈S
ai
where ˆgb(S) is the coefficient.
ˆgb(S) =
X
S⊆[T ]
ˆf(S, T) ·
Y
i∈T
δi(b)
If the coefficient ˆf(S, T) is not 0, then ˆg(S) will not be 0 since δi(b) ∈{±1}. When g(a) is a non-constant multilinear
function of a, and we can have
f(a + ϵv+, b) > f(a, b),
f(a + ϵv−, b) < f(a, b).
Lemma 5 implies that Eq. (81) admits no local optima within the open domain (−1, 1)n ×Rm. This directly results
in Theorem 2.


--- Page 33 ---
33
Supplementary Note 9: Technical Proofs
Some proofs are provided in the supplementary notes where the corresponding results first appear. This section
presents the proofs of the theoretical results stated in the main text.
Proof of Theorem 1
The CLS approach relies on Thm. 1 in the main text. This subsection proves Thm. 1.
Each atomic constraint partitions the real space into finitely many polyhedral regions a1, . . . , aN, the objective Fw
admits the case representation
fc(x, y) =







fc(x|y ∈a1)
if y ∈a1,
...
fc
if y ∈aN.
Let f (i)
c (x) = fc(x|y ∈ai), which is a multilinear polynomial in x.
The Lem. 1 in [76] states that, if x ∈[−1, 1], for i ∈{1, ..., N}, we have f (i)
c (x) ∈[−1, 1]. Since the above statement
holds in each case, it immediately yields the following Lemma.
Lemma 6. If (x, y) ∈[−1, 1]n × Rm, we have fc(x, y) ∈[−1, 1].
Now we are ready to prove Thm. 1.
Proof of Theorem 1.
• “⇒”: Suppose F = V
c∈C c is satisfiable and (x, y) ∈{±1}n × Rm is one of its solutions. Then (x, y) is also a
solution for every constraint c. Thus, for every c ∈C, fc(x, y) = −1. Therefore Fw(x, y) = −P
c∈C wc and
min
x∈[−1,1]n
y∈Rm
Fw(x, y) = −
X
c∈C
wc.
• “⇐”: Suppose
min
x∈[−1,1]n
y∈Rm
Fw(x, y) = −
X
c∈C
wc.
There must exists (x, y) ∈{±1}n × Rm such that Fw(x, y) = −P
c∈C wc. By the above Lemma, (x, y) is a
solution of fc for every c ∈C. Thus (x, y) is also a solution of Fw.
Proof of Proposition 1
Our CLS approach relies on projected gradient descent, i.e., the complexity of the projection heavily affects the
performance of CLS. This section proves that the projection in our CLS approach is a convex problem.
Proof of Proposition 1. Firstly, the minimization objective function in the matrix form is

a
b
⊤
In
0
0
Im

|
{z
}
Hessian

a
b

−2

(a′)⊤(b′)⊤ 
a
b

,
up to an irrelevant constant. The Hessian is diag(In, Im), which is an identity matrix, e.g., positive definite and
convex. Therefore, the minimization objective function is a convex function.
Secondly, the box constraints −1 ≤ai ≤1, ∀i define a closed halfspace. The unit theory atoms Pm
k=1 qj,kbk−qj,0 ▷◁0
are linear inequalities or equalities. The intersection of two convex sets is, therefore, convex.


--- Page 34 ---
34
Supplementary Note 10: Per-Instance Benchmark Results
The main text summarizes the overall performance across the three benchmark suites.
Here, we present the
complete per-instance runtime results for all solvers. FourierSMT is executed using 8 GPUs in parallel, and the
median runtime per instance is reported in the main text. To complement this, we first report the per-GPU runtime
statistics in Table I, Table II, and Table III. We then provide the full per-instance runtimes of all solvers in Table IV,
Table V, and Table VI. Eventually, we summarize the results of Table V, and Table VI into Fig. 5.
Table I: Per-instance runtime of FourierSMT for the random
hybrid-constraint benchmark. Eight GPUs use different seed num-
bers. All runtimes are reported in seconds. The label “to” indicates that
the solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds) and did not
return a solution.
Instances
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
100 0
9.981
8.530
9.122
8.417
10.139
8.966
8.766
10.231
100 1
10.226
10.005
10.071
8.736
10.225
10.220
10.144
11.852
100 2
10.494
10.311
10.074
12.362
10.259
10.953
10.812
12.552
100 3
12.856
11.400
10.109
13.103
10.335
10.980
12.991
14.721
100 4
13.021
12.790
10.588
14.664
10.339
12.563
13.171
14.824
100 5
14.094
13.071
12.362
14.689
10.428
13.786
13.573
14.862
100 6
14.406
13.915
13.811
14.820
12.989
14.288
13.787
14.866
100 7
14.521
13.927
14.443
15.099
13.892
14.297
14.224
15.022
100 8
14.525
14.016
14.454
15.115
14.053
14.341
14.225
15.282
100 9
14.662
14.399
14.596
15.239
14.559
14.417
14.273
15.350
200 0
14.804
14.588
14.744
15.317
14.622
14.627
14.280
15.396
200 1
15.109
14.692
14.780
15.357
14.820
14.730
14.473
15.452
200 2
15.243
14.795
14.876
15.460
14.916
14.991
14.936
15.510
200 3
15.430
14.926
14.917
15.488
15.039
15.299
15.186
15.770
200 4
15.487
14.967
14.983
15.652
15.269
15.336
15.437
15.860
200 5
15.520
14.998
14.994
15.675
15.355
15.400
15.505
16.091
200 6
15.684
15.019
15.086
15.844
15.359
15.418
15.596
16.251
200 7
15.734
15.069
15.342
15.955
15.473
15.525
15.605
16.308
200 8
15.756
15.109
15.379
16.013
15.550
15.557
15.831
16.331
200 9
15.783
15.417
15.533
16.063
15.577
15.614
15.926
16.356
300 0
15.962
15.450
15.689
16.074
15.820
16.232
16.051
16.450
300 1
15.987
15.460
15.708
16.139
15.956
16.280
16.099
16.537
300 2
16.073
15.970
15.765
16.286
15.997
16.305
16.154
16.684
300 3
16.143
16.168
15.831
16.313
16.085
16.320
16.208
16.779
300 4
16.163
16.373
16.196
16.436
16.319
16.456
16.364
16.832
300 5
16.182
16.737
16.385
16.456
16.373
16.476
16.435
17.055
300 6
16.235
17.126
16.441
16.617
16.417
16.563
16.469
17.289
300 7
16.237
17.467
16.577
16.798
16.491
16.571
16.964
17.297
300 8
16.274
17.533
16.589
16.898
16.533
16.621
16.993
17.510
300 9
16.286
17.596
16.761
16.987
16.595
16.691
17.028
17.549
400 0
16.350
17.678
16.779
17.373
16.852
16.709
17.048
17.559
400 1
16.373
17.687
16.784
17.403
16.883
16.728
17.082
17.606
400 2
16.491
17.691
16.893
17.484
17.017
17.138
17.095
17.663
400 3
16.594
17.788
17.191
17.700
17.041
17.159
17.219
17.688
400 4
16.627
17.803
17.227
17.799
17.141
17.204
17.269
17.700
400 5
16.649
17.812
17.314
17.813
17.222
17.388
17.421
17.899
400 6
16.744
17.830
17.416
17.850
17.493
17.404
17.536
17.909
400 7
16.837
17.912
17.572
17.882
17.583
17.492
17.605
17.930
400 8
16.888
17.944
17.574
18.021
17.836
17.601
17.642
17.997
400 9
16.952
18.050
17.734
18.028
17.953
17.641
17.698
18.045
500 0
17.185
18.206
17.919
18.047
17.973
17.747
17.707
18.121
500 1
17.247
18.259
18.029
18.085
17.997
17.788
17.728
18.122
500 2
17.337
18.355
18.112
18.134
18.153
17.807
17.784
18.132
500 3
17.343
18.398
18.181
18.141
18.160
18.011
17.803
18.142
500 4
17.596
18.738
18.272
18.164
18.259
18.204
17.948
18.286
500 5
17.631
18.752
18.361
18.357
18.439
18.271
17.952
18.301
500 6
17.776
18.758
18.404
18.393
18.450
18.358
17.992
18.319
500 7
18.303
18.777
18.509
18.427
18.452
18.369
18.225
18.330
500 8
18.601
18.848
18.609
18.444
18.498
18.395
18.339
18.363


--- Page 35 ---
35
500 9
18.707
18.871
18.647
18.687
18.527
18.480
18.358
18.598
600 0
18.842
18.897
18.717
18.809
18.629
18.509
18.362
18.692
600 1
18.934
18.899
18.751
18.867
18.924
18.524
18.384
18.702
600 2
19.003
18.919
18.819
19.030
19.129
18.781
18.449
18.804
600 3
19.022
19.122
18.904
19.373
19.368
18.825
18.496
18.903
600 4
19.199
19.262
18.926
19.385
19.487
18.853
18.573
19.056
600 5
19.242
19.360
19.082
19.432
19.492
19.004
18.624
19.191
600 6
19.243
19.442
19.122
19.531
19.530
19.282
18.795
19.221
600 7
19.414
19.571
19.166
19.548
19.602
19.301
18.813
19.330
600 8
19.454
19.932
19.362
19.589
19.685
19.323
18.838
19.351
600 9
19.479
20.099
19.425
19.779
19.927
19.451
18.850
19.411
700 0
19.642
20.232
19.426
20.113
20.004
19.451
18.913
19.900
700 1
20.006
20.272
19.433
20.775
20.017
19.528
18.979
20.529
700 2
20.269
20.417
20.163
20.898
20.274
19.540
19.327
20.591
700 3
20.271
20.713
20.388
20.915
20.532
19.570
19.388
20.600
700 4
20.480
20.717
20.705
20.925
20.665
19.578
19.722
20.677
700 5
20.496
20.732
20.771
20.937
20.676
19.904
19.836
20.830
700 6
20.692
20.754
20.815
21.142
20.848
20.490
19.886
20.854
700 7
20.725
21.540
20.893
21.626
20.902
20.507
19.930
20.864
700 8
20.739
21.783
21.021
21.646
20.935
20.509
20.042
20.992
700 9
20.770
22.004
21.131
21.969
21.122
20.925
20.480
21.174
800 0
20.927
22.156
21.132
22.079
21.124
21.066
20.683
21.242
800 1
21.136
22.228
21.225
22.313
21.207
21.765
20.908
21.245
800 2
21.352
22.294
21.620
22.942
21.884
21.952
20.966
21.357
800 3
21.536
22.438
21.751
23.352
22.218
21.953
20.996
21.544
800 4
21.812
22.523
22.352
24.124
22.245
22.073
21.027
21.884
800 5
21.840
22.785
22.376
24.865
22.380
22.084
21.038
22.181
800 6
22.103
22.807
22.409
25.042
22.425
22.128
21.057
22.294
800 7
22.231
22.842
22.545
25.303
22.682
22.349
21.253
22.397
800 8
22.442
22.889
22.589
26.097
22.821
22.354
21.267
22.414
800 9
22.478
22.933
22.625
26.121
23.050
22.508
21.645
22.557
900 0
22.573
23.355
22.825
26.134
23.081
22.625
21.866
22.586
900 1
22.735
23.445
22.942
26.350
23.227
22.636
22.122
22.871
900 2
22.817
23.469
23.236
26.962
23.386
22.647
22.326
23.251
900 3
22.856
23.661
23.334
27.086
23.634
22.662
22.373
23.548
900 4
23.282
23.773
23.524
27.333
23.646
22.740
22.535
23.551
900 5
23.399
24.914
24.088
28.128
23.808
23.110
22.636
23.575
900 6
24.069
25.647
24.465
29.122
23.968
23.513
22.689
23.753
900 7
24.136
26.518
25.391
29.174
23.991
23.880
22.689
24.101
900 8
25.443
27.446
25.662
29.728
25.148
24.085
22.694
24.262
900 9
25.847
28.099
25.890
29.812
25.703
26.251
22.960
24.339
1000 0
28.818
28.180
28.344
30.465
26.724
26.424
23.008
25.007
1000 1
30.324
28.455
32.473
32.410
28.259
30.333
23.140
26.395
1000 2
30.399
28.731
33.817
34.723
33.579
30.734
23.391
27.706
1000 3
30.832
31.551
39.709
35.623
42.018
33.451
25.470
28.065
1000 4
31.480
33.168
40.420
42.757
42.168
35.795
28.174
34.467
1000 5
37.982
49.747
54.804
48.215
56.230
37.694
31.340
35.609
1000 6
38.553
50.556
57.522
569.286
67.473
38.962
39.405
39.781
1000 7
46.623
52.472
61.477
588.018
564.549
45.010
56.773
56.978
1000 8
53.395
56.276
615.299
623.060
635.637
59.581
59.345
74.874
1000 9
642.772
627.007
634.551
654.337
641.551
62.874
633.074
630.581
Table II: Per-instance runtime of FourierSMT for the continuous
time scheduling benchmark. Eight GPUs use different seed numbers.
All runtimes are reported in seconds. The label “to” indicates that the
solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds) and did not return
a solution.
Instances
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
16 2 0
27.110
28.163
27.517
27.472
26.969
24.363
21.773
16.021
16 2 1
15.058
17.114
13.984
29.762
16.877
16.968
13.735
17.574
16 2 2
12.492
13.120
12.740
12.345
12.997
13.266
13.477
12.797
16 2 3
12.292
12.423
11.667
22.216
11.524
12.735
11.093
27.390


--- Page 36 ---
36
16 2 4
9.836
11.120
11.540
10.510
11.032
11.607
12.166
11.090
16 2 5
8.723
9.064
10.555
9.773
9.173
9.884
10.575
8.529
16 2 6
8.633
9.213
9.503
9.369
8.716
8.558
9.173
9.500
16 2 7
10.226
8.515
9.377
12.288
9.601
10.162
9.715
9.783
16 2 8
12.537
9.903
11.714
10.716
10.625
10.418
9.548
10.860
16 2 9
10.681
11.023
10.083
8.540
9.023
9.620
10.531
9.517
16 3 0
10.046
10.341
11.038
11.478
9.874
10.358
9.952
10.441
16 3 1
10.075
10.402
9.730
10.620
10.603
9.123
11.470
9.257
16 3 2
11.325
12.939
10.821
11.897
12.668
13.030
11.356
11.276
16 3 3
9.822
9.688
10.312
11.642
9.840
9.576
9.227
9.320
16 3 4
12.071
11.984
12.525
11.633
11.023
9.914
11.966
11.006
16 3 5
24.007
25.660
11.680
23.650
13.769
11.736
12.505
23.719
16 3 6
11.801
11.318
11.264
13.277
12.294
11.935
11.490
11.289
16 3 7
9.756
10.660
10.980
11.442
9.761
10.260
10.184
10.306
16 3 8
28.985
10.870
12.559
25.011
12.014
12.067
11.579
12.454
16 3 9
10.923
10.978
10.508
11.258
11.781
11.127
10.625
10.286
16 4 0
10.757
10.019
11.998
13.109
10.940
10.277
12.586
10.270
16 4 1
26.026
27.425
27.293
24.424
39.877
12.702
11.773
39.482
16 4 2
11.910
11.794
12.376
11.619
11.756
10.191
10.251
9.884
16 4 3
11.060
12.116
12.365
12.069
10.688
11.162
11.785
19.462
16 4 4
10.344
10.714
10.241
10.495
11.219
11.504
11.164
13.126
16 4 5
11.426
11.456
12.435
9.827
10.751
11.753
11.064
10.641
16 4 6
24.184
17.227
12.198
25.211
23.744
25.577
11.689
11.040
16 4 7
13.028
12.427
11.343
10.923
10.998
10.160
11.820
10.703
16 4 8
26.685
18.305
35.625
25.835
26.795
38.459
38.362
25.770
16 4 9
11.991
12.471
13.367
12.058
12.192
11.781
10.926
12.881
16 5 0
12.020
11.210
12.853
11.414
13.302
12.108
12.456
12.367
16 5 1
11.738
12.114
10.478
10.777
13.344
12.789
11.683
11.025
16 5 2
12.372
11.449
12.500
10.099
10.849
13.701
12.322
23.700
16 5 3
12.313
13.966
12.783
13.900
11.835
10.694
10.856
15.033
16 5 4
13.143
28.037
23.917
11.760
27.074
12.382
10.425
11.153
16 5 5
62.167
57.158
130.878
65.563
47.477
66.533
195.674
49.349
16 5 6
12.185
12.205
10.658
11.906
11.189
12.955
13.262
12.049
16 5 7
12.105
12.524
12.748
11.915
11.656
11.195
12.363
11.459
16 5 8
24.396
12.360
13.044
24.476
26.086
22.679
12.793
25.501
16 5 9
301.099
531.010
689.073
71.236
53.084
80.460
295.050
307.914
32 2 0
10.483
9.246
9.972
10.598
11.571
10.706
10.752
10.049
32 2 1
10.231
13.323
10.855
12.162
11.515
10.390
12.968
11.171
32 2 2
10.660
11.915
12.148
12.336
11.393
13.192
13.688
11.668
32 2 3
10.457
10.138
11.341
11.315
12.358
10.025
10.341
11.482
32 2 4
11.137
11.713
9.553
10.802
11.084
11.513
10.177
9.497
32 2 5
12.330
10.751
11.037
12.263
12.845
11.548
11.665
12.269
32 2 6
11.815
10.785
11.743
11.179
12.533
12.816
11.412
11.984
32 2 7
20.497
13.491
18.804
18.977
21.102
11.005
21.292
18.941
32 2 8
27.842
23.051
12.261
13.070
26.920
14.356
12.249
30.516
32 2 9
14.505
18.753
18.657
12.524
9.851
14.661
18.090
12.539
32 3 0
13.521
14.618
11.625
11.824
12.680
11.845
10.248
11.183
32 3 1
11.920
12.203
11.792
12.454
12.130
10.634
10.545
11.275
32 3 2
11.783
11.979
10.857
11.342
13.205
11.887
23.479
11.551
32 3 3
13.750
31.392
32.243
32.765
19.025
68.083
29.423
33.427
32 3 4
13.791
10.814
12.983
11.235
11.351
10.004
10.913
10.289
32 3 5
11.000
10.802
11.757
11.630
13.623
11.592
11.907
11.685
32 3 6
12.660
13.702
12.463
12.182
12.341
13.645
13.263
11.644
32 3 7
15.539
11.312
12.368
13.973
11.013
11.843
11.401
11.902
32 3 8
11.306
15.561
11.433
13.166
11.286
13.499
22.245
10.654
32 3 9
12.549
13.291
12.204
12.152
13.367
19.429
12.373
12.966
32 4 0
21.496
14.835
14.303
21.835
16.607
14.563
14.346
14.728
32 4 1
18.924
12.185
27.577
19.023
33.997
30.100
28.480
14.447
32 4 2
21.393
20.693
20.041
25.233
15.644
11.521
23.204
24.660
32 4 3
24.186
22.931
21.939
12.605
15.308
21.858
24.567
25.342
32 4 4
11.671
12.749
11.950
11.596
10.523
12.177
12.077
12.394
32 4 5
13.032
14.909
16.068
13.294
14.509
14.642
14.185
13.640
32 4 6
14.765
14.588
14.372
13.356
10.985
13.979
15.649
12.813
32 4 7
13.325
32.492
27.170
24.679
16.942
41.122
16.040
47.731


--- Page 37 ---
37
32 4 8
12.076
11.930
12.892
10.792
12.462
11.652
11.978
12.045
32 4 9
13.523
14.589
16.665
12.595
13.336
14.498
14.668
11.851
32 5 0
27.316
26.460
26.403
27.218
24.463
25.568
24.708
24.374
32 5 1
13.057
12.866
27.975
32.206
25.172
16.355
26.773
15.960
32 5 2
27.000
31.883
28.754
16.160
13.066
29.479
13.080
28.279
32 5 3
13.263
12.729
12.882
13.625
13.691
16.088
13.281
14.505
32 5 4
15.480
13.985
12.656
13.638
13.777
13.512
14.602
12.753
32 5 5
25.262
17.869
18.742
25.341
24.428
14.525
24.924
26.158
32 5 6
25.048
14.832
25.243
23.475
25.961
14.382
13.764
24.829
32 5 7
37.131
153.093
26.377
25.769
16.097
173.190
26.968
23.858
32 5 8
12.267
14.351
17.181
13.925
14.528
15.125
12.223
14.410
32 5 9
13.219
13.430
15.118
12.530
15.297
12.814
13.460
12.927
64 2 0
13.664
12.437
12.647
12.837
12.502
12.446
12.334
12.318
64 2 1
15.140
12.904
14.167
12.856
12.729
13.806
15.690
13.283
64 2 2
14.485
13.616
11.741
12.530
12.039
12.780
12.636
11.734
64 2 3
22.620
25.446
23.975
24.117
23.542
29.237
13.190
22.611
64 2 4
11.909
11.805
11.700
12.701
11.226
11.737
11.661
11.464
64 2 5
13.454
11.628
13.959
12.021
12.978
12.801
12.218
11.224
64 2 6
12.624
13.251
13.046
12.935
12.706
14.210
13.197
13.330
64 2 7
11.727
12.560
12.725
11.824
12.115
13.461
10.918
11.483
64 2 8
11.469
12.830
12.365
11.448
11.061
11.610
11.754
12.756
64 2 9
12.356
13.119
14.987
13.545
14.099
14.936
15.590
12.987
64 3 0
13.733
16.605
13.104
14.479
14.311
13.897
13.400
13.454
64 3 1
13.386
13.809
15.674
13.706
14.388
13.125
14.680
14.588
64 3 2
12.795
15.676
12.639
12.724
14.021
13.612
13.358
13.911
64 3 3
13.168
16.079
15.667
23.586
12.658
15.463
15.054
16.244
64 3 4
14.816
30.622
15.367
14.871
14.479
14.395
11.942
15.939
64 3 5
12.508
14.210
15.197
18.014
15.124
16.275
12.710
12.567
64 3 6
14.019
12.216
11.968
12.589
12.738
13.664
12.995
13.291
64 3 7
15.771
16.986
16.692
17.734
14.955
16.650
17.747
18.929
64 3 8
13.911
16.007
15.858
15.816
15.402
13.878
14.731
23.682
64 3 9
16.042
16.192
15.380
18.096
15.970
15.442
16.525
15.758
64 4 0
16.296
16.358
16.046
16.380
17.346
15.678
17.745
17.582
64 4 1
17.238
16.351
19.776
19.614
16.939
17.046
18.868
16.505
64 4 2
15.478
15.339
16.509
17.528
16.497
18.496
14.810
15.672
64 4 3
19.041
29.540
31.089
34.416
17.976
18.570
34.476
29.800
64 4 4
17.917
16.953
18.793
17.190
17.875
18.117
15.940
15.401
64 4 5
17.124
33.759
19.837
31.801
19.680
32.229
18.714
16.816
64 4 6
14.606
18.020
16.599
18.168
16.894
17.275
16.564
18.310
64 4 7
17.443
16.807
15.976
16.723
19.822
17.601
17.337
16.263
64 4 8
16.953
16.726
16.612
19.598
16.237
18.662
16.598
15.409
64 4 9
16.277
16.780
16.382
16.200
15.974
16.224
16.751
15.729
64 5 0
19.786
20.329
23.131
19.897
25.675
19.090
21.954
16.985
64 5 1
38.304
20.920
35.061
25.804
36.609
21.155
36.921
20.276
64 5 2
18.043
18.890
18.554
18.274
17.418
17.905
20.251
18.659
64 5 3
34.896
19.729
19.923
21.059
24.119
19.925
20.719
20.448
64 5 4
42.190
38.724
50.277
39.996
40.327
44.906
21.732
20.652
64 5 5
21.166
22.660
36.900
21.100
36.365
35.466
35.072
23.821
64 5 6
38.815
49.905
68.727
59.034
55.228
51.064
63.884
57.872
64 5 7
32.832
23.018
19.145
19.594
22.194
22.745
37.185
34.323
64 5 8
22.244
34.834
22.055
20.480
20.519
17.702
23.438
21.411
64 5 9
19.602
22.786
41.678
20.905
22.048
39.602
33.340
22.719
128 2 0
17.186
18.238
17.100
16.193
16.113
16.565
15.694
17.820
128 2 1
18.009
15.840
15.460
15.263
19.929
16.170
16.564
17.162
128 2 2
16.187
17.122
15.887
16.498
15.877
18.016
17.365
15.236
128 2 3
17.644
16.810
20.142
16.789
23.227
18.805
19.535
32.824
128 2 4
26.803
16.974
16.447
17.593
18.342
16.251
16.943
19.176
128 2 5
20.588
16.419
19.429
17.426
16.992
18.545
56.902
19.070
128 2 6
15.947
16.395
16.383
16.656
16.023
15.345
17.664
16.512
128 2 7
17.119
16.641
17.131
18.566
17.002
16.420
18.006
16.870
128 2 8
16.088
16.784
18.122
19.032
18.453
16.589
16.775
17.319
128 2 9
16.277
20.035
17.589
18.784
17.575
17.622
15.998
17.580
128 3 0
21.814
22.908
22.694
21.045
22.257
26.844
23.215
21.967
128 3 1
24.542
27.290
28.976
26.644
26.404
26.570
26.875
25.465


--- Page 38 ---
38
128 3 2
26.233
24.387
27.154
26.673
27.604
25.843
26.140
27.728
128 3 3
23.433
24.165
24.239
24.985
23.859
25.263
26.644
21.746
128 3 4
22.656
22.505
23.456
24.607
22.882
24.254
23.508
23.515
128 3 5
27.084
22.430
22.069
22.451
23.926
21.363
21.389
25.000
128 3 6
24.404
22.069
22.524
21.737
20.988
22.776
21.869
21.904
128 3 7
21.949
22.760
21.939
22.419
20.802
22.895
22.076
22.004
128 3 8
25.278
41.064
46.079
49.896
24.952
39.097
44.152
42.200
128 3 9
26.320
23.342
22.782
26.449
21.886
27.210
21.890
21.438
128 4 0
31.354
34.277
35.833
34.631
32.315
33.138
33.208
31.483
128 4 1
35.460
38.666
34.696
36.286
36.399
39.082
36.158
39.808
128 4 2
30.820
34.831
33.038
31.323
33.791
32.635
32.801
32.062
128 4 3
33.107
33.993
38.270
37.190
33.636
35.052
33.064
33.784
128 4 4
31.297
35.011
30.510
30.173
31.865
30.466
36.408
35.652
128 4 5
36.002
33.804
36.161
34.640
33.196
36.076
33.126
36.359
128 4 6
30.063
31.462
32.927
33.700
30.798
30.798
36.412
32.336
128 4 7
33.850
33.710
35.204
33.945
33.424
33.669
34.795
34.238
128 4 8
32.930
38.874
34.596
37.313
33.876
32.959
32.673
32.540
128 4 9
40.254
48.420
38.966
42.785
66.771
62.733
61.483
60.388
128 5 0
46.132
42.539
41.452
42.329
42.446
49.048
41.989
43.535
128 5 1
44.162
44.850
43.880
44.101
44.791
44.390
44.154
46.281
128 5 2
43.056
45.926
43.365
43.574
45.556
47.101
43.968
44.200
128 5 3
42.993
43.138
45.971
43.834
44.424
43.537
44.531
41.824
128 5 4
697.360
193.551
361.557
558.898
191.024
166.769
198.631
358.692
128 5 5
49.268
51.989
51.392
47.393
52.997
46.765
47.774
44.647
128 5 6
47.840
45.976
45.572
47.875
82.275
54.700
44.374
45.443
128 5 7
46.187
46.689
44.227
49.371
45.058
46.767
46.294
45.219
128 5 8
45.404
51.691
43.834
45.571
46.119
47.098
47.104
51.651
128 5 9
56.453
81.098
45.873
46.744
48.809
46.913
48.795
49.198
256 2 0
35.908
36.672
37.321
34.982
35.637
34.899
35.749
33.948
256 2 1
39.400
37.326
36.824
37.641
36.582
37.479
37.111
34.659
256 2 2
36.010
35.619
35.994
41.825
36.142
35.815
34.482
36.828
256 2 3
50.905
43.859
51.608
38.899
41.880
38.640
42.058
44.878
256 2 4
37.917
35.474
37.431
37.167
37.162
36.951
35.420
37.637
256 2 5
36.338
37.464
39.060
37.248
41.102
35.792
37.971
36.381
256 2 6
41.925
37.210
34.799
40.692
35.707
33.982
36.004
34.329
256 2 7
38.073
37.472
47.741
36.666
39.491
38.311
37.425
37.082
256 2 8
36.430
42.103
52.095
34.873
35.793
35.190
34.210
34.592
256 2 9
45.928
45.204
52.717
40.021
41.337
39.563
48.812
42.727
256 3 0
89.472
79.314
76.432
83.416
121.653
77.030
72.374
95.447
256 3 1
96.004
80.150
88.211
77.210
69.216
66.367
79.165
80.615
256 3 2
69.887
85.542
81.068
63.327
65.143
62.787
63.739
74.472
256 3 3
70.511
68.125
69.737
62.732
60.714
61.745
61.554
63.700
256 3 4
94.280
82.156
76.839
229.782
77.660
89.560
188.934
97.280
256 3 5
82.419
82.480
72.429
189.688
71.443
74.198
76.247
88.979
256 3 6
76.234
79.772
155.768
75.669
72.273
74.429
72.194
74.632
256 3 7
82.256
129.602
74.553
71.975
74.097
179.965
99.610
82.960
256 3 8
70.145
75.378
68.274
73.696
68.180
67.870
68.558
88.778
256 3 9
106.838
78.905
81.006
67.234
66.456
66.472
67.335
61.509
256 4 0
106.054
140.411
132.542
130.542
136.271
132.607
110.051
110.196
256 4 1
330.682
499.181
375.038
438.306
328.312
439.494
259.706
164.643
256 4 2
141.116
132.438
127.142
126.885
120.667
118.199
141.387
125.074
256 4 3
117.727
117.264
110.203
109.133
136.397
124.773
152.332
108.032
256 4 4
134.342
134.403
133.234
140.881
147.804
156.152
139.552
157.831
256 4 5
104.982
110.648
128.998
135.608
108.966
121.395
177.990
128.933
256 4 6
119.874
113.904
133.330
121.894
188.890
127.232
117.959
144.403
256 4 7
116.692
144.695
122.661
116.157
127.303
120.325
116.801
135.152
256 4 8
114.173
117.741
129.831
124.430
118.317
121.352
131.057
109.665
256 4 9
114.926
114.212
115.208
115.928
128.289
122.421
110.368
128.276
256 5 0
156.046
167.588
173.142
153.574
186.388
160.818
170.755
152.284
256 5 1
166.841
164.207
167.165
161.261
164.911
156.056
176.995
157.465
256 5 2
177.216
176.742
173.549
174.933
189.339
164.802
165.471
168.873
256 5 3
207.576
200.987
219.719
188.459
171.248
198.044
197.958
175.104
256 5 4
194.098
251.389
291.133
193.348
216.893
189.772
193.408
177.940
256 5 5
182.231
172.137
171.837
220.978
190.193
188.697
210.295
203.511


--- Page 39 ---
39
256 5 6
212.837
157.267
215.598
182.321
194.911
169.995
185.429
189.570
256 5 7
159.824
161.129
162.742
157.909
163.794
169.472
156.279
157.547
256 5 8
165.779
192.249
168.444
178.863
215.303
177.887
172.085
200.469
256 5 9
218.868
192.453
195.766
200.082
189.978
196.691
663.105
202.177
Table III: Per-instance runtime of FourierSMT for the 3D place-
ment benchmark. Eight GPUs use different seed numbers. All run-
times are reported in seconds. The label “to” indicates that the solver
exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds) and did not return a
solution.
Instances
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2 2 0
13.273
9.910
9.556
7.955
7.523
9.020
8.813
7.594
2 2 1
9.251
12.525
11.632
7.698
7.608
8.719
7.870
7.994
2 2 2
8.830
8.555
8.196
8.370
7.447
9.899
8.880
8.172
2 2 3
9.070
10.114
9.298
11.977
7.769
10.307
9.330
8.419
2 2 4
12.097
9.784
9.146
12.242
7.909
11.541
11.187
8.727
2 2 5
11.684
13.602
11.329
8.226
9.902
10.300
8.976
8.887
2 2 6
10.287
9.259
9.893
8.336
8.007
9.872
9.528
8.433
2 2 7
10.097
8.681
10.084
11.426
8.462
9.500
8.961
8.343
2 2 8
11.964
9.888
10.668
8.159
8.144
9.492
9.583
8.066
2 2 9
12.741
8.668
46.090
10.353
7.568
9.152
8.928
7.931
2 4 0
10.050
7.457
9.156
8.069
8.545
9.196
7.666
10.159
2 4 1
10.000
8.029
8.878
7.828
10.174
9.261
8.627
9.368
2 4 2
10.767
8.074
9.019
8.837
8.372
9.566
8.114
10.530
2 4 3
9.778
8.676
10.036
8.552
9.408
9.331
8.506
9.648
2 4 4
9.862
8.372
10.187
8.266
8.380
8.115
8.548
9.784
2 4 5
9.353
8.569
10.230
8.247
9.788
9.307
8.108
10.253
2 4 6
10.460
7.890
8.528
8.232
8.012
9.366
8.619
10.124
2 4 7
9.730
8.360
10.654
8.186
10.115
9.848
8.127
8.613
2 4 8
10.289
8.300
10.085
8.264
9.234
9.957
9.266
9.299
2 4 9
10.671
9.141
9.514
7.856
9.351
10.297
8.069
9.190
2 8 0
11.794
8.763
8.173
10.542
7.853
9.150
10.389
10.852
2 8 1
11.802
8.641
8.172
9.884
9.192
9.426
9.792
10.664
2 8 2
8.383
9.612
8.016
10.089
9.010
8.599
9.600
11.457
2 8 3
10.011
9.230
8.284
10.414
9.334
9.504
8.348
11.319
2 8 4
8.845
7.511
8.970
10.404
8.021
9.135
8.254
10.619
2 8 5
10.695
8.395
9.044
10.659
8.159
9.228
8.270
10.790
2 8 6
10.137
8.556
9.263
10.469
9.120
9.190
8.106
10.169
2 8 7
10.218
9.611
9.360
10.998
9.676
9.192
11.346
12.178
2 8 8
9.206
9.132
8.073
11.122
10.115
9.650
9.081
12.371
2 8 9
9.998
8.665
8.183
11.352
8.445
9.934
9.608
11.091
4 2 0
9.754
10.748
8.924
12.259
9.892
11.017
10.533
10.853
4 2 1
8.590
11.210
11.776
11.501
14.906
12.916
10.491
11.451
4 2 2
8.934
9.788
10.428
10.880
10.648
12.221
11.530
11.512
4 2 3
9.035
9.722
11.052
10.960
10.689
11.242
10.607
11.279
4 2 4
11.512
7.833
11.741
12.078
10.285
11.988
10.726
13.055
4 2 5
9.956
10.132
11.038
11.660
9.823
12.476
11.466
12.298
4 2 6
9.087
9.769
10.669
10.494
11.842
10.423
10.765
10.684
4 2 7
9.356
7.981
10.398
13.401
11.003
10.418
11.421
13.035
4 2 8
8.722
9.063
10.589
10.499
11.888
9.748
11.461
10.467
4 2 9
10.556
8.805
11.329
13.568
12.021
11.790
11.006
11.971
4 4 0
10.833
10.677
10.432
11.568
9.125
11.318
10.152
10.927
4 4 1
11.014
9.594
10.159
11.483
11.127
11.101
10.439
11.870
4 4 2
10.972
11.387
10.764
10.630
10.172
9.568
10.120
10.879
4 4 3
11.698
10.271
10.193
9.887
9.870
8.763
10.901
11.238
4 4 4
10.976
10.363
9.901
12.028
10.918
10.744
9.525
11.361
4 4 5
10.051
10.235
10.197
11.089
10.357
8.188
9.843
10.537
4 4 6
11.551
10.879
9.989
11.212
10.368
8.749
10.560
11.984
4 4 7
12.318
10.352
10.179
12.198
10.162
9.448
9.829
11.359
4 4 8
11.789
9.809
10.410
10.978
10.553
10.862
11.251
11.218
4 4 9
11.796
10.858
10.469
11.054
10.747
11.029
10.336
11.137
4 8 0
11.231
10.473
11.470
12.412
12.555
13.195
11.771
9.842


--- Page 40 ---
40
4 8 1
11.756
9.259
12.185
12.874
13.146
12.131
12.291
9.666
4 8 2
11.828
10.224
11.641
14.413
12.978
12.277
11.993
11.031
4 8 3
11.089
11.610
12.235
13.350
12.897
12.404
12.567
8.523
4 8 4
10.002
9.231
12.029
12.680
12.926
10.741
12.881
8.910
4 8 5
11.486
9.894
11.734
13.207
13.370
12.231
12.345
9.533
4 8 6
11.189
10.367
11.872
14.958
12.520
12.083
11.828
9.120
4 8 7
11.879
9.436
13.266
12.615
12.317
11.879
11.567
9.998
4 8 8
11.339
10.279
11.463
11.797
12.717
12.707
12.972
10.831
4 8 9
11.786
10.357
11.160
13.708
12.731
11.513
11.529
9.474
8 2 0
13.472
14.252
17.178
15.597
13.310
17.759
12.185
12.494
8 2 1
14.226
17.068
16.001
14.314
15.200
13.759
9.842
16.108
8 2 2
15.124
15.326
12.658
13.879
13.151
14.408
14.387
13.729
8 2 3
14.990
16.106
17.210
16.028
14.482
14.364
11.914
13.831
8 2 4
14.842
17.123
13.256
14.787
13.043
14.270
15.264
11.869
8 2 5
13.880
16.370
14.479
12.479
13.354
11.679
11.182
12.824
8 2 6
16.897
17.164
14.020
16.194
13.008
12.699
13.240
13.756
8 2 7
14.236
18.073
13.883
14.652
12.180
11.610
15.288
14.410
8 2 8
13.135
14.432
13.197
16.385
12.348
15.985
18.438
11.411
8 2 9
15.542
14.699
11.851
13.146
13.076
17.051
15.515
11.309
8 4 0
12.714
12.120
12.676
11.910
12.576
12.923
12.961
11.438
8 4 1
12.586
13.367
13.337
13.251
12.940
12.715
11.207
10.657
8 4 2
13.505
13.510
14.167
13.269
12.935
12.625
11.035
12.393
8 4 3
13.915
11.224
12.843
13.871
14.000
13.349
12.713
11.964
8 4 4
12.643
13.269
11.274
12.008
13.127
13.312
12.658
12.629
8 4 5
13.791
13.258
11.642
14.008
13.815
11.695
12.418
12.016
8 4 6
12.976
12.155
13.474
12.569
14.196
14.164
13.912
13.145
8 4 7
12.231
12.058
13.549
15.745
13.644
13.217
12.988
12.765
8 4 8
12.773
11.320
13.468
13.923
13.664
13.618
13.199
12.695
8 4 9
12.865
13.030
12.878
13.288
13.015
11.707
12.497
12.635
8 8 0
18.206
12.865
15.472
14.397
14.410
13.699
15.779
13.850
8 8 1
17.055
12.799
16.084
14.904
16.847
13.773
16.131
11.767
8 8 2
17.437
13.096
16.337
13.494
15.258
14.378
15.987
13.570
8 8 3
16.103
13.615
15.984
14.504
15.098
13.109
15.827
13.518
8 8 4
18.323
13.318
16.197
14.096
15.565
14.639
16.222
14.100
8 8 5
16.876
12.617
16.106
14.746
15.417
13.655
15.119
13.889
8 8 6
17.884
13.307
16.124
14.668
15.756
13.686
15.578
12.917
8 8 7
17.105
14.781
16.130
14.695
16.945
13.872
16.430
14.579
8 8 8
17.461
13.511
15.025
14.177
16.662
12.803
15.418
14.215
8 8 9
17.351
13.556
16.192
13.852
14.753
13.769
15.334
14.347
16 2 0
20.790
18.220
25.701
20.093
19.279
23.503
24.978
22.885
16 2 1
18.325
22.195
18.357
18.117
16.793
17.263
16.968
24.416
16 2 2
21.663
19.938
25.332
22.100
18.889
20.444
18.305
19.699
16 2 3
22.672
25.486
24.984
21.367
20.719
17.714
19.176
20.723
16 2 4
21.360
21.917
18.522
21.765
23.223
21.658
22.202
22.354
16 2 5
18.976
23.493
21.032
18.837
23.305
18.443
20.082
18.260
16 2 6
26.409
21.551
19.203
22.089
16.466
22.414
24.200
19.170
16 2 7
20.461
19.205
23.683
21.625
17.026
22.261
18.475
17.196
16 2 8
25.105
21.434
25.211
19.122
17.211
19.663
19.880
17.607
16 2 9
19.385
19.874
22.483
20.147
17.212
21.829
21.699
21.956
16 4 0
17.335
16.843
17.583
16.133
15.228
15.429
16.858
14.235
16 4 1
18.075
16.046
17.105
16.322
16.267
14.409
17.970
15.761
16 4 2
16.664
16.897
16.258
16.276
15.593
15.489
16.936
16.863
16 4 3
16.148
16.460
17.168
15.665
15.657
16.636
19.126
15.127
16 4 4
16.982
16.999
17.343
16.733
16.688
16.033
17.093
16.083
16 4 5
17.190
16.501
17.397
16.164
17.016
16.438
16.735
15.930
16 4 6
18.345
16.191
17.594
17.795
16.602
15.399
16.418
16.121
16 4 7
16.804
15.769
17.443
17.513
17.747
15.515
17.748
16.875
16 4 8
17.009
16.078
14.713
17.338
16.780
15.641
16.186
16.319
16 4 9
18.281
15.921
17.746
16.998
16.277
16.530
16.434
16.082
16 8 0
24.861
22.210
25.329
22.583
22.860
25.300
24.484
23.472
16 8 1
24.532
22.530
23.799
23.741
23.979
24.499
23.199
24.406
16 8 2
25.138
22.604
23.972
23.675
25.388
24.564
24.161
23.670
16 8 3
24.596
22.256
22.596
23.067
23.149
24.831
23.331
23.051
16 8 4
24.538
22.568
26.841
23.572
23.115
23.831
23.145
23.528


--- Page 41 ---
41
16 8 5
27.856
23.777
23.331
24.214
23.252
24.684
25.215
23.860
16 8 6
24.279
22.224
22.440
22.723
24.209
22.630
24.134
24.090
16 8 7
23.541
22.560
23.730
22.879
23.455
23.239
25.414
22.428
16 8 8
23.990
23.179
25.416
24.273
24.634
24.823
25.794
24.819
16 8 9
25.489
22.705
24.727
25.001
24.201
24.000
24.723
25.933
32 2 0
34.910
30.428
32.152
32.051
30.231
32.308
31.358
27.536
32 2 1
42.833
31.732
52.325
31.175
33.014
32.986
28.897
24.072
32 2 2
55.232
31.466
31.802
26.482
35.758
31.956
35.855
32.459
32 2 3
28.232
33.619
29.767
28.494
28.240
28.539
33.193
30.332
32 2 4
29.543
33.657
34.044
32.270
29.926
32.513
27.947
29.714
32 2 5
31.957
31.023
52.069
31.796
29.375
33.777
33.093
30.690
32 2 6
33.790
25.005
30.296
48.987
33.647
33.741
28.870
29.078
32 2 7
53.912
28.851
29.823
33.425
27.121
33.699
32.112
27.528
32 2 8
47.885
33.678
48.016
34.026
57.581
24.447
32.474
27.007
32 2 9
30.821
32.182
32.571
50.685
34.824
31.391
33.608
58.438
32 4 0
31.777
28.596
28.516
28.875
28.843
28.727
29.099
29.834
32 4 1
30.330
28.063
30.187
28.717
29.218
29.864
27.426
28.624
32 4 2
27.395
30.140
30.425
28.729
31.933
30.397
29.317
31.100
32 4 3
28.868
27.069
29.111
31.699
30.927
28.170
30.584
27.615
32 4 4
28.138
27.542
29.937
28.919
30.743
27.601
27.568
28.672
32 4 5
30.221
28.246
29.225
30.075
30.358
29.688
29.204
28.171
32 4 6
30.319
29.349
31.866
29.950
27.824
28.924
28.407
30.130
32 4 7
32.675
28.851
31.613
28.121
29.825
28.739
28.619
28.011
32 4 8
38.807
27.453
37.081
28.702
28.714
31.959
27.598
29.326
32 4 9
35.698
28.986
33.727
33.750
29.310
28.018
28.235
27.811
32 8 0
86.983
61.935
94.117
75.052
64.812
67.950
66.495
65.538
32 8 1
86.718
67.628
87.606
91.260
69.658
77.637
84.536
78.231
32 8 2
80.116
80.356
92.245
83.722
74.266
92.560
88.459
94.920
32 8 3
72.454
97.542
81.284
91.358
75.910
94.540
90.550
93.097
32 8 4
91.599
93.686
79.399
70.824
74.105
94.022
83.605
93.608
32 8 5
80.496
91.302
91.827
79.643
70.645
79.909
77.758
84.928
32 8 6
78.526
81.694
83.635
73.610
82.258
84.742
76.669
89.289
32 8 7
72.265
82.553
71.336
76.010
76.651
86.816
91.096
87.175
32 8 8
64.727
83.045
56.192
66.682
81.603
80.664
76.918
82.503
32 8 9
64.923
80.489
69.717
66.726
76.138
67.626
79.698
75.116
64 2 0
266.963
127.080
168.539
866.875
128.940
120.664
121.389
137.909
64 2 1
70.629
440.618
360.925
61.009
260.635
158.139
173.286
185.971
64 2 2
681.134
118.974
176.795
605.324
140.153
151.334
152.027
239.754
64 2 3
103.458
175.167
235.277
179.721
175.210
330.358
113.082
226.070
64 2 4
119.611
292.611
172.872
135.217
114.784
182.442
166.313
118.346
64 2 5
184.327
62.182
165.352
222.668
127.980
390.911
53.421
112.743
64 2 6
196.000
66.959
68.505
149.856
66.759
110.046
190.753
167.332
64 2 7
68.046
177.111
119.817
406.398
63.028
232.733
64.398
169.949
64 2 8
228.988
114.589
121.839
218.387
116.397
130.568
112.373
66.926
64 2 9
425.988
248.772
129.427
261.269
238.909
55.010
109.281
116.137
64 4 0
106.732
95.223
105.299
98.691
83.330
102.142
85.878
94.219
64 4 1
108.505
108.623
101.538
87.960
88.047
102.634
86.778
93.657
64 4 2
106.272
92.516
112.126
97.979
86.683
112.257
87.556
92.539
64 4 3
101.048
101.632
103.770
101.348
90.852
102.841
89.799
101.906
64 4 4
87.642
98.957
93.465
80.698
97.719
97.973
99.211
101.439
64 4 5
97.074
91.781
94.313
88.767
99.856
94.970
92.552
96.602
64 4 6
90.868
93.793
100.892
96.947
95.182
101.527
106.562
100.122
64 4 7
88.430
94.190
101.383
101.473
109.341
94.855
112.327
95.200
64 4 8
95.507
92.620
97.261
100.274
99.202
102.549
108.265
95.527
64 4 9
105.889
102.446
99.680
99.727
95.710
106.408
102.549
99.878
64 8 0
289.754
284.314
304.717
331.592
327.080
307.372
315.660
327.589
64 8 1
295.340
281.258
306.575
301.947
325.450
332.469
300.360
301.247
64 8 2
252.924
285.944
228.482
290.230
301.222
269.578
287.071
318.004
64 8 3
292.645
332.678
281.728
287.034
313.736
329.541
328.671
301.484
64 8 4
278.542
273.656
301.114
303.729
334.449
280.329
283.985
328.285
64 8 5
283.962
331.013
283.824
290.712
306.059
311.748
303.534
292.165
64 8 6
287.729
299.289
289.911
286.438
311.286
286.862
285.105
276.748
64 8 7
292.593
285.077
305.776
284.963
329.314
296.268
328.489
306.246
64 8 8
247.544
285.126
283.875
292.930
309.507
280.890
299.622
280.604


--- Page 42 ---
42
64 8 9
269.551
286.376
245.185
248.663
298.424
285.382
298.903
278.127
Table
IV:
Per-instance
runtime
for
the
random
hybrid-
constraint benchmark. All runtimes are reported in seconds. The
label “to” indicates that the solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000
seconds) and did not return a solution.
Instances
FourierSMT
Yices2
SMTS
MathSAT5
Z3
Z3PP
SMT-RAT
CVC5
100 0
10.320
0.667
2.056
1.206
51.959
127.370
1.774
2.860
100 1
10.520
0.683
2.260
1.190
51.131
98.331
1.554
2.693
100 2
11.720
0.673
2.402
1.201
45.104
60.249
1.608
2.737
100 3
13.660
0.663
2.342
1.155
41.762
95.694
1.631
2.874
100 4
14.290
0.698
2.386
1.232
58.014
99.942
1.596
2.981
100 5
14.500
0.669
19.931
1.200
46.701
52.544
1.583
2.711
100 6
14.870
0.677
13.027
1.201
68.633
138.883
1.516
2.896
100 7
14.910
0.642
3.281
1.151
42.805
56.822
1.591
2.431
100 8
14.940
0.667
2.173
1.203
50.816
105.896
1.666
2.784
100 9
14.960
0.651
2.539
1.166
45.264
131.687
1.626
2.800
200 0
15.330
12.048
48.993
19.439
to
to
24.022
48.571
200 1
15.370
12.078
48.971
19.267
to
to
24.388
49.811
200 2
15.380
12.008
54.727
19.361
to
to
25.450
50.707
200 3
15.460
12.008
48.868
19.301
to
to
25.293
47.859
200 4
15.480
12.172
50.719
19.180
to
to
24.146
48.347
200 5
15.590
12.021
47.117
19.376
to
to
25.087
45.112
200 6
15.660
11.992
56.309
19.141
to
to
24.680
48.549
200 7
15.680
12.052
47.796
19.352
to
to
25.511
50.345
200 8
15.890
12.107
44.313
19.269
818.373
to
24.929
50.230
200 9
16.150
12.379
50.883
19.303
to
to
24.737
50.114
300 0
16.160
64.666
267.432
99.981
to
to
149.874
259.052
300 1
16.190
64.763
296.301
101.294
to
to
151.812
254.098
300 2
16.220
64.662
306.719
99.826
to
to
151.029
259.306
300 3
16.240
64.989
320.685
103.340
to
to
149.994
258.533
300 4
16.320
64.510
314.240
100.480
to
to
152.409
252.257
300 5
16.320
65.044
305.877
101.760
to
to
150.918
256.669
300 6
16.480
64.674
311.967
99.943
to
to
149.744
257.035
300 7
16.510
64.575
311.690
99.871
to
to
151.735
259.863
300 8
16.550
64.278
308.431
99.871
to
to
147.721
226.919
300 9
16.850
64.698
289.831
99.544
to
to
151.231
255.693
400 0
16.900
218.945
to
329.279
to
to
367.954
820.927
400 1
17.060
214.078
996.427
328.652
to
to
409.900
814.795
400 2
17.310
214.551
to
328.087
to
to
367.802
824.332
400 3
17.500
214.109
984.854
325.206
to
to
364.456
822.964
400 4
17.610
213.321
to
327.078
to
to
362.811
818.409
400 5
17.630
213.839
to
331.589
to
to
364.403
836.187
400 6
17.710
212.857
to
325.873
to
to
362.606
819.349
400 7
17.730
213.435
to
326.335
to
to
364.717
835.281
400 8
17.870
212.426
to
325.650
to
to
361.630
829.775
400 9
17.950
212.935
985.271
331.455
to
to
384.311
817.612
500 0
17.980
543.005
to
838.665
to
to
770.167
to
500 1
17.980
541.506
to
828.176
to
to
757.559
to
500 2
18.000
553.905
to
834.533
to
to
737.038
to
500 3
18.070
543.653
to
829.635
to
to
706.543
to
500 4
18.120
544.267
to
828.905
to
to
738.708
to
500 5
18.230
541.190
to
828.367
to
to
738.962
to
500 6
18.270
541.699
to
829.384
to
to
759.099
to
500 7
18.330
542.968
to
840.175
to
to
749.606
to
500 8
18.350
543.276
to
835.088
to
to
773.535
to
500 9
18.470
541.691
to
829.888
to
to
745.924
to
600 0
18.590
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 1
18.620
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 2
18.640
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 3
18.700
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 4
18.700
to
to
to
to
to
to
to


--- Page 43 ---
43
600 5
18.770
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 6
18.830
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 7
18.840
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 8
19.030
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
600 9
19.240
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 0
19.290
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 1
19.430
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 2
19.540
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 3
19.570
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 4
19.640
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 5
19.670
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 6
19.810
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 7
19.830
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 8
19.980
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
700 9
20.190
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 0
20.230
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 1
20.410
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 2
20.750
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 3
20.850
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 4
21.280
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 5
21.380
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 6
21.560
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 7
21.580
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 8
21.680
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
800 9
21.700
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 0
21.740
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 1
21.820
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 2
21.970
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 3
22.230
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 4
22.350
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 5
22.750
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 6
22.910
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 7
23.040
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 8
23.240
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
900 9
23.670
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 0
23.860
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 1
23.860
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 2
23.870
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 3
24.200
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 4
24.640
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 5
25.000
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 6
25.780
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 7
26.300
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 8
28.680
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
1000 9
37.840
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
Table V: Per-instance runtime for the continuous time schedul-
ing benchmark. All runtimes are reported in seconds. The label “to”
indicates that the solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds)
and did not return a solution.
Instances
FourierSMT
Yices2
SMTS
MathSAT5
Z3
Z3PP
SMT-RAT
CVC5
16 2 0
27.040
0.230
1.172
0.299
0.862
0.331
9.956
1.179
16 2 1
16.922
0.062
0.195
0.163
0.083
0.163
9.952
0.332
16 2 2
12.897
0.030
0.358
0.252
0.092
0.154
7.262
0.288
16 2 3
12.357
0.044
0.212
0.324
0.096
0.159
5.562
0.267
16 2 4
11.105
0.032
0.199
0.261
0.086
0.145
6.632
0.252
16 2 5
9.473
0.033
0.194
0.323
0.086
0.157
7.903
0.266
16 2 6
9.193
0.035
0.190
0.253
0.079
0.150
3.607
0.288
16 2 7
9.749
0.028
0.182
0.199
0.078
0.150
2.040
0.209
16 2 8
10.671
0.037
0.180
0.309
0.083
0.160
6.266
0.340
16 2 9
9.851
0.034
0.187
0.261
0.093
0.155
5.775
0.258
16 3 0
10.349
0.118
0.324
1.292
0.156
0.361
40.309
1.089


--- Page 44 ---
44
16 3 1
10.238
0.123
0.276
0.822
0.173
0.329
49.513
0.775
16 3 2
11.627
0.128
0.338
0.834
0.180
0.325
162.922
0.922
16 3 3
9.755
0.115
0.199
0.597
0.180
0.345
22.885
0.893
16 3 4
11.799
0.114
0.210
0.807
0.161
0.317
60.249
0.940
16 3 5
18.709
0.157
0.316
0.676
0.157
0.303
34.023
1.171
16 3 6
11.646
0.114
0.274
0.614
0.153
0.346
85.415
0.785
16 3 7
10.283
0.125
0.221
0.802
0.163
0.309
53.771
0.903
16 3 8
12.261
0.163
0.406
0.797
0.216
0.342
184.333
1.081
16 3 9
10.950
0.140
0.299
0.678
0.250
0.301
107.449
0.986
16 4 0
10.848
0.208
0.297
1.811
0.319
0.708
236.647
1.982
16 4 1
26.660
0.247
0.506
3.522
0.538
0.797
636.707
2.836
16 4 2
11.688
0.289
0.533
2.013
0.318
0.913
to
2.088
16 4 3
11.927
0.349
0.541
4.611
0.327
0.729
to
2.203
16 4 4
10.939
0.170
0.383
2.290
0.319
0.646
324.821
1.977
16 4 5
11.245
0.289
0.511
1.722
0.293
0.617
351.524
2.472
16 4 6
20.486
0.387
0.509
2.731
0.459
0.758
to
3.105
16 4 7
11.171
0.221
0.549
1.782
0.412
0.557
470.767
2.462
16 4 8
26.740
0.483
0.624
2.192
0.316
0.443
506.957
2.463
16 4 9
12.125
0.359
0.533
1.476
0.337
0.416
518.591
2.418
16 5 0
12.238
0.478
0.751
6.328
0.587
0.761
to
4.577
16 5 1
11.710
0.789
0.662
4.012
0.797
1.002
to
6.415
16 5 2
12.347
0.610
0.701
4.398
0.554
0.862
to
5.733
16 5 3
12.548
1.478
0.670
7.916
0.702
0.745
to
7.342
16 5 4
12.762
1.036
0.720
8.067
0.666
0.819
to
5.275
16 5 5
63.865
5.506
0.975
10.256
2.268
1.263
to
7.366
16 5 6
12.117
0.540
0.767
9.026
0.622
1.454
to
6.014
16 5 7
12.010
0.543
0.655
5.671
0.787
0.779
to
8.433
16 5 8
23.538
1.289
0.708
4.641
0.720
1.024
to
8.297
16 5 9
298.075
45.338
0.909
17.743
6.893
2.204
to
6.887
32 2 0
10.541
0.225
0.297
2.198
0.381
0.536
226.152
1.968
32 2 1
11.343
0.356
0.427
1.495
0.334
0.691
446.455
2.844
32 2 2
12.031
0.296
0.458
1.869
0.359
0.699
527.795
2.861
32 2 3
10.886
0.314
0.466
3.802
0.400
0.578
287.040
2.722
32 2 4
10.943
0.359
0.349
2.384
0.365
0.556
164.071
3.310
32 2 5
11.964
0.208
0.480
2.113
0.358
0.579
to
3.180
32 2 6
11.779
0.297
0.506
3.149
0.571
0.660
393.326
3.882
32 2 7
18.959
0.302
0.483
2.710
0.386
0.703
366.121
2.951
32 2 8
18.703
0.281
0.456
2.226
0.366
0.621
840.697
3.385
32 2 9
14.583
0.310
0.445
1.919
0.319
0.407
337.798
2.887
32 3 0
11.835
1.734
0.855
23.455
1.100
1.629
to
16.291
32 3 1
11.856
1.252
0.687
8.122
1.011
1.506
to
16.124
32 3 2
11.835
2.433
0.918
10.511
1.473
2.357
to
13.910
32 3 3
31.818
1.347
0.860
8.088
1.108
1.807
to
14.332
32 3 4
11.074
1.021
0.764
11.313
0.951
1.578
to
8.211
32 3 5
11.658
0.784
0.754
12.622
0.870
1.883
to
13.741
32 3 6
12.561
1.213
0.763
8.403
1.115
1.305
to
12.722
32 3 7
11.872
1.184
0.867
10.724
1.589
2.144
to
16.586
32 3 8
12.300
1.142
0.909
10.032
1.006
1.758
to
9.707
32 3 9
12.758
1.030
0.850
13.571
1.211
3.401
to
15.931
32 4 0
14.782
2.808
1.452
32.440
4.087
7.874
to
36.276
32 4 1
23.300
3.508
1.948
28.959
3.353
5.354
to
55.646
32 4 2
21.043
3.672
1.315
18.781
4.308
6.253
to
39.611
32 4 3
22.435
4.025
1.511
24.504
3.501
4.608
to
58.803
32 4 4
12.014
5.431
1.678
27.823
2.811
9.385
to
77.434
32 4 5
14.347
2.892
1.535
31.365
2.047
3.177
to
49.941
32 4 6
14.175
4.172
1.865
33.398
3.548
4.469
to
53.574
32 4 7
25.925
5.767
2.017
48.448
4.828
5.118
to
51.069
32 4 8
12.011
4.120
1.459
35.993
1.442
5.693
to
42.363
32 4 9
14.011
4.161
1.575
35.282
4.310
6.212
to
45.499
32 5 0
25.986
13.947
3.334
110.144
6.104
13.729
to
117.503
32 5 1
20.764
9.336
2.608
63.770
4.244
8.820
to
158.131
32 5 2
27.639
24.379
4.380
321.993
6.391
19.946
to
167.740
32 5 3
13.453
25.772
3.725
104.578
9.708
7.789
to
129.521
32 5 4
13.707
19.542
3.177
308.964
9.909
15.601
to
127.565


--- Page 45 ---
45
32 5 5
24.676
8.343
2.862
81.417
5.219
9.815
to
114.127
32 5 6
24.152
19.756
3.251
272.302
9.208
10.591
to
104.664
32 5 7
26.672
27.024
2.434
74.307
10.670
9.452
to
109.409
32 5 8
14.381
77.472
3.663
350.932
11.503
15.308
to
169.241
32 5 9
13.325
7.081
3.407
77.977
7.398
17.317
to
148.968
64 2 0
12.474
3.128
1.446
27.512
2.888
4.589
to
43.508
64 2 1
13.544
2.648
1.587
29.859
2.094
4.722
to
49.726
64 2 2
12.583
3.600
1.469
31.399
2.196
4.997
to
39.326
64 2 3
23.759
3.075
1.574
28.212
3.030
4.471
to
36.486
64 2 4
11.718
3.118
1.484
40.300
2.210
2.873
to
86.908
64 2 5
12.509
2.529
1.443
49.345
2.245
3.074
to
39.101
64 2 6
13.121
2.845
1.576
33.560
3.413
2.975
to
44.290
64 2 7
11.970
3.047
1.714
31.621
3.888
6.653
to
51.427
64 2 8
11.682
3.478
1.505
44.850
1.901
3.457
to
45.369
64 2 9
13.822
3.335
1.749
29.450
2.919
3.084
to
41.745
64 3 0
13.815
16.108
4.063
146.747
29.856
14.692
to
224.028
64 3 1
14.098
20.534
4.505
293.319
6.297
7.573
to
212.775
64 3 2
13.485
15.576
3.856
183.160
5.587
17.535
to
306.306
64 3 3
15.565
21.605
4.250
217.093
7.882
16.597
to
181.239
64 3 4
14.844
23.448
4.405
225.280
6.529
9.740
to
249.158
64 3 5
14.667
29.091
4.684
207.881
8.327
12.844
to
364.327
64 3 6
12.866
17.874
4.013
267.554
9.647
10.302
to
314.181
64 3 7
16.839
19.099
5.471
246.814
10.509
12.319
to
392.739
64 3 8
15.609
22.730
5.623
183.827
6.425
22.011
to
327.328
64 3 9
16.006
20.885
5.062
154.655
10.751
9.073
to
366.237
64 4 0
16.369
88.450
11.824
839.809
162.148
42.087
to
826.405
64 4 1
17.142
62.745
13.014
to
96.194
34.222
to
763.588
64 4 2
16.084
78.794
11.181
525.425
28.051
35.795
to
618.071
64 4 3
29.670
55.381
9.464
to
111.914
30.951
to
to
64 4 4
17.532
74.879
9.381
531.118
23.771
30.858
to
922.959
64 4 5
19.758
587.883
14.536
to
128.229
40.888
to
821.720
64 4 6
17.084
134.384
14.546
to
169.075
101.591
to
643.976
64 4 7
17.072
62.432
11.054
to
107.364
52.151
to
834.580
64 4 8
16.669
129.383
14.496
to
140.324
30.992
to
to
64 4 9
16.251
63.548
12.345
to
117.020
32.773
to
737.374
64 5 0
20.113
to
34.423
to
525.779
48.919
to
to
64 5 1
30.432
158.513
23.438
to
279.409
54.905
to
to
64 5 2
18.414
343.739
33.762
to
415.866
51.988
to
to
64 5 3
20.584
148.072
27.740
to
200.551
395.898
to
to
64 5 4
40.162
153.321
31.825
to
241.264
71.977
to
to
64 5 5
29.447
332.852
25.877
to
408.406
329.576
to
to
64 5 6
56.550
to
42.611
to
694.874
509.194
to
to
64 5 7
22.882
140.645
28.956
to
180.277
371.783
to
to
64 5 8
21.733
to
32.239
to
993.279
41.324
to
to
64 5 9
22.753
to
32.126
to
62.011
45.145
to
to
128 2 0
16.833
65.639
12.042
854.797
88.731
24.302
to
724.482
128 2 1
16.367
74.278
10.026
591.881
98.185
25.512
to
538.788
128 2 2
16.343
64.393
10.604
to
103.853
27.445
to
469.126
128 2 3
19.170
53.567
10.177
to
37.003
31.513
to
813.266
128 2 4
17.284
90.822
10.389
to
38.654
32.262
to
662.087
128 2 5
18.808
86.970
12.953
609.966
25.150
31.401
to
578.507
128 2 6
16.389
78.200
11.339
to
88.002
32.617
to
441.320
128 2 7
17.060
69.753
9.852
813.153
97.434
30.212
to
592.031
128 2 8
17.051
80.977
8.802
to
25.545
87.076
to
to
128 2 9
17.584
72.305
10.466
568.931
85.575
23.183
to
718.122
128 3 0
22.476
367.835
33.598
to
357.972
163.510
to
to
128 3 1
26.607
358.551
58.302
to
to
467.951
to
to
128 3 2
26.453
381.840
38.941
to
893.475
445.183
to
to
128 3 3
24.202
340.652
43.340
to
to
329.264
to
to
128 3 4
23.482
257.362
36.143
to
117.034
324.488
to
to
128 3 5
22.441
272.186
47.435
to
907.247
122.779
to
to
128 3 6
21.986
291.676
33.592
to
761.162
319.208
to
to
128 3 7
22.040
488.270
37.073
to
890.721
844.235
to
to
128 3 8
41.632
927.926
58.770
to
537.663
146.421
to
to


--- Page 46 ---
46
128 3 9
23.062
264.381
39.865
to
106.869
58.927
to
to
128 4 0
33.173
to
148.878
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 1
36.343
to
135.016
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 2
32.718
716.402
124.973
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 3
33.889
836.317
125.073
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 4
31.581
749.251
122.616
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 5
35.321
to
123.238
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 6
31.899
to
109.968
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 7
33.898
to
143.873
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 8
33.418
968.790
88.984
to
to
to
to
to
128 4 9
54.404
883.718
148.272
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 0
42.492
to
300.366
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 1
44.276
to
334.595
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 2
44.084
to
335.216
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 3
43.686
to
462.148
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 4
278.661
to
390.678
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 5
48.521
to
278.542
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 6
46.908
to
586.455
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 7
46.240
to
444.569
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 8
46.608
to
342.575
to
to
to
to
to
128 5 9
48.802
to
341.136
to
to
to
to
to
256 2 0
35.693
540.753
111.198
to
to
305.297
to
to
256 2 1
37.218
569.220
100.476
to
to
488.482
to
to
256 2 2
36.002
616.599
100.626
to
308.660
989.786
to
to
256 2 3
42.959
660.138
100.475
to
to
to
to
to
256 2 4
37.165
606.099
112.441
to
to
to
to
to
256 2 5
37.356
605.490
97.369
to
to
470.725
to
to
256 2 6
35.855
595.612
129.581
to
to
911.357
to
to
256 2 7
37.773
661.744
122.221
to
to
to
to
to
256 2 8
35.492
532.737
109.400
to
to
to
to
to
256 2 9
43.965
663.289
108.188
to
to
712.464
to
to
256 3 0
81.365
to
362.189
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 1
79.657
to
466.286
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 2
67.515
to
507.674
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 3
63.216
to
395.136
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 4
91.920
to
502.177
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 5
79.333
to
467.360
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 6
75.150
to
522.162
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 7
82.608
to
442.585
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 8
69.352
to
426.302
to
to
to
to
to
256 3 9
67.284
to
422.094
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 0
131.542
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 1
352.860
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 2
127.013
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 3
117.495
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 4
140.216
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 5
125.164
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 6
124.563
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 7
121.493
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 8
119.834
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 4 9
115.568
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 0
164.203
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 1
164.559
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 2
174.241
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 3
198.001
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 4
193.753
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 5
189.445
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 6
187.500
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 7
160.476
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 8
178.375
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
256 5 9
198.387
to
to
to
to
to
to
to


--- Page 47 ---
47
Table VI: Per-instance runtime for the 3D placement bench-
mark. All runtimes are reported in seconds. The label “to” indicates
that the solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds) and did
not return a solution.
Instances
FourierSMT
Yices2
SMTS
MathSAT5
Z3
Z3PP
SMT-RAT
CVC5
2 2 0
8.357
0.005
0.120
0.020
0.034
0.050
0.213
0.023
2 2 1
8.462
0.005
0.122
0.021
0.036
0.051
0.214
0.024
2 2 2
8.464
0.006
0.132
0.021
0.036
0.052
0.228
0.024
2 2 3
8.573
0.006
0.136
0.021
0.036
0.052
0.373
0.025
2 2 4
8.851
0.006
0.136
0.021
0.036
0.052
0.373
0.025
2 2 5
8.908
0.006
0.138
0.021
0.036
0.053
0.379
0.025
2 2 6
8.916
0.006
0.138
0.021
0.037
0.058
0.382
0.026
2 2 7
8.928
0.006
0.140
0.023
0.038
0.058
0.387
0.029
2 2 8
9.040
0.006
0.146
0.024
0.038
0.060
0.388
0.030
2 2 9
9.069
0.008
0.146
0.035
0.039
0.061
0.452
0.049
2 4 0
9.136
0.009
0.147
0.047
0.042
0.062
5.295
0.070
2 4 1
9.171
0.009
0.150
0.047
0.042
0.062
6.052
0.070
2 4 2
9.226
0.010
0.150
0.049
0.042
0.063
7.091
0.071
2 4 3
9.230
0.010
0.155
0.050
0.043
0.063
7.516
0.079
2 4 4
9.271
0.010
0.155
0.050
0.043
0.064
9.585
0.089
2 4 5
9.282
0.010
0.157
0.051
0.044
0.066
9.649
0.091
2 4 6
9.305
0.010
0.157
0.051
0.044
0.066
9.854
0.094
2 4 7
9.314
0.011
0.160
0.051
0.044
0.068
11.032
0.104
2 4 8
9.330
0.012
0.160
0.051
0.045
0.069
11.549
0.105
2 4 9
9.369
0.013
0.161
0.054
0.046
0.070
32.821
0.110
2 8 0
9.393
0.013
0.163
0.071
0.046
0.072
497.321
0.229
2 8 1
9.419
0.014
0.166
0.074
0.047
0.078
498.062
0.267
2 8 2
9.428
0.015
0.167
0.081
0.047
0.080
857.466
0.269
2 8 3
9.538
0.016
0.168
0.084
0.047
0.081
to
0.272
2 8 4
9.609
0.016
0.169
0.085
0.048
0.082
to
0.274
2 8 5
9.770
0.016
0.169
0.085
0.048
0.086
to
0.278
2 8 6
9.771
0.016
0.170
0.085
0.048
0.090
to
0.291
2 8 7
9.947
0.016
0.173
0.090
0.048
0.095
to
0.333
2 8 8
10.101
0.017
0.173
0.090
0.049
0.098
to
0.338
2 8 9
10.216
0.017
0.185
0.093
0.050
0.110
to
0.347
4 2 0
10.232
0.038
0.185
0.175
0.063
0.111
to
0.543
4 2 1
10.265
0.039
0.188
0.186
0.064
0.111
to
0.634
4 2 2
10.483
0.041
0.190
0.186
0.065
0.112
to
0.673
4 2 3
10.486
0.045
0.191
0.192
0.067
0.112
to
0.679
4 2 4
10.582
0.046
0.194
0.204
0.068
0.114
to
0.685
4 2 5
10.640
0.049
0.200
0.206
0.068
0.123
to
0.698
4 2 6
10.697
0.049
0.200
0.240
0.068
0.124
to
0.788
4 2 7
10.710
0.050
0.200
0.249
0.070
0.126
to
0.964
4 2 8
10.720
0.057
0.202
0.252
0.070
0.129
to
0.973
4 2 9
10.755
0.058
0.202
0.265
0.070
0.131
to
0.974
4 4 0
10.764
0.058
0.203
0.280
0.078
0.134
to
1.080
4 4 1
10.825
0.059
0.205
0.288
0.079
0.136
to
1.092
4 4 2
10.831
0.060
0.207
0.295
0.080
0.142
to
1.136
4 4 3
10.920
0.064
0.211
0.306
0.081
0.145
to
1.142
4 4 4
10.944
0.071
0.220
0.311
0.082
0.145
to
1.246
4 4 5
11.058
0.080
0.221
0.317
0.082
0.146
to
1.260
4 4 6
11.252
0.090
0.224
0.341
0.083
0.150
to
1.320
4 4 7
11.385
0.093
0.228
0.343
0.086
0.152
to
1.329
4 4 8
11.476
0.094
0.240
0.344
0.087
0.156
to
1.386
4 4 9
11.521
0.110
0.258
0.366
0.103
0.234
to
1.729
4 8 0
11.559
0.121
0.272
0.712
0.117
0.246
to
2.357
4 8 1
11.620
0.130
0.294
0.722
0.117
0.247
to
2.378
4 8 2
11.627
0.133
0.304
0.860
0.118
0.255
to
2.437
4 8 3
11.630
0.138
0.306
0.860
0.118
0.265
to
2.647
4 8 4
11.850
0.138
0.310
1.040
0.120
0.266
to
2.755
4 8 5
11.879
0.145
0.314
1.136
0.120
0.267
to
3.186
4 8 6
11.910
0.153
0.315
1.317
0.120
0.271
to
3.422
4 8 7
11.982
0.154
0.348
1.367
0.121
0.280
to
3.475


--- Page 48 ---
48
4 8 8
12.158
0.160
0.351
1.459
0.123
0.322
to
3.651
4 8 9
12.319
0.171
0.376
1.709
0.123
0.373
to
3.864
8 2 0
12.626
0.483
0.678
1.775
0.186
0.384
to
8.973
8 2 1
12.651
0.501
0.699
2.451
0.186
0.418
to
9.414
8 2 2
12.828
0.545
0.712
2.637
0.186
0.470
to
9.457
8 2 3
12.838
0.564
0.716
3.433
0.189
0.496
to
10.148
8 2 4
12.872
0.592
0.737
3.726
0.190
0.521
to
10.855
8 2 5
13.089
0.608
0.738
4.090
0.190
0.534
to
11.372
8 2 6
13.096
0.612
0.739
4.297
0.190
0.534
to
13.034
8 2 7
13.102
0.617
0.745
4.378
0.191
0.542
to
14.031
8 2 8
13.102
0.672
0.762
4.723
0.197
0.548
to
14.282
8 2 9
13.309
0.708
0.775
4.946
0.197
0.550
to
14.888
8 4 0
13.334
0.722
0.782
5.744
0.229
0.552
to
19.526
8 4 1
13.814
0.731
0.807
6.160
0.232
0.555
to
20.242
8 4 2
13.862
0.753
0.819
6.718
0.235
0.559
to
21.701
8 4 3
13.888
0.775
0.826
6.825
0.238
0.574
to
21.923
8 4 4
13.922
0.830
0.834
7.161
0.238
0.627
to
22.077
8 4 5
14.133
0.866
0.865
9.054
0.239
0.657
to
26.833
8 4 6
14.323
0.903
0.896
11.150
0.240
0.666
to
27.298
8 4 7
14.404
0.915
0.933
11.173
0.241
0.667
to
27.538
8 4 8
14.529
1.104
0.972
13.524
0.243
0.678
to
30.722
8 4 9
14.550
1.116
0.983
14.845
0.257
0.686
to
31.907
8 8 0
14.620
1.134
0.992
22.688
0.372
0.701
to
63.512
8 8 1
14.736
1.246
1.030
28.355
0.375
0.719
to
64.636
8 8 2
14.757
1.354
1.109
42.344
0.376
0.753
to
70.565
8 8 3
14.801
1.430
1.202
44.810
0.376
0.759
to
71.132
8 8 4
14.818
1.437
1.225
53.247
0.381
0.844
to
73.549
8 8 5
14.933
1.621
1.312
59.897
0.392
0.845
to
77.774
8 8 6
15.102
1.652
1.335
63.428
0.400
0.851
to
81.516
8 8 7
15.123
1.869
1.343
90.124
0.407
0.876
to
87.172
8 8 8
15.456
1.925
1.387
156.848
0.415
0.888
to
92.884
8 8 9
15.494
2.518
1.420
163.363
0.415
1.063
to
96.264
16 2 0
16.252
5.002
4.874
738.148
0.850
1.849
to
280.715
16 2 1
16.294
5.410
5.394
to
0.853
1.865
to
285.539
16 2 2
16.304
5.435
6.297
to
0.857
1.869
to
297.034
16 2 3
16.470
5.722
6.349
to
0.862
1.878
to
316.067
16 2 4
16.482
5.841
7.448
to
0.866
1.936
to
341.960
16 2 5
16.488
6.735
7.851
to
0.868
1.942
to
349.459
16 2 6
16.510
7.898
7.893
to
0.870
1.979
to
368.993
16 2 7
16.618
8.319
7.976
to
0.892
2.087
to
382.363
16 2 8
16.858
8.568
8.031
to
0.921
2.381
to
415.233
16 2 9
17.159
10.769
8.272
to
0.949
2.384
to
424.091
16 4 0
18.221
12.244
8.435
to
1.482
2.610
to
492.489
16 4 1
19.529
13.510
8.515
to
1.490
2.674
to
601.084
16 4 2
19.771
14.098
8.542
to
1.535
2.676
to
640.257
16 4 3
19.833
14.410
8.965
to
1.561
2.872
to
640.758
16 4 4
20.191
14.856
10.740
to
1.562
2.942
to
651.161
16 4 5
20.923
16.040
10.916
to
1.698
2.986
to
707.244
16 4 6
21.045
18.780
11.552
to
1.738
3.023
to
745.994
16 4 7
21.820
19.340
11.669
to
1.752
3.446
to
870.632
16 4 8
21.837
20.896
12.465
to
1.824
3.548
to
933.501
16 4 9
21.841
23.464
13.683
to
1.950
3.767
to
to
16 8 0
23.108
24.455
17.134
to
2.992
3.913
to
to
16 8 1
23.347
34.670
17.767
to
3.074
4.641
to
to
16 8 2
23.407
36.192
18.943
to
3.127
4.822
to
to
16 8 3
23.550
39.243
19.255
to
3.218
5.144
to
to
16 8 4
23.889
43.801
20.517
to
3.353
5.539
to
to
16 8 5
23.978
44.633
22.418
to
4.126
5.560
to
to
16 8 6
24.037
44.941
22.475
to
4.392
5.569
to
to
16 8 7
24.067
52.935
25.362
to
5.339
6.267
to
to
16 8 8
24.725
56.197
26.090
to
10.184
10.949
to
to
16 8 9
24.727
65.366
26.307
to
11.159
13.933
to
to
32 2 0
28.405
109.771
89.343
to
12.787
18.546
to
to
32 2 1
28.795
154.794
96.938
to
12.902
18.692
to
to


--- Page 49 ---
49
32 2 2
28.859
165.528
101.115
to
13.060
19.956
to
to
32 2 3
28.968
179.768
116.255
to
13.595
20.941
to
to
32 2 4
28.989
188.215
118.699
to
13.626
21.012
to
to
32 2 5
29.020
188.843
119.695
to
14.302
21.073
to
to
32 2 6
29.148
247.890
120.004
to
14.419
21.115
to
to
32 2 7
29.153
249.458
120.484
to
14.570
21.511
to
to
32 2 8
29.456
259.489
121.021
to
14.866
23.490
to
to
32 2 9
29.649
299.561
133.291
to
14.931
23.788
to
to
32 4 0
30.268
301.993
138.032
to
15.132
25.547
to
to
32 4 1
30.968
302.071
139.322
to
16.717
26.024
to
to
32 4 2
31.098
310.454
146.172
to
16.758
26.949
to
to
32 4 3
31.705
327.171
157.097
to
17.746
27.057
to
to
32 4 4
31.877
336.877
157.264
to
17.786
29.046
to
to
32 4 5
31.971
369.498
166.412
to
18.608
30.326
to
to
32 4 6
32.208
390.207
178.427
to
19.642
32.118
to
to
32 4 7
32.359
430.133
182.445
to
19.650
35.197
to
to
32 4 8
33.090
435.579
224.071
to
22.818
36.683
to
to
32 4 9
33.852
439.721
226.689
to
23.940
37.391
to
to
32 8 0
67.222
444.490
292.867
to
24.493
38.167
to
to
32 8 1
72.416
447.244
316.561
to
24.788
40.871
to
to
32 8 2
78.791
488.759
356.595
to
25.452
42.984
to
to
32 8 3
79.602
495.382
381.526
to
27.170
45.100
to
to
32 8 4
80.203
586.220
425.064
to
30.825
45.218
to
to
32 8 5
81.383
597.532
433.010
to
31.020
46.395
to
to
32 8 6
81.976
679.850
443.741
to
34.386
50.004
to
to
32 8 7
86.090
930.571
489.981
to
37.312
51.141
to
to
32 8 8
87.602
970.144
492.600
to
37.757
53.715
to
to
32 8 9
90.954
to
524.383
to
38.020
66.488
to
to
64 2 0
94.642
to
757.721
to
162.246
258.806
to
to
64 2 1
95.259
to
877.139
to
165.145
273.614
to
to
64 2 2
96.957
to
984.668
to
167.819
290.407
to
to
64 2 3
97.597
to
988.336
to
169.436
292.482
to
to
64 2 4
97.846
to
to
to
170.077
293.424
to
to
64 2 5
98.231
to
to
to
170.333
297.116
to
to
64 2 6
98.291
to
to
to
172.951
315.039
to
to
64 2 7
98.535
to
to
to
172.968
322.046
to
to
64 2 8
101.162
to
to
to
172.973
323.287
to
to
64 2 9
101.490
to
to
to
184.401
324.042
to
to
64 4 0
119.118
to
to
to
360.426
551.277
to
to
64 4 1
129.951
to
to
to
375.781
575.071
to
to
64 4 2
133.424
to
to
to
381.141
576.374
to
to
64 4 3
144.883
to
to
to
390.029
591.010
to
to
64 4 4
146.666
to
to
to
413.503
592.750
to
to
64 4 5
150.765
to
to
to
445.167
609.174
to
to
64 4 6
164.411
to
to
to
475.534
614.263
to
to
64 4 7
177.466
to
to
to
483.366
618.999
to
to
64 4 8
179.629
to
to
to
518.660
635.730
to
to
64 4 9
184.168
to
to
to
524.320
653.587
to
to
64 8 0
281.755
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 1
284.500
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 2
286.508
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 3
287.296
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 4
292.549
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 5
297.850
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 6
301.022
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 7
301.597
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 8
307.610
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
64 8 9
311.516
to
to
to
to
to
to
to


--- Page 50 ---
50
Figure 5. Detailed solver performance on benchmark categories. (a) Results on the scheduling problems. Z3++,
CVC5, MathSAT5, SMT-RAT wins non of the instances in this category. Yices2 performs best on the small-scale instances
(nw = 16), while SMTS attains the best results on the medium-scale cases (nw ∈{32, 64}). As the instance size increases
further, FourierSMT can handle cases that cause timeouts among competing solvers. (b) Results on the placement problems.
SMTS, CVC5, MathSAT5, SMT-RAT wins non of the instances in this category. Yices2 still performs best on the small-
scale instances (nm = 2), while Z3 and Z3++ attains the best results on the medium-scale cases (nw ∈{8, 16, 32}). The
landscape of solvers exhibits pronounced variability: different solvers excel in different problem scales, and no classical solver
maintains uniformly strong performance. FourierSMT benefits from GPU acceleration, resulting in relatively similar solving
times across instance sizes because the fixed parallelization overhead of the GPU amortizes most of the computational cost.
For the largest category, FourierSMT remains scalable and continues to solve instances that all other solvers time out on.


--- Page 51 ---
51
Supplementary Note 11: Gradient Computation Time
To quantify the acceleration attributable to GPU execution, we measure the gradient computation time of Fouri-
erSMT when executed on either CPU or GPU. Our high-performance cluster node has dual AMD EPYC 9654
(with at most 384 threads), but configure the following flags: XLA FLAGS=--xla cpu multi thread eigen=false
intra op parallelism threads=64, OMP NUM THREADS=64, and MKL NUM THREADS=64 to enforce that FourierSMT
uses at most 64 CPU threads. Similarly, the node contains 8 NVIDIA L40S GPUs, but we constrain FourierSMT
to a single GPU by setting CUDA VISIBLE DEVICES=0.
We measure the gradient computation time using the instances in the random hybrid constraint benchmark. For
each instance, we evaluate the gradient at 10,000 distinct initial points. These points are partitioned into 100 groups,
where each group of 100 points uses the same annealing parameter. We test 100 annealing parameters corresponding
to 1/σ ∈{0.00, 0.01, 0.99}. The results of this experiment are reported in Fig. 3b of the main text. In this section,
we report the per-instance gradient computation time in Table VII.
Table VII: Per-instance average gradient runtime of
Fouri-
erSMT for the random hybrid-constraint benchmark. All run-
times are reported in milliseconds. The label “to” indicates that the
solver exceeded the allotted time limit (1000 seconds) and did not re-
turn a solution.
Instances
CPU
GPU
100 0
4.841
12.890
100 1
4.993
12.848
100 2
4.975
12.126
100 3
5.300
12.370
100 4
4.930
12.902
100 5
4.886
12.942
100 6
5.251
12.888
100 7
4.861
12.973
100 8
4.911
12.756
100 9
4.884
12.323
200 0
23.869
13.734
200 1
21.147
13.594
200 2
21.687
13.708
200 3
22.092
13.645
200 4
20.119
13.596
200 5
20.233
13.531
200 6
22.756
13.481
200 7
19.925
13.689
200 8
24.230
13.694
200 9
21.735
13.693
300 0
35.270
12.828
300 1
34.592
12.738
300 2
33.986
12.485
300 3
34.086
12.560
300 4
34.517
12.774
300 5
32.877
12.885
300 6
34.472
12.621
300 7
33.741
12.883
300 8
33.282
12.712
300 9
34.676
13.236
400 0
41.611
12.906
400 1
41.828
12.971
400 2
42.041
12.790
400 3
43.206
12.829
400 4
44.231
12.649
400 5
42.228
12.518
400 6
42.131
12.778
400 7
46.592
12.903
400 8
42.831
12.731
400 9
44.681
12.893
500 0
48.972
12.831
500 1
50.528
12.483


--- Page 52 ---
52
500 2
48.619
12.816
500 3
48.682
12.483
500 4
47.275
12.462
500 5
47.327
12.348
500 6
47.238
12.817
500 7
47.029
12.674
500 8
51.214
12.514
500 9
47.077
12.605
600 0
59.570
12.863
600 1
55.350
12.784
600 2
52.882
12.745
600 3
53.691
12.688
600 4
58.432
12.558
600 5
55.391
12.882
600 6
54.917
12.973
600 7
55.205
13.011
600 8
58.445
12.659
600 9
58.832
12.750
700 0
59.736
12.797
700 1
65.506
12.836
700 2
66.118
13.046
700 3
60.359
12.455
700 4
63.349
12.727
700 5
60.291
12.665
700 6
60.050
12.934
700 7
60.203
12.671
700 8
68.391
12.668
700 9
60.000
12.822
800 0
71.691
12.832
800 1
77.569
12.737
800 2
66.064
12.634
800 3
65.728
12.997
800 4
65.247
12.726
800 5
70.436
12.787
800 6
71.175
12.987
800 7
67.009
12.992
800 8
67.247
12.815
800 9
68.656
12.895
900 0
77.775
12.671
900 1
80.032
12.928
900 2
75.771
12.982
900 3
82.115
13.027
900 4
77.760
12.705
900 5
76.144
12.758
900 6
76.445
12.863
900 7
75.271
12.708
900 8
76.232
13.017
900 9
76.164
13.072
1000 0
90.081
12.284
1000 1
83.093
12.864
1000 2
84.637
12.743
1000 3
83.680
12.876
1000 4
82.626
12.527
1000 5
82.269
12.627
1000 6
82.549
12.778
1000 7
86.008
12.697
1000 8
82.360
12.418
1000 9
86.246
12.711
