--- Page 1 ---
GOVERNMENT LICENSE
The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of
Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office
of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The U.S. Gov-
ernment retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up nonexclusive, irrevocable
worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to
the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.
The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored
research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan. http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-
public-access-plan
arXiv:2603.05696v1  [cs.CE]  5 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Autonomous Algorithm Discovery for
Ptychography via Evolutionary LLM Reasoning
Xiangyu Yin,∗,† Ming Du,† Junjing Deng,† Zhi Yang,‡ Yimo Han,‡ and Yi Jiang†
†Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA
‡Department of Materials Science and NanoEngineering, Rice University, Houston, TX,
USA
E-mail: xyin@anl.gov
Abstract
Ptychography is a computational imaging technique widely used for high-resolution
materials characterization, but high-quality reconstructions often require the use of reg-
ularization functions that largely remain manually designed. We introduce Ptychi-
Evolve, an autonomous framework that uses large language models (LLMs) to dis-
cover and evolve novel regularization algorithms. The framework combines LLM-driven
code generation with evolutionary mechanisms, including semantically-guided crossover
and mutation. Experiments on three challenging datasets (X-ray integrated circuits,
low-dose electron microscopy of apoferritin, and multislice imaging with crosstalk ar-
tifacts) demonstrate that discovered regularizers outperform conventional reconstruc-
tions, achieving up to +0.26 SSIM and +8.3 dB PSNR improvements. Besides, Ptychi-
Evolve records algorithm lineage and evolution metadata, enabling interpretable and
reproducible analysis of discovered regularizers.
1


--- Page 3 ---
Introduction
Autonomous scientific discovery, in which artificial intelligence (AI) systems independently
formulate hypotheses, design experiments, and interpret results, has long captivated re-
searchers. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have brought this vision closer
to reality, with systems demonstrating fully automated computational research pipelines1
and LLM-guided evolutionary search discovering novel algorithms in mathematics and com-
puter science.2,3 A central insight from those work is that searching through program space,
by evolving code that describes how to construct solutions, yields interpretable discoveries
that can be verified, generalized, and deployed in practice.
Ptychography presents a good domain for such autonomous algorithm discovery. This
computational imaging technique reconstructs high-resolution images from overlapping diffrac-
tion patterns, achieving resolution beyond conventional optical limits.4–6 The technique has
become indispensable for nanoscale materials characterization, with applications spanning
battery electrodes, catalytic nanoparticles, semiconductor devices, and biological specimens.
However, ptychographic reconstruction is fundamentally an ill-posed and mostly underdeter-
mined inverse problem whose quality depends critically on regularization, i.e., mathematical
constraints encoding prior knowledge and limitations about the expected solution.7 Despite
decades of research producing diverse approaches from classical total variation (TV) to mod-
ern deep learning priors, the design of effective regularization strategies remains largely man-
ual, requiring practitioners to select among competing methods and tune hyperparameters
for each new imaging challenge. While recent work has automated hyperparameter selection
vis Bayesian optimization8 and LLM-assisted automated workflows,9 these approaches oper-
ate within fixed algorithmic structures rather than discovering new regularization strategies.
In this work, we propose Ptychi-Evolve, an autonomous framework that uses LLM
reasoning to discover and evolve regularization algorithms for the ptychographic recon-
struction engine implemented in the Pty-Chi package.10 Unlike prior work that operates
within fixed structures, Ptychi-Evolve searches the space of algorithms themselves, gen-
2


--- Page 4 ---
erating executable Python functions that implement novel regularization strategies.
By
combining LLM-driven code generation with evolutionary refinement mechanisms including
semantically-guided crossover and mutation, Ptychi-Evolve discovers regularizers that
substantially outperform conventional approaches while preserving interpretable algorithm
lineage and evolution metadata.
The contributions of this work are fourfold.
First, we present the first framework
for autonomous discovery of regularization algorithms for computational imaging, extend-
ing beyond parameter optimization to structural algorithm search. Second, we introduce
semantically-guided evolutionary operations where crossover and mutation are informed by
the LLM’s understanding of algorithmic function rather than random recombination. Third,
we develop a flexible evaluation pipeline supporting ground-truth metrics, human expert
feedback, and vision-language model assessment, enabling deployment across diverse experi-
mental contexts. Fourth, we demonstrate substantial improvements across three challenging
case studies, with analysis of evolution histories revealing interpretable scientific insights
about effective regularization strategies.
Related Work
Large Language Models for Scientific Discovery
The application of large language models to scientific discovery has emerged as a rapidly
evolving research frontier. For example, the AI Scientist system from Sakana AI represents
one of the first efforts toward fully automated research, demonstrating end-to-end pipelines
that generate novel research ideas, write necessary code, execute computational experiments,
and produce complete scientific manuscripts.1
Within the specific domain of algorithmic discovery, FunSearch established the paradigm
of searching through program space using LLM-guided evolution.2 The key insight is that
programs describing how to construct solutions are more amenable to evolutionary improve-
3


--- Page 5 ---
ment than raw solutions, and the resulting discoveries are inherently interpretable. AlphaE-
volve extends this approach by employing an ensemble of Gemini 2.0 models and scaling
to programs hundreds of lines long.3 The system has achieved remarkable results including
improvements to fundamental algorithms, optimization of Google’s data center scheduling,
and acceleration of TPU arithmetic circuits. The Evolution of Heuristics (EoH) framework
introduced the concept of evolving both natural language “thoughts” representing algorith-
mic ideas and executable code implementing those ideas.11 This dual representation enables
the LLM to reason about algorithmic concepts at a high level while still producing con-
crete, evaluable implementations. Similarly, the LLaMEA framework similarly uses LLMs
for automated generation and refinement of metaheuristic algorithms, achieving performance
exceeding state-of-the-art methods like CMA-ES and Differential Evolution.12
Beyond algorithmic discovery, LLMs have found numerous applications in natural sci-
ences like materials science and chemistry. We refer readers to a comprehensive survey doc-
umenting 34 examples spanning automation, assistants, agents, and accelerated discovery.13
In microscopy, the AILA framework enables LLM agents to automate microscopy experi-
ments in user facilities,14 and the PEAR framework9 enables automated microscopy data
analysis workflows. These efforts collectively establish that LLM agents can meaningfully
engage with scientific context and analysis, though significant challenges remain.
Ptychography reconstruction algorithms and artifacts
A coherent diffraction imaging technique like ptychography collects diffraction patterns,
and relies on an inverting process known as phase retrieval to recover human-interpretable
images of the measured specimen. Examples of phase retrieval algorithms include the pty-
chographic iterative engine (PIE) family,15–17 least-square maximum likelihood (LSQML),18
and difference map (DM).19 Software packages implementing these algorithms are available
with various programming frameworks and offer a wide collection of features to enhance the
reconstruction quality.20–24 Pty-Chi10 is a recent ptychographic data processing library lever-
4


--- Page 6 ---
aging PyTorch25 for numerical computing, automatic differentiation, GPU acceleration, and
multi-processing. Pty-Chi also features a modular design that makes it possible to modify
and improve certain features via drop-in replacement, facilitating the dynamic evolution of
the reconstruction workflow.
Ptychography is very powerful, but artifacts often arise from model mismatch and ex-
perimental imperfections.26 For example, periodic artifacts from raster-scan geometry, also
known as grid pathology, are especially prominent when scan step sizes are large relative to
the illumination function.27 These artifacts originate from periodically repeating scan grids,
aliasing in undersampled overlap regions, and systematic probe variations. While denser
sampling suppresses such artifacts, this increases acquisition time and radiation dose, mo-
tivating algorithmic solutions. For thick specimens, multislice ptychography reconstructs
depth-resolved transmission functions but suffers from crosstalk where features leak between
slices.28–31 For dose-sensitive biological or rare samples, low-dose acquisition is often neces-
sary to mitigate radiation damage. Under low-dose conditions, shot-noise–limited diffrac-
tion patterns and the reduced overlap common in sparse scanning weaken the reconstruc-
tion constraints, leading to grainier, lower-resolution images, while detector readout noise,
background offsets, and unmodeled static intensity can further bias the reconstruction and
introduce additional artifacts.32–34
Regularization in Ptychography
Regularization is fundamental to solving ill-posed inverse problems in imaging. For exam-
ple, the total variation (TV) functional, introduced by Rudin, Osher, and Fatemi, promotes
edge-preserving solutions by penalizing the L1 norm of image gradients.35 This approach
along with its extensions including total generalized variation (TGV),,36 have become ubiq-
uitous in medical imaging, microscopy, and remote sensing. Anisotropic regularization ap-
proaches adapt penalty strength based on local image structure. Structure tensor analysis
computes local orientation fields that guide preferential smoothing along edges rather than
5


--- Page 7 ---
across them.37 For images with regular structures, such as the metal lines in integrated cir-
cuits, orientation-aware regularization can improve reconstruction quality by respecting the
underlying geometry.
The deep learning revolution has transformed regularization for inverse problems. The
Deep Image Prior demonstrated that untrained convolutional networks provide implicit reg-
ularization through architectural inductive bias.38 This result showed that the structure of
deep networks inherently favors natural images over noise, allowing reconstruction without
any training data. Plug-and-play methods integrate learned denoisers into classical optimiza-
tion frameworks, with theoretical foundations established through connections to proximal
operators and ADMM.39,40 The approach has achieved state-of-the-art results across deblur-
ring, super-resolution, and computed tomography reconstruction.41
For ptychography specifically, regularization choices significantly impact reconstruction
quality. Classical approaches apply TV or sparsity constraints to the recovered object.42 De-
sign of those regularization strategies is largely manual, requiring expert knowledge to select
and tune approaches for specific imaging conditions. Recent work has explored learned ap-
proaches including deep image prior and deep generative priors.31,43–45 Du et al.46 developed
a plug-and-play framework integrating physics-based reconstruction with text-guided diffu-
sion models, enabling users to specify artifacts for removal through natural language prompts
while maintaining data fidelity via ADMM. Those learned approaches aren’t manual, but
it’s not interpretable and the performance is largely uncertain.
Method: The Ptychi-Evolve Framework
Ptychi-Evolve is an autonomous framework for discovering regularization algorithms
through LLM-guided evolutionary search. The system comprises four interconnected com-
ponents: an LLM engine for algorithm generation and analysis, a multi-modal evaluation
pipeline for assessing reconstruction quality, evolutionary refinement mechanisms for improv-
6


--- Page 8 ---
ing algorithms over generations, and a history management system for context management,
interpretability and checkpointing. Figure 1 provides an overview of the complete architec-
ture.
Figure 1: System architecture of Ptychi-Evolve showing the discovery loop. The LLM
Engine generates regularizer code, which is executed by the Pty-Chi reconstruction library.
The Evaluator assesses reconstruction quality and records metrics to the History Manager.
Context from the history informs both the Evolution Controller (for selecting parent algo-
rithms and actions) and the LLM Engine (for code generation). The Evolution Controller
triggers actions (generate, tune, crossover, or mutate) that prompt the LLM to produce new
regularizer variants.
Problem Formulation
Ptychographic reconstruction seeks to recover a complex-valued object function ψ(r) from
diffraction intensity measurements.
In the standard formulation, a coherent probe P(r)
illuminates the object at a series of overlapping positions {rj}, producing exit waves that
propagate to a detector where only intensity (not phase) is recorded. The forward model
7


--- Page 9 ---
relates the object to measurements through:
Ij(q) = |F [P(r −rj) · ψ(r)]|2 + ϵ
(1)
where F denotes the Fourier transform, q represents detector coordinates, and ϵ accounts
for noise. For multislice ptychography, the object is represented as a stack of S transmis-
sion functions {ψs}S
s=1, with the exit wave computed through sequential propagation and
multiplication operations.
Reconstruction algorithms iteratively minimize a data fidelity term while incorporating
regularization to address ill-posedness:
ˆψ = arg min
ψ
X
j
L(Ij, ψ) + λR(ψ)
(2)
Here, L measures agreement between predicted and observed intensities (typically amplitude-
based or Gaussian likelihood), R(ψ) encodes prior knowledge through regularization, and λ
controls the regularization strength. Our goal is to automatically discover effective forms of
R and associated optimization strategies.
LLM-Driven Algorithm Generation
The core of Ptychi-Evolve is an LLM engine that generates regularization algorithms
as executable Python functions. Each generated function is a method of Pty-Chi’s Object
class and follows a pre-defined standardized interface: regularize llm(self) operates on a
complex-valued object tensor stored in self.data and writes the regularized result through
self.set data(). This interface enables seamless integration with the Pty-Chi library’s
reconstruction pipeline, where the regularization function is called at each epoch.
The generation process begins with prompt construction. Each prompt includes sev-
eral components that provide context for the LLM. The experimental context describes the
8


--- Page 10 ---
imaging modality, sample characteristics, and expected challenges; for example, it may note
that an integrated circuit sample exhibits grid artifacts from periodic structures, or that
a multislice dataset requires handling of crosstalk between depth layers.
The algorithm
history summarizes previously attempted approaches with their performance metrics, en-
abling the LLM to learn from both successes and failures. When web search is enabled, the
prompt incorporates relevant scientific literature retrieved through queries about regular-
ization techniques, the specific imaging modality, and known challenges. Finally, technical
requirements specify code constraints including the function signature, available imports
(PyTorch, NumPy, SciPy), and interface conventions.
The LLM generates candidate algorithms in response to these prompts. Generated code
undergoes multi-pass extraction to identify Python function definitions, handling variations
in output formatting across different model responses. Extracted code is then subjected
to security validation that detects potentially dangerous operations including system calls,
file I/O, network access, and imports of restricted modules. In our implementation, vali-
dation combines an LLM-based security audit with a restricted execution environment that
whitelists available built-ins and imports for the generated regularizer code.
When algorithms fail during evaluation due to syntax errors, runtime exceptions, or
invalid outputs, Ptychi-Evolve attempts automatic correction. The LLM receives the
failed algorithm along with the error message and traceback, then generates a corrected
version that addresses the specific failure. This correction mechanism enables recovery from
common issues including tensor shape mismatches, numerical instabilities, and API misuse.
Up to two correction attempts are permitted before marking an algorithm as failed, balancing
recovery potential against computational cost.
Multi-Modal Evaluation Pipeline
Discovered algorithms must be evaluated to guide the evolutionary search process. Recog-
nizing that different experimental contexts have different evaluation requirements, Ptychi-
9


--- Page 11 ---
Evolve supports three complementary evaluation modes.
Ground truth evaluation is applicable when reference images are available, either from
simulation or from expensive high-quality reconstructions (with the goal to find a regular-
izer that can reduce the computation cost or to be more robust in terms of algorithmic
parameters). The system computes standard image quality metrics including structural sim-
ilarity index (SSIM), peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), root mean squared error (RMSE),
and mean absolute error (MAE). For multislice reconstructions, metrics are computed in-
dependently for each layer, then aggregated through configurable strategies including mean,
median, minimum, or percentile-based combination. This per-layer analysis enables identi-
fication of regularizers that perform well across all depth slices versus those that sacrifice
quality on certain layers.
Human expert evaluation enables deployment on novel samples where no ground truth
exists. Domain experts view reconstructed images and provide quality assessments on a
continuous zero-to-one scale, accompanied by qualitative feedback describing observed arti-
facts, resolution, and contrast. Experts may also suggest directions for subsequent algorithm
development, which are incorporated into generation prompts. While more labor-intensive
than automated metrics, human evaluation captures aspects of reconstruction quality that
may not be reflected in simple numerical metrics.
Vision-language model (VLM) evaluation provides a middle ground that reduces expert
burden while enabling assessment beyond ground truth metrics.
In few-shot mode, the
VLM learns from example images paired with quality scores, developing an implicit model
of what constitutes good reconstruction for the specific imaging modality. In description
mode, natural language criteria guide assessment, for example specifying that reconstructions
should exhibit sharp edges, uniform background, and absence of ringing artifacts.
Both
modes produce structured evaluations compatible with the evolutionary search process. We
refer our previous work47 for readers interested in learning more about how we develop VLMs
for ptychography tasks.
10


--- Page 12 ---
Regardless of evaluation mode, each algorithm is executed by dynamically patching the
PlanarObject.regularize llm method in the Pty-Chi library. Reconstruction proceeds
with the discovered regularizer enabled, running for a fixed iteration count determined by
the experimental configuration. The execution environment restricts available imports to a
curated set (PyTorch, NumPy, SciPy, and their submodules) to ensure reproducibility and
prevent unintended side effects.
Evolutionary Refinement
Ptychi-Evolve take actions sequentially to navigate the algorithm design space, and there
are three actions available: generation, tuning, and evolution. An LLM-driven and rules-
regulated action policy determines which action to take based on the current state of the
algorithm population.
Generation creates new algorithms from scratch, informed by the experimental context
and history of prior attempts. The LLM synthesizes novel approaches by drawing on its
knowledge of regularization techniques, adapting concepts from the literature to the specific
imaging challenge at hand. Generation is the primary action during the warmup phase of
discovery, establishing a diverse initial pool of regularizers before evolution or tuning begins.
Tuning refines high-performing algorithms by adjusting hyperparameters while preserving
algorithmic structure. Given a successful algorithm, the LLM analyzes its components and
proposes modified parameter values, such as regularization weights, iteration counts, or
learning rates. Tuning is triggered when excellent algorithms exist but may benefit from
fine-grained optimization, as indicated by performance that is good but not yet saturated.
Evolution represents the most distinctive mechanism in Ptychi-Evolve, comprising
two semantically-guided operations. Crossover takes two successful parent algorithms and
generates an offspring that combines their complementary strengths. Unlike recombination
in traditional genetic algorithms, the LLM understands what each parent algorithm does and
intentionally merges their techniques. For instance, given one parent with an effective TV
11


--- Page 13 ---
formulation and another with gradient correlation penalty for crosstalk mitigation, crossover
might produce an offspring that incorporates both approaches within a unified optimization
framework. Mutation takes a single parent and introduces variations, such as adding new
components, removing redundant operations, or modifying mathematical formulations, while
preserving core functionality that contributed to the parent’s success.
The action policy balances exploration of new algorithmic ideas against exploitation of
successful approaches. During the warmup phase (typically the first five to ten iterations),
the policy focuses exclusively on generation to establish population diversity. Once sufficient
successful algorithms exist, the policy begins selecting tuning and evolution actions based on
configurable criteria. Tuning is triggered when excellent-tier algorithms exist and a specified
number of iterations have passed since the last tuning action. Evolution is triggered when
the population contains enough successful algorithms to enable meaningful crossover, again
subject to iteration-based throttling. When the policy would select an action that cannot
be executed (for instance, evolution when too few successful algorithms exist), it falls back
to generation.
History Management and Interpretability
Evaluated algorithms are stored with comprehensive metadata enabling post-hoc analysis
and interpretation. Each record includes the complete source code, generation number, ac-
tion type (generated, tuned, or evolved), parent identities for evolved algorithms, evaluation
metrics, and (when available) LLM-generated analysis.
This analysis extracts the tech-
niques employed by each algorithm (such as TV regularization, gradient correlation penalty,
or adaptive weighting), identifies key parameters and their values, and suggests potential
improvements based on observed performance.
Algorithms are classified into performance tiers based on configurable metric thresholds.
For ground truth evaluation using SSIM, a typical configuration might classify algorithms
achieving SSIM ≥0.90 as excellent, ≥0.80 as good, ≥0.60 as moderate, and below 0.60
12


--- Page 14 ---
as poor. These classifications inform action selection (tuning targets excellent algorithms,
evolution requires successful algorithms) and history compression.
To bound memory usage while preserving information necessary for effective generation
and evolution, the history undergoes periodic compression. The compression policy always
retains the top-performing algorithms regardless of generation, ensuring that the best discov-
eries remain available. All excellent and good algorithms are preserved, as these represent the
successful outcomes that justify the discovery effort. Among moderate and poor algorithms,
the policy retains representative samples: the best within each tier and recently generated al-
gorithms that provide context for subsequent generations. This selective retention maintains
population diversity while preventing unbounded growth.
The discovery state is checkpointed periodically and upon interruption signals (SIGINT,
SIGTERM), enabling resumption of long-running experiments. Checkpoints capture the cur-
rent stored history, optimization statistics, and cached web search results needed to resume
discovery. Upon restart, Ptychi-Evolve loads the most recent checkpoint and continues
discovery from where it left off.
The comprehensive history maintained by Ptychi-Evolve enables interpretability anal-
yses that would be impossible with black-box optimization. Algorithm lineage can be traced
to understand which parent techniques contributed to successful offspring. Technique time-
lines reveal when specific innovations emerged and propagated through the population. Fail-
ure analysis identifies common pitfalls, including numerical instabilities, over-smoothing, and
memory errors, that the discovery process learned to avoid. These analyses yield scientific
insights about what makes regularization effective for specific imaging challenges.
Experiments
We evaluate Ptychi-Evolve on three challenging ptychography datasets spanning differ-
ent reconstruction challenges. These experiments demonstrate the framework’s ability to
13


--- Page 15 ---
discover effective regularizers across diverse conditions while providing insights into the dis-
covered algorithms and evolution dynamics.
Experimental Setup
The evaluation encompasses three datasets chosen to represent distinct imaging modalities
and challenges. The X-ray Integrated Circuit (IC) dataset consists of hard X-ray synchrotron
measurements of a semiconductor integrated circuit sample. This dataset presents multiple
challenges: the initial probe estimate is inaccurate, the scan step size is large relative to
probe dimensions (causing aliasing), and the periodic metal line structures in the IC produce
prominent grid artifacts in naive reconstructions. The combination of these factors makes
regularization particularly important for achieving high-quality reconstructions.
The X-ray Multislice dataset is a simulated two-layer stack designed to evaluate handling
of depth-dependent reconstruction.
Layer 1 contains low-contrast, muted features while
Layer 2 contains high-contrast, sharp edges. The primary challenge is cross-layer interference
(crosstalk), where features from one depth erroneously appear in reconstructions of adjacent
depths. This dataset tests the framework’s ability to discover regularizers that enforce slice
independence while preserving layer-specific characteristics.
The Electron Apoferritin dataset consists of low-dose electron ptychography simulations
of apoferritin protein. The primary challenge is severe noise and reduced spatial resolution
due to the dose limitations necessary to prevent radiation damage to biological specimens.
This dataset evaluates the framework’s ability to discover regularizers that suppress noise
while preserving fine structural details.
For all datasets, we compare against reconstruction without regularization as imple-
mented in the Pty-Chi library. This baseline represents standard ptychographic reconstruc-
tion using the least-square maximum likelihood algorithm (LSQML)18 without explicit priors
beyond constraints inherent to the algorithm. We report improvements relative to this base-
line to isolate the contribution of discovered regularizers.
14


--- Page 16 ---
The experiments uses OpenAI’s O3 reasoning model for code generation, analysis and
evolutionary operations. Web search is enabled for context retrieval, allowing the LLM to
ground generation in scientific literature. During discovery, each reconstruction evaluation
runs for a fixed iteration count determined by dataset characteristics: 1000 iterations for
apoferritin, 1000 for multislice, and 3000 for the more challenging IC dataset. We report
convergence analyses of the discovered algorithms in Figure 3.
Main Results
Table 1 summarizes the discovery process and final performance across all three datasets.
Ptychi-Evolve successfully discovers regularizers that substantially outperform baselines
on all datasets, with improvements ranging from +0.12 to +0.26 SSIM.
Table 1: Discovery Statistics and Performance. Best reports the discovery-evaluation SSIM
at the fixed discovery horizon (IC: 3000 iterations; apoferritin and multislice: 1000). ∆
SSIM and ∆PSNR report improvement of the best discovered regularizer over the baseline
at the representative comparison iteration in Figure 3 (IC: 3000 iterations; apoferritin: 1000;
multislice: 1000) using the same evaluation references as in Figure 2. For multislice, ∆values
are computed on the mean across layers.
Dataset
Algorithms
Success
Best
∆SSIM
∆PSNR
Duration
X-ray IC
100
83%
0.785
+0.26
+8.3 dB
16.5 hrs
Apoferritin
147
97%
0.836
+0.12
+3.2 dB
29.5 hrs
Multislice
97
94%
0.871
+0.18
+8.0 dB
10.5 hrs
The X-ray IC dataset exhibits the largest absolute improvement, with the best discovered
regularizer achieving +0.26 SSIM and +8.3 dB PSNR over baseline at the discovery evalua-
tion horizon (3000 iterations). This substantial gain reflects the severity of artifacts in naive
reconstructions and the effectiveness of the discovered notch filtering approach for suppress-
ing grid artifacts. The 83% algorithm success rate, lower than other datasets, indicates that
the challenging nature of this reconstruction problem leads to more failed attempts, though
the framework successfully navigates these failures through its correction mechanism.
The apoferritin dataset shows more modest improvements (+0.12 SSIM, +3.2 dB PSNR)
15


--- Page 17 ---
but achieves the highest success rate (97%). The relatively smaller gains likely reflect funda-
mental limitations imposed by shot noise at low dose, as no regularizer can recover informa-
tion that was never captured. Nevertheless, the discovered regularizers provide meaningful
improvements in reconstruction quality that could impact downstream analysis.
The multislice dataset achieves the highest absolute reconstruction quality (0.871 SSIM),
with mean improvement of +0.18 SSIM across layers (layer 1: +0.17; layer 2: +0.20).
The 94% success rate indicates that algorithms generated for this problem are more likely to
produce valid reconstructions, potentially because the well-defined crosstalk challenge admits
clearer algorithmic solutions. The discovery process found 4 excellent-tier and 30 good-tier
algorithms, demonstrating that multiple effective approaches exist for this problem.
Figure 2 provides visual comparison of reconstruction quality across datasets. The X-ray
IC images reveal severe periodic artifacts in the baseline that are substantially reduced by
the discovered notch filtering regularizer. For apoferritin, the improvement is more sub-
tle but visible as reduced noise and sharper protein features. Both multislice layers show
characteristic crosstalk artifacts (diagonal stripes from feature leakage between layers) in
the baseline; layer 1 exhibits more complex structures while layer 2 shows cleaner diagonal
features. The discovered gradient correlation penalty and Gram orthogonality techniques
effectively suppress these artifacts in both layers.
Figure 3 illustrates convergence dynamics across datasets. The X-ray IC results reveal
substantial improvement at 3000 iterations, where baseline SSIM is 0.52 compared to 0.79 for
the regularized reconstruction. At higher iteration counts, the baseline gradually catches up
as increased computation partially compensates for the lack of explicit regularization, which
in turn suggests that we can save time and computational resources with this discovered
regularizer for similar IC datasets.
The multislice convergence curves reveal an interesting phenomenon: at early iterations
(roughly the first 200-250), the regularized reconstruction can perform worse than baseline.
This initial degradation occurs because the regularizer perturbs the reconstruction away
16


--- Page 18 ---
Figure 2: Visual comparison of reconstructed phase images at representative iterations.
Columns show a reference image, baseline reconstruction, and best discovered regularizer.
For multislice and apoferritin, the reference is the simulated ground-truth phase; for X-
ray IC, the reference is a long-iteration (i.e., 10,000) reconstruction used as an evaluation
reference in the absence of ground truth. SSIM values overlaid on baseline/best are computed
against the corresponding reference, and all images within each row share a unified color scale
(shown by the colorbar on the right). X-ray IC is shown at 3000 iterations; apoferritin and
multislice are shown at 1000 iterations.
17


--- Page 19 ---
(a) X-ray IC
(b) Apoferritin
(c) Multislice
Figure 3: Convergence comparison showing SSIM, PSNR, RMSE, and MAE versus recon-
struction iterations for baseline (grey) and best discovered regularizer (green), computed
against the same evaluation references as in Figure 2. IC is swept up to 10,000 iterations;
apoferritin and multislice are swept up to 1,000 iterations. Multislice results are shown per
layer (top row: layer 1; bottom row: layer 2).
18


--- Page 20 ---
from the data-consistent solution before its structure-enforcing properties become beneficial.
By approximately 250-300 iterations, the regularized reconstruction overtakes baseline and
maintains superior performance thereafter. This observation has practical implications: users
should ensure sufficient iterations when deploying discovered regularizers.
Analysis of Discovered Algorithms
Examination of top-performing algorithms reveals dataset-specific innovations alongside com-
mon patterns. Table 2 summarizes the key techniques discovered for each dataset.
Table 2: Key Techniques Discovered by Dataset
Dataset
Technique
Description
X-ray IC
Adaptive notch filtering
FFT-based grid artifact suppression
X-ray IC
Structure-tensor TV
Edge-aware anisotropic smoothing
X-ray IC
Barzilai-Borwein
Adaptive step size acceleration
Apoferritin
Variance-gated
Preserves features under noise
Apoferritin
Soft-Huber
Noise-adaptive shrinkage
Apoferritin
Perona-Malik
Anisotropic diffusion
Multislice
Gradient correlation penalty
Penalizes shared gradients
Multislice
Gram orthogonality
Slice independence via correlation
Multislice
Contrast-adaptive
Per-slice regularization strength
Multislice
Spectral masks
Butterworth filters per slice
Several individual discoveries parallel established techniques in computational imaging,
demonstrating that the LLM effectively retrieves and applies relevant domain knowledge.
The notch filtering approach for grid artifact suppression has been demonstrated by Huang
et al.,48 Gram orthogonality for enforcing slice independence echoes multi-view geometry
constraints used in stereo reconstruction, Perona-Malik diffusion is a classical edge-preserving
filter,49 and the Huber penalty provides a smooth approximation to TV that avoids non-
differentiability at zero gradient.50
However, the LLM combines these known techniques in novel ways tailored to each
challenge, producing algorithms whose overall design goes beyond what any single technique
provides. Each best-performing algorithm integrates multiple complementary components
19


--- Page 21 ---
with carefully orchestrated interaction between them, representing the kind of algorithmic
synthesis that would be difficult to achieve through manual design or parameter tuning alone.
For example, the best regularizer discovered for the multislice case study integrates four
gradient components within a single regularization step: (1) isotropic 3-D Charbonnier-TV
with reflective boundary conditions, where the TV penalty extends along the depth (inter-
slice) direction in addition to the spatial dimensions; (2) multi-slice gradient exclusion that
penalizes locations where multiple slices simultaneously exhibit strong gradients, discourag-
ing crosstalk; (3) Gram orthogonality that minimizes off-diagonal entries of the slice-wise
Gram matrix to enforce statistical independence between layers; and (4) complementary But-
terworth spectral masks, where low-contrast slices receive a high-pass filter and high-contrast
slices receive a low-pass filter, with the filter strength exponentially annealed over epochs. A
notable innovation is the contrast-adaptive TV weighting, which blends a reciprocal contrast
map with a logistic contrast map (both percentile-clipped) to automatically assign stronger
regularization to low-contrast slices and weaker regularization to high-contrast ones. The
four gradient contributions are aggregated and passed through a two-stage robust clamp
(scale-invariant median clamp followed by per-slice ℓ2 clamp) before being applied to the ob-
ject. Rather than using a fixed step size, the regularizer applies this combined gradient using
Adam update rules51 with persistent first- and second-moment estimates that accumulate
across reconstruction epochs and a three-phase learning rate schedule (warm-up, exponential
decay, and cosine annealing). After each update, per-slice ℓ2 renormalization prevents the
regularization from altering the overall energy of any slice. The use of a stateful optimizer
within a regularization step is unconventional: conventional regularizers typically apply a
single closed-form operation per epoch (e.g., soft thresholding, one-step proximal TV). This
design pattern was not prescribed by the framework and represents a novel strategy au-
tonomously discovered by the LLM, enabling the regularizer to make larger, more effective
updates in early epochs and converge smoothly as reconstruction progresses.
The top-performing X-ray IC algorithm takes the internal-optimization idea further. It
20


--- Page 22 ---
decomposes the complex-valued object into amplitude and phase, then solves each compo-
nent through a dedicated iterative sub-loop within every reconstruction epoch: 25 amplitude
iterations, 15 phase iterations, and 2 joint complex-TV iterations. The amplitude path com-
putes a structure tensor to estimate local edge orientation and applies anisotropic Huber-TV
that penalizes gradients perpendicular to detected edges 4× more strongly than gradients
parallel to them, combined with a TGV-like second-order Laplacian term that reduces stair-
casing. The Huber threshold decays every four internal iterations (a form of continuation
that progresses from smooth to sharp regularization). The phase path applies amplitude-
weighted TV that smooths more aggressively in low-signal regions and wraps the result to
[−π, π). After the joint complex-TV step, FFT-based notch filtering suppresses periodic grid
artifacts. Rather than requiring known artifact periodicity, the algorithm automatically de-
tects the strongest peaks in the power spectrum (excluding the DC component), constructs
symmetric Gaussian notch pairs at those locations, and suppresses them in Fourier space.
Within the amplitude sub-loop, step sizes are adaptively selected using the Barzilai-Borwein
(BB) method,52 which approximates the local curvature from successive gradient differences
(τBB = s · y/y · y); a candidate step is accepted only when an Armijo-type energy decrease
condition is satisfied, providing quasi-Newton acceleration with guaranteed descent. Posi-
tivity of the amplitude is enforced through a softplus transformation with a data-adaptive
steepness parameter. The use of an iterative solver inside the regularization step effectively
turns each epoch’s regularization into a proximal operator that approximately solves the
regularization sub-problem, a strategy that, like the Adam approach in multislice, was au-
tonomously discovered rather than prescribed.
The best apoferritin algorithm employs a different strategy: rather than an optimization
loop, it applies a sequential signal-processing pipeline that separately denoises the ampli-
tude and corrects the phase. Amplitude processing begins with a noise-adaptive Soft-Huber
shrinkage that pulls values toward unit amplitude, where the shrinkage threshold is gated
by a sigmoid function of the global variance, yielding stronger denoising under noisier con-
21


--- Page 23 ---
ditions and lighter denoising when the signal is already clean. This is followed by cascaded
guided filters at two radii (r=1 and r=2), each blending the filtered output with the input
in proportion to local variance, thereby preserving edges while suppressing noise in flat re-
gions. An optional Gaussian fusion step activates when global noise exceeds a threshold.
Phase processing consists of quality-guided Itoh unwrapping (row-then-column), followed
by mean subtraction to remove any DC offset or residual ramp.
The unwrapped phase
is then smoothed by five steps of Perona-Malik diffusion49 with a conduction coefficient
c = 1/(1 + |∇u|2/λ2) that preserves edges while diffusing noise. Finally, the regularized
object is formed by blending the denoised amplitude and corrected phase with the original
estimate through a weak complex L2 anchor (α = 0.1), which prevents over-regularization
and maintains fidelity to the data. This pipeline approach, while not involving an internal
optimizer, demonstrates a different form of algorithmic sophistication: the careful ordering
and interaction of multiple denoising and phase-correction stages, each conditioned on data
statistics.
Looking across all three best algorithms, several cross-cutting patterns emerge.
Cer-
tain techniques appear consistently regardless of dataset: edge-aware TV variants (Huber,
Charbonnier, anisotropic) that preserve sharp features while smoothing noise; adaptive pa-
rameter scheduling that reduces regularization strength over iterations (spectral annealing
in multislice, Huber continuation in IC, variance-gated thresholds in apoferritin); and robust
gradient handling including clipping, normalization, and adaptive step sizes. These patterns
suggest general principles of effective regularization that transfer across imaging modali-
ties. Two structural patterns are also noteworthy. First, a polar decomposition strategy
is independently adopted by both the IC and apoferritin algorithms: each decomposes the
complex-valued object into amplitude and phase, applies tailored regularization to each com-
ponent, and recombines. This separation allows the regularizer to exploit domain-specific
priors (e.g., amplitude positivity, phase continuity) that would be difficult to enforce on
the complex-valued representation directly. Second, two distinct regularization architectures
22


--- Page 24 ---
coexist: the IC and multislice algorithms embed internal optimization loops within the regu-
larization step (iterative sub-loops or stateful Adam updates), while the apoferritin algorithm
uses a sequential signal-processing pipeline. Both approaches are effective, suggesting that
the optimal regularization architecture depends on the problem structure.
Dataset-specific innovations further illustrate the LLM’s ability to reason about problem
structure. The automatic notch filtering for IC grid artifacts detects artifact frequencies di-
rectly from the power spectrum rather than requiring user specification, demonstrating the
framework’s ability to discover self-calibrating solutions. The gradient correlation penalty
and Gram orthogonality for multislice address slice ambiguity from complementary perspec-
tives: gradient exclusion acts locally (penalizing shared edges), while Gram orthogonality
acts globally (enforcing statistical independence), and their combination via crossover proved
more effective than either alone. The noise-adaptive shrinkage and variance-gated filtering
for apoferritin specifically target the signal-dependent noise characteristics of low-dose elec-
tron imaging.
Evolution Dynamics
The discovery process exhibits distinct dynamics across datasets, reflecting differences in
problem structure and the effectiveness of evolutionary operations. For the multislice and
apoferritin datasets, crossover operations produced the majority of top-performing algo-
rithms.
This pattern suggests that these problems admit compositional solutions where
distinct algorithmic components address orthogonal aspects of the challenge. For example,
the best multislice regularizer was produced through crossover of two successful parents,
combining one parent’s TV formulation with another’s slice independence constraints. The
LLM’s ability to understand what each parent does, rather than blindly recombining code
fragments, enables meaningful synthesis.
The X-ray IC dataset presents a contrasting pattern: all top-five algorithms were freshly
generated rather than evolved through crossover or mutation.
We hypothesize that the
23


--- Page 25 ---
unique challenge of grid artifacts requires novel solutions (specifically, notch filtering in the
frequency domain) that were not present in the initial population and could not be obtained
by recombining existing approaches. Fresh generation, informed by the experimental context
describing periodic structures, proved more effective than evolutionary refinement for this
problem.
(a) X-ray IC
(b) Apoferritin
(c) Multislice
Figure 4: Discovery trajectory over generation number from the merged history. Grey points
show successfully evaluated algorithms; the green curve shows the best discovery-evaluation
SSIM found so far (computed at the fixed discovery horizon: IC 3000 iterations; apoferritin
and multislice 1000).
Figure 4 visualizes the discovery trajectories. Performance generally improves over gen-
erations as the history accumulates successful algorithms that inform subsequent generation
and evolution. For multislice, a clear inflection point occurs around generation 69 when
crossover first combines gradient correlation penalty with Gram orthogonality, producing a
24


--- Page 26 ---
large jump in SSIM that then stabilizes through subsequent generations. For X-ray IC, im-
provement is more gradual as the framework explores diverse approaches before converging
on notch filtering strategies.
The technique timeline analysis (Figure 5) reveals the emergence and propagation of al-
gorithmic innovations. For the multislice dataset, gradient correlation penalty appears early
(generation 6), Gram orthogonality appears later (generation 28), and their combination via
crossover yields the best algorithms by generation 85. This pattern demonstrates that the
evolutionary process can discover complementary techniques and effectively combine them.
Limitations and Future Directions
Several limitations of the current work suggest directions for future research.
The com-
putational cost of discovery remains substantial, requiring 10-30 hours per dataset due to
the time required for reconstruction evaluation (approximately 10 minutes per algorithm)
and API latency for LLM operations. Parallelizing evaluations and exploring more efficient
reconstruction methods (e.g., early stopping) could substantially accelerate discovery.
The evaluation for the three case studies relies primarily on ground truth metrics com-
puted against reference images. While we support human and VLM evaluation modes, our
experiments use simulated or well-characterized samples where ground truth is available for
objective evaluation and comparison. We intend to demonstrate deploying Ptychi-Evolve
on novel samples without references with human assessment for the next step.
The discovered algorithms are optimized for specific datasets and imaging conditions,
which suggestes limited direct transferability: a regularizer discovered for one sample may
not be optimal for a different sample with different feature scales or artifact characteristics.
Re-running discovery for each new experimental condition is currently necessary, though
this cost may be acceptable for repeated imaging of similar samples (e.g., IC) or high-value
measurements where reconstruction quality is critical.
The search space is constrained by the requirement to interface with Pty-Chi’s API, which
25


--- Page 27 ---
(a) X-ray IC
(b) Apoferritin
(c) Multislice
Figure 5: Technique adoption timeline from the merged history, showing the generations
in which successfully evaluated algorithms include each technique. Lines span first-to-last
appearance and markers indicate that a technique appears in at least one algorithm in that
generation (techniques shown have ≥5 occurrences; technique names are normalized to merge
spelling variants).
26


--- Page 28 ---
prescribes the function signature and available state and importable packages. More general
frameworks that allow modification of the iteration structure itself, not just the regularization
function, could enable discovery of fundamentally new reconstruction algorithms beyond
regularization.
Future directions include multi-objective discovery that optimizes for both reconstruction
quality and computational efficiency, enabling deployment in time-sensitive applications.
Transfer learning approaches could bootstrap discovery on new datasets using algorithms
discovered for related problems. Integration with learned priors, such as deep image prior38
or implicit neural representations, which share a similar iterative workflow with conventional
algorithms but represent the object with a neural network, could combine the interpretability
of discovered regularization strategies with the representational power of deep learning.
Conclusion
We have presented Ptychi-Evolve, an autonomous framework for discovering regulariza-
tion algorithms for ptychographic reconstruction through LLM-guided evolutionary search.
By combining large language model capabilities in code generation, scientific reasoning,
and iterative refinement with systematic evaluation and evolutionary mechanisms, Ptychi-
Evolve can discover algorithms that outperform conventional approaches.
This work demonstrates that LLMs can effectively navigate the space of regulariza-
tion algorithms, generating valid executable code that implements novel strategies informed
by scientific domain knowledge. Evolutionary operations enable compositional discoveries
that combine complementary techniques, with the LLM’s semantic understanding enabling
meaningful synthesis rather than random recombination. The discovered algorithms are in-
terpretable, yielding scientific insights about effective regularization strategies for different
imaging challenges. Analysis of evolution histories reveals patterns in technique emergence
and propagation that characterize the discovery process.
27


--- Page 29 ---
This work represents a novel direction for AI-driven algorithm discovery in scientific
computing. The approach can be generalized beyond ptychography to other inverse problems
in imaging, such as magnetic resonance imaging, computed tomography, and seismic imaging,
wherever handcrafted regularization represents a bottleneck to automation and optimization.
More broadly, the combination of LLM-guided search with systematic evaluation represents
a powerful paradigm for exploring algorithm design spaces that are too large and complex
for manual exploration.
Finally, Ptychi-Evolve advances the vision of autonomous scientific discovery by show-
ing that large language models can not only assist human researchers but independently
discover algorithmic innovations that enhance our ability to image the nanoscale world. As
LLM capabilities continue to advance and computational resources become more accessible,
we anticipate that autonomous algorithm discovery will become an increasingly important
tool in the scientific toolkit.
Acknowledgement
This material is based upon work supported by Laboratory Directed Research and Devel-
opment (LDRD) funding from Argonne National Laboratory (Award 2023-0049), provided
by the Director, Office of Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No.
DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S.
Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of
Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
(1) Lu, C.; Lu, C.; Lange, R. T.; Foerster, J.; Clune, J.; Ha, D. The ai scientist: Towards
fully automated open-ended scientific discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 2024,
28


--- Page 30 ---
(2) Romera-Paredes, B.;
Barekatain, M.;
Novikov, A.;
Balog, M.;
Kumar, M. P.;
Dupont, E.; Ruiz, F. J.; Ellenberg, J. S.; Wang, P.; Fawzi, O.; others Mathemati-
cal discoveries from program search with large language models. Nature 2024, 625,
468–475.
(3) Novikov, A.; V˜u, N.; Eisenberger, M.; Dupont, E.; Huang, P.-S.; Wagner, A. Z.; Shi-
robokov, S.; Kozlovskii, B.; Ruiz, F. J.; Mehrabian, A.; others AlphaEvolve: A coding
agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 2025,
(4) Thibault, P.; Dierolf, M.; Menzel, A.; Bunk, O.; David, C.; Pfeiffer, F. High-resolution
scanning x-ray diffraction microscopy. Science 2008, 321, 379–382.
(5) Pfeiffer, F. X-ray ptychography. Nature Photonics 2018, 12, 9–17.
(6) Chen, Z.; Jiang, Y.; Shao, Y.-T.; Holtz, M. E.; Odstrˇcil, M.; Guizar-Sicairos, M.;
Hanke, I.; Ganschow, S.; Schlom, D. G.; Muller, D. A. Electron ptychography achieves
atomic-resolution limits set by lattice vibrations. Science 2021, 372, 826–831.
(7) Marchesini, S. Invited article: A unified evaluation of iterative projection algorithms
for phase retrieval. Review of scientific instruments 2007, 78.
(8) Cao, M. C.; Chen, Z.; Jiang, Y.; Han, Y. Automatic parameter selection for electron
ptychography via Bayesian optimization. Scientific Reports 2022, 12, 12284.
(9) Yin, X.; Shi, C.; Han, Y.; Jiang, Y. PEAR: a robust and flexible automation frame-
work for ptychography enabled by multiple large language model agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.09034 2024,
(10) Du, M.; Ruth, H.; Henke, S.; Jiang, Y.; Nikitin, V.; Tripathi, A.; Deng, J.; Klug, J.;
Myint, P.; Zhou, T.; Schwarz, N.; Cherukara, M.; Sandy, A.; Vogt, S. Pty-Chi: A
PyTorch-based modern ptychographic data analysis package. arXiv [physics.optics]
2025,
29


--- Page 31 ---
(11) Liu, F.; Tong, X.; Yuan, M.; Lin, X.; Luo, F.; Wang, Z.; Lu, Z.; Zhang, Q. Evolution
of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic algorithm design using large language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02051 2024,
(12) van Stein, N.; B¨ack, T. Llamea: A large language model evolutionary algorithm for
automatically generating metaheuristics. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Compu-
tation 2024,
(13) Zimmermann, Y.; Bazgir, A.; Al-Feghali, A.; Ansari, M.; Bocarsly, J.; Brinson, L. C.;
Chiang, Y.; Circi, D.; Chiu, M.-H.; Daelman, N.; others 34 Examples of LLM Appli-
cations in Materials Science and Chemistry: Towards Automation, Assistants, Agents,
and Accelerated Scientific Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.03049 2025,
(14) Prince, M. H.; Chan, H.; Vriza, A.; Zhou, T.; Sastry, V. K.; Luo, Y.; Dearing, M. T.;
Harder, R. J.; Vasudevan, R. K.; Cherukara, M. J. Opportunities for retrieval and tool
augmented large language models in scientific facilities. npj Computational Materials
2024, 10, 251.
(15) Rodenburg, J. M.; Faulkner, H. M. L. A phase retrieval algorithm for shifting illumi-
nation. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2004, 85, 4795–4797.
(16) Maiden, A. M.; Rodenburg, J. M. An improved ptychographical phase retrieval algo-
rithm for diffractive imaging. Ultramicroscopy 2009, 109, 1256–1262.
(17) Maiden, A.; Johnson, D.; Li, P. Further improvements to the ptychographical iterative
engine. Optica 2017, 4, 710–736.
(18) Odstrˇcil, M.; Menzel, A.; Guizar-Sicairos, M. Iterative least-squares solver for general-
ized maximum-likelihood ptychography. Opt. Express 2018, 26, 3108–3123.
(19) Elser, V. Phase retrieval by iterated projections. J. Opt. Soc. Am. 2003, 20, 40.
30


--- Page 32 ---
(20) Wakonig, K.; Stadler, H.-C.; Odstrˇcil, M.; Tsai, E. H. R.; Diaz, A.; Holler, M.; Usov, I.;
Raabe, J.; Menzel, A.; Guizar-Sicairos, M. PtychoShelves, a versatile high-level frame-
work for high-performance analysis of ptychographic data. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2020,
53.
(21) Nashed, Y. S. G.; Vine, D. J.; Peterka, T.; Deng, J.; Ross, R.; Jacobsen, C. Parallel
ptychographic reconstruction. Opt. Express 2014, 22, 32082–32016.
(22) Yue, K.; Deng, J.; Jiang, Y.; Nashed, Y.; Vine, D.; Vogt, S. Ptychopy: GPU framework
for ptychographic data analysis. X-Ray Nanoimaging: Instruments and Methods V.
2021.
(23) Enders, B.; Thibault, P. A computational framework for ptychographic reconstructions.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
2016, 472, 20160640.
(24) Favre-Nicolin, V.; Girard, G.; Leake, S.; Carnis, J.; Chushkin, Y.; Kieffer, J.; Paleo, P.;
Richard, M.-I. PyNX: high-performance computing toolkit for coherent X-ray imaging
based on operators. J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2020, 53, 1404–1413.
(25) Paszke, A. et al. PyTorch: An Imperative Style, High-Performance Deep Learning
Library. arXiv 2019,
(26) Guizar-Sicairos, M.; Thibault, P. Ptychography: A solution to the phase problem.
Physics Today 2021, 74, 42–48.
(27) Liu, S.; Xu, Z.; Xing, Z.; Zhang, X.; Li, R.; Qin, Z.; Wang, Y.; Tai, R. Periodic artifacts
generation and suppression in X-ray ptychography. Photonics. 2023; p 532.
(28) Maiden, A. M.; Humphry, M. J.; Rodenburg, J. M. Ptychographic transmission mi-
croscopy in three dimensions using a multi-slice approach. Journal of the Optical Society
of America a 2012, 29, 1606–1614.
31


--- Page 33 ---
(29) Suzuki, A.; Furutaku, S.; Shimomura, K.; Yamauchi, K.; Kohmura, Y.; Ishikawa, T.;
Takahashi, Y. High-resolution multislice x-ray ptychography of extended thick objects.
Physical review letters 2014, 112, 053903.
(30) O’Leary, C. M.; Sha, H.; Zhang, J.; Su, C.; Kahn, S.; Jiang, H.; Zettl, A.; Ciston, J.;
Miao, J. Three-dimensional structure of buried heterointerfaces revealed by multislice
ptychography. Physical Review Applied 2024, 22, 014016.
(31) Du, M.; Huang, X.; Jacobsen, C. Using a modified double deep image prior for crosstalk
mitigation in multislice ptychography. Journal of Synchrotron Radiation 2021, 28,
1137–1145.
(32) Seifert, J.; Shao, Y.; Van Dam, R.; Bouchet, D.; Van Leeuwen, T.; Mosk, A. P.
Maximum-likelihood estimation in ptychography in the presence of Poisson–Gaussian
noise statistics. Optics Letters 2023, 48, 6027–6030.
(33) Leidl, M. L.; Diederichs, B.; Sachse, C.; M¨uller-Caspary, K. Influence of loss function
and electron dose on ptychography of 2D materials using the Wirtinger flow. Micron
2024, 185, 103688.
(34) Wu, L.; Yoo, S.; Chu, Y. S.; Huang, X.; Robinson, I. K. Dose-efficient automatic
differentiation for ptychographic reconstruction. Optica 2024, 11, 821–830.
(35) Rudin, L. I.; Osher, S.; Fatemi, E. Nonlinear total variation based noise removal algo-
rithms. Physica D: nonlinear phenomena 1992, 60, 259–268.
(36) Bredies, K.; Kunisch, K.; Pock, T. Total generalized variation. SIAM Journal on Imag-
ing Sciences 2010, 3, 492–526.
(37) Weickert, J.; others Anisotropic diffusion in image processing; Teubner Stuttgart, 1998;
Vol. 1.
32


--- Page 34 ---
(38) Ulyanov, D.; Vedaldi, A.; Lempitsky, V. Deep image prior. Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 2018; pp 9446–9454.
(39) Venkatakrishnan, S. V.; Bouman, C. A.; Wohlberg, B. Plug-and-play priors for model
based reconstruction. 2013 IEEE global conference on signal and information process-
ing. 2013; pp 945–948.
(40) Zhang, K.; Li, Y.; Zuo, W.; Zhang, L.; Van Gool, L.; Timofte, R. Plug-and-play im-
age restoration with deep denoiser prior. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 2021, 44, 6360–6376.
(41) Kamilov, U. S.; Bouman, C. A.; Buzzard, G. T.; Wohlberg, B. Plug-and-play meth-
ods for integrating physical and learned models in computational imaging: Theory,
algorithms, and applications. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 2023, 40, 85–97.
(42) Maiden, A. M.; Rodenburg, J. M. An improved ptychographical phase retrieval algo-
rithm for diffractive imaging. Ultramicroscopy 2009, 109, 1256–1262.
(43) Aslan, S.; Liu, Z.; Nikitin, V.; Bicer, T.; Leyffer, S.; G¨ursoy, D. Joint ptycho-
tomography with deep generative priors. Machine Learning: Science and Technology
2021, 2, 045017.
(44) Barutcu, S.; G¨ursoy, D.; Katsaggelos, A. K. Compressive ptychography using deep
image and generative priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.02397 2022,
(45) Cam, R. M.; Deng, J.; Kettimuthu, R.; Cherukara, M. J.; Bicer, T. Ptychographic
image reconstruction from limited data via score-based diffusion models with physics-
guidance. 2025 IEEE 35th International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal
Processing (MLSP). 2025; pp 1–6.
(46) Du, M.; Rose, V.; Deng, J.; Singh, D.; Chen, S.; Cherukara, M. Fidelity-preserving
33


--- Page 35 ---
enhancement of ptychography with foundational text-to-image models. Optica 2026,
13, 45–56.
(47) Umeike, R.; Getty, N.; Xiangyu, Y.; Jiang, Y. Adapting General-Purpose Foundation
Models for X-ray Ptychography in Low-Data Regimes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02503
2025,
(48) Huang, X.; Yan, H.; Ge, M.; ¨Ozt¨urk, H.; Nazaretski, E.; Robinson, I. K.; Chu, Y. S. Ar-
tifact mitigation of ptychography integrated with on-the-fly scanning probe microscopy.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2017, 111, 023103.
(49) Perona, P.; Malik, J. Scale-space and edge detection using anisotropic diffusion. IEEE
Transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 2002, 12, 629–639.
(50) Huber, P. J. Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution; Springer, 1992;
pp 492–518.
(51) Kingma, D. P.; Ba, J. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization. International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR). 2015.
(52) Barzilai, J.; Borwein, J. M. Two-point step size gradient methods. IMA journal of
numerical analysis 1988, 8, 141–148.
Best Discovered Regularization Algorithms
This appendix presents the complete source code of the best regularization algorithm dis-
covered by Ptychi-Evolve for each of the three datasets. Each algorithm is a drop-in
regularize llm(self) method that operates on self.data (a complex-valued tensor of
shape [S, H, W] representing the object slices) and writes the regularized result back via
self.set data().
34


--- Page 36 ---
Multislice X-ray (Algorithm 5efac846, SSIM 0.871)
Listing 1: Best discovered regularizer for the multislice X-ray dataset. Combines isotropic
3-D Charbonnier total variation, multi-slice gradient exclusion, Gram orthogonality, and
complementary spectral masking, all updated via a stateful complex Adam optimizer with
a three-phase learning rate schedule.
1
def
regularize_llm (self):
2
"""Hybrid
regulariser
combining
four
gradient
components
3
with a stateful
complex
Adam
optimizer."""
4
import
math , torch
5
6
# ---- Shorthands
and
bookkeeping
----
7
x = self.data
# (S, H, W), complex
8
dev , dt = x.device , x.dtype
9
S, H, W = x.shape
10
eps = 1e-8
11
12
# Track
the
iteration
count
across
calls
13
it = getattr(self , "_iter_cnt", 0) + 1
14
self._iter_cnt = it
15
16
# Initialize
Adam
optimizer
state on first
call
17
if not all(hasattr(self , k) for k in ("_adam_m", "_adam_v", "_adam_t")):
18
self._adam_m = torch.zeros_like (x)
# first
moment
19
self._adam_v = torch.zeros_like (x.real)
# second
moment (real)
20
self._adam_t = 0
21
self._adam_t
+= 1
22
23
# Mixed -precision
helper: use
fp16
scratch
buffers
on CUDA
24
def _mp(t):
25
if (t. is_floating_point () and t.dtype == torch.float32
26
and
torch.cuda. is_available ()):
27
return t.to(torch.float16)
28
return t
29
30
# ---- Hyper -parameters
----
31
LR_BASE
= 2.4e-2
# base
learning
rate
32
LR_WARMUP = 5
# linear warm -up
iterations
33
LR_DECAY
= 0.990
# exponential
decay
factor
34
COS_START = 120
# cosine
tail
begins
here
35
b1 , b2
= 0.9, 0.999
# Adam
momentum
parameters
36
STEP_CLAMP = 0.08
# per -element
step
size
clamp
37
38
LAM_TV0
= 3.9e-3
# TV
strength
39
TV_K
= 1.2
# logistic
steepness
for TV weight
40
LAM_DEPTH = 6.8e-3
# depth -axis TV weight
41
D_CHAR
= 3.3e-2
# Charbonnier
smoothing
parameter
42
LAM_EXCL
= 1.9e-3
# gradient
exclusion
strength
43
LAM_CORR
= 2.9e-3
# Gram
orthogonality
strength
44
LAM_SPEC0 = 1.4e-3
# spectral
mask
initial
strength
45
F_CUT
= 0.18
# Butterworth
radial
cutoff
46
47
# ---- Finite
differences (reflective
boundary) ----
48
dx = x - torch.cat([x[... , :, 1:], x[... , :,
-1:]], dim =-1)
49
dy = x - torch.cat([x[... , 1:, :], x[... ,
-1:, :]], dim =-2)
50
if S > 1:
51
dz = torch.zeros_like(x)
52
dz[: -1] = x[: -1] - x[1:]
# reflective
BC at last
slice
53
else:
54
dz = torch.zeros_like(x)
55
56
# ---- Adaptive
contrast
weight
for TV
----
57
# Blend
reciprocal
and
logistic
weighting
maps ,
58
# clipped
at the 5th and 95th
percentiles
59
g_xy = (dx.abs () + dy.abs()).mean(dim=(-2,
-1), keepdim=True) + eps
35


--- Page 37 ---
60
flat_c = g_xy.view (-1)
61
p5 , p95 = torch.quantile(
62
flat_c , torch.tensor ([0.05 , 0.95] ,
device=dev))
63
g_clamp = g_xy.clamp(p5 , p95)
64
mu , sig = g_clamp.mean (), g_clamp.std ().clamp(min=eps)
65
w_rcp = (g_clamp.mean () / g_clamp).clamp (0.5 , 2.0)
66
w_log = torch.sigmoid(TV_K * (mu - g_clamp) / sig)
67
tv_wgt = LAM_TV0 * 0.5 * (w_rcp + w_log)
68
69
# ====
Component
1:
Isotropic 3-D Charbonnier
TV ====
70
dz_mod = LAM_DEPTH * dz
71
denom = torch.sqrt(
72
dx.abs() **2 + dy.abs ()**2 + dz_mod.abs () **2 + D_CHAR **2)
73
w_iso = tv_wgt / denom
74
tvx , tvy , tvz = _mp(w_iso * dx), _mp(w_iso * dy), _mp(w_iso * dz_mod)
75
# Compute
divergence (scatter -add)
76
tv_grad = torch.zeros_like(x)
77
tv_grad [... , :, :-1] += tvx [... , :, :-1]
78
tv_grad [... , :,
1:]
-= tvx [... , :, :-1]
79
tv_grad [... , :-1, :] += tvy [... , :-1, :]
80
tv_grad [... ,
1:, :]
-= tvy [... , :-1, :]
81
if S > 1:
82
tv_grad [: -1] += tvz [: -1]
83
tv_grad [1:]
-= tvz [: -1]
84
85
# ====
Component
2: Multi -slice
gradient
exclusion
====
86
# Penalize co -located
edges
across
slices (DDIP -style)
87
excl_grad = torch.zeros_like(x)
88
if S > 1 and
LAM_EXCL
> 0:
89
g_mag = torch.sqrt(dx.real **2 + dy.real **2 + eps)
90
share = g_mag.sum(dim=0, keepdim=True) - g_mag
91
w_ex = _mp(LAM_EXCL * share / (g_mag + D_CHAR))
92
dx_ex , dy_ex = w_ex * dx , w_ex * dy
93
excl_grad [... , :, :-1] += dx_ex [... , :, :-1]
94
excl_grad [... , :,
1:]
-= dx_ex [... , :, :-1]
95
excl_grad [... , :-1, :] += dy_ex [... , :-1, :]
96
excl_grad [... ,
1:, :]
-= dy_ex [... , :-1, :]
97
98
# ====
Component
3: Slice Gram - orthogonality
====
99
# Minimize off -diagonal
elements
of the
slice
Gram
matrix
100
# to
encourage
independent
slice
content
101
flat = x.view(S,
-1)
102
if S > 32:
# low -rank
random
projection
for
many
slices
103
k = min(32, max(8, S // 4))
104
if not (hasattr(self , "_rand_proj")
105
and
self._rand_proj.shape == (k, S)):
106
self._rand_proj = torch.randn(
107
k, S, device=dev , dtype=flat.real.dtype)
108
Y = self._rand_proj @ flat
109
Gk = flat @ Y.T
110
frob = torch.linalg.norm(Gk) + eps
111
corr_grad = (2.0 * LAM_CORR / frob) * (Gk @ Y)
112
else:
# full
Gram
matrix
path
113
G = flat.conj () @ flat.T
114
G. fill_diagonal_ (0.0)
115
frob = torch.linalg.norm(G) + eps
116
corr_grad = (2.0 * LAM_CORR / frob) * (G @ flat)
117
corr_grad = corr_grad.view_as(x)
118
119
# ====
Component
4:
Complementary
spectral
masking
====
120
# 6th -order
Butterworth
filter; low -contrast
slices
get
121
# high -pass , others
get low -pass. Strength
is
annealed.
122
lam_spec = LAM_SPEC0 * math.exp(-max(0, it - 5) / 20.0)
123
if
lam_spec
< 1e-6:
124
spec_grad = torch.zeros_like(x)
125
else:
126
cache = getattr(self , "_freq_cache ", None)
127
if not (isinstance(cache , dict)
128
and
cache.get("shape") == (H, W)):
129
fy = torch.fft.fftfreq(H, device=dev ,
130
dtype=x.real.dtype).view(-1, 1)
131
fx = torch.fft.fftfreq(W, device=dev ,
36


--- Page 38 ---
132
dtype=x.real.dtype).view(1,
-1)
133
fr = torch.sqrt(fx**2 + fy **2) + eps
134
low
= 1.0 / (1.0 + (fr / F_CUT)**6)
135
high = 1.0 - low
136
self. _freq_cache = {
137
"shape": (H, W), "low": low , "high": high}
138
low_m = self. _freq_cache["low"]
139
high_m = self._freq_cache["high"]
140
is_low = (g_clamp
< g_clamp.mean ()).to(x.real.dtype)
141
mask = is_low * high_m + (1.0 - is_low) * low_m
142
F = torch.fft.fft2(x)
143
spec_grad = lam_spec * torch.fft.ifft2(mask * F)
144
145
# ---- Aggregate
gradient
with
robust
clamping
----
146
grad = tv_grad + excl_grad + corr_grad + spec_grad
147
grad = torch.nan_to_num(grad)
148
# Stage 1: scale -invariant
median
clamp
149
med = torch.median(grad.abs()) + eps
150
grad = grad * torch.clamp(
151
4.0 * med / (grad.abs () + eps), max =1.0)
152
# Stage 2: per -slice L2 norm
clamp
153
gn = torch.linalg.norm(
154
grad.view(S,
-1), dim=1, keepdim=True) + eps
155
thr = 4.0 * torch.median(gn)
156
grad = (grad.view(S,
-1)
157
* torch.clamp(thr / gn , max =1.0)).view_as(x)
158
159
# ---- Complex
Adam
update
----
160
m = self._adam_m = b1 * self._adam_m + (1 - b1) * grad
161
v = self._adam_v = (b2 * self._adam_v
162
+ (1 - b2) * (grad.real **2 + grad.imag **2))
163
m_hat = m / (1 - b1 ** self._adam_t)
164
v_hat = v / (1 - b2 ** self._adam_t)
165
# Three -phase LR: warm -up -> exponential
decay
-> cosine
tail
166
if it
<= LR_WARMUP:
167
lr = LR_BASE * it / LR_WARMUP
168
else:
169
lr = LR_BASE * (LR_DECAY
** (it - LR_WARMUP))
170
if it > COS_START:
171
cos_fac = 0.5 * (1 + math.cos(
172
math.pi * (it - COS_START) / COS_START))
173
lr *= max(cos_fac , 0.0)
174
step = lr * m_hat / (torch.sqrt(v_hat) + eps)
175
# Per -element
step
clamp
for
stability
176
step = (torch.clamp(step.real , -STEP_CLAMP , STEP_CLAMP )
177
+ 1j * torch.clamp(step.imag , -STEP_CLAMP , STEP_CLAMP))
178
179
x_new = x - step
180
181
# ---- Per -slice L2
renormalization
----
182
old_n = torch.linalg.norm(
183
x.view(S,
-1), dim=1, keepdim=True).clamp(min=eps)
184
new_n = torch.linalg.norm(
185
x_new.view(S,
-1), dim=1, keepdim=True).clamp(min=eps)
186
x_new = (x_new.view(S,
-1) * (old_n / new_n)).view_as(x)
187
x_new = torch.nan_to_num(x_new)
188
189
self.set_data(x_new)
X-ray Integrated Circuit (Algorithm 0165719f, SSIM 0.785)
37


--- Page 39 ---
Listing 2: Best discovered regularizer for the X-ray integrated circuit dataset. Features an
internal iterative optimization loop with separate amplitude (25 iterations) and phase (15
iterations) denoising sub-problems, structure-tensor-guided anisotropic Huber-TV, Barzilai–
Borwein step size with Armijo acceptance, and automatic notch filtering of periodic artifacts.
1
def
regularize_llm (self):
2
"""Multi -scale
anisotropic
DTGV -Huber
regulariser
3
with
adaptive
notch
filtering."""
4
import
torch
5
import
torch.nn.functional
as F
6
7
# ---- Helper
functions
----
8
def
_grad(u):
9
"""Forward
finite
differences
along x and y."""
10
gy , gx = torch.gradient(u, dim=(-2,
-1))
11
return gx , gy
12
13
def
_div(px , py):
14
"""Discrete
divergence (adjoint
of _grad)."""
15
dpx_dx = torch.gradient(px , dim=(-2,
-1))[1]
16
dpy_dy = torch.gradient(py , dim=(-2,
-1))[0]
17
return
dpx_dx + dpy_dy
18
19
def
_lap(u):
20
"""Discrete
Laplacian."""
21
return
_div (* _grad(u))
22
23
def
_orientation_field (a, kernel):
24
"""Estimate
local
orientation
from
structure
tensor."""
25
gx , gy = _grad(a)
26
conv = lambda t: F.conv2d(
27
t.unsqueeze (1), kernel , padding =1).squeeze (1)
28
J11 , J22 , J12 = conv(gx*gx), conv(gy*gy), conv(gx*gy)
29
theta = 0.5 * torch.atan2(
30
2.0 * J12 , J11 - J22 + 1e -12)
31
return
torch.cos(theta), torch.sin(theta)
32
33
def
_build_notch_mask (a, k=8, sigma_frac =0.01):
34
"""Detect
periodic
artifacts
from
the
power
spectrum
35
and
build a multiplicative
notch -rejection
mask."""
36
Hn , Wn = a.shape [-2], a.shape [-1]
37
Famp = torch.fft.fftshift(
38
torch.fft.fftn(a, dim=(-2,
-1)), dim=(-2,
-1))
39
power = Famp.real **2 + Famp.imag **2
40
# Zero
out DC
neighborhood
41
power[Hn //2 -1:Hn//2+2 , Wn //2 -1: Wn //2+2] = 0
42
vals , idx = torch.topk(power.flatten (), k=k)
43
sigma = sigma_frac * min(Hn , Wn)
44
yy , xx = idx // Wn , idx % Wn
45
yv , xv = torch.meshgrid(
46
torch.arange(Hn , device=a.device),
47
torch.arange(Wn , device=a.device), indexing=’ij’)
48
H = torch.ones_like(power)
49
thresh = power.mean () * 10
50
for y0 , x0 , v in zip(yy , xx , vals):
51
if v < thresh:
52
continue
53
d2 = (xv - x0)**2 + (yv - y0)**2
54
g = torch.exp ( -0.5 * d2 / sigma **2)
55
H *= (1.0 - g)
56
# Symmetric
notch
partner
57
g2 = torch.roll(torch.roll(
58
g, shifts=Hn//2, dims =0) , shifts=Wn//2, dims =1)
59
H *= (1.0 - g2)
60
return H
61
62
# ---- Setup
----
38


--- Page 40 ---
63
z = self.data
64
single = (z.ndim == 2)
65
if single:
66
z = z.unsqueeze (0)
67
device = z.device
68
c_dtype , r_dtype = z.dtype , torch.float32
69
S, H, W = z.shape
70
71
# Polar
decomposition : separate
amplitude
and
phase
72
amp = torch.abs(z).to(r_dtype)
73
phi = torch.angle(z).to(r_dtype)
74
support = getattr(self , ’support_mask ’, None)
75
if
support
is not
None:
76
if
support.ndim == 2:
77
support = support.unsqueeze (0)
78
support = support.to(device=device , dtype=r_dtype)
79
80
# ---- Hyper -parameters
----
81
lam_tv
= 3e-3
# amplitude
TV
strength
82
lam_tgv2 = 1e-3
# second -order
TGV
strength
83
lam_phi
= 8e-4
# phase TV
strength
84
lam_cplx = 5e-4
# complex
TV
strength
85
lam_fft
= 2e-3
# notch
filter
strength
86
n_amp_iter
= 25
# amplitude sub - iterations
87
n_phi_iter
= 15
# phase sub - iterations
88
n_cplx_iter = 2
# complex
TV
iterations
89
tau_amp0 = 0.24
# initial
amplitude
step
size
90
tau_phi0 = 0.24
# initial
phase
step
size
91
huber_eps0 = 1e-3
# Huber
threshold (annealed)
92
anisotropy = 4.0
# directional
anisotropy
ratio
93
orient_every = 5
# re -estimate
orientation
interval
94
tol = 5e-4
# early
stopping
tolerance
95
device_eps = torch.tensor (1e-12, dtype=r_dtype , device=device)
96
97
# Gaussian
smoothing
kernel
for
structure
tensor
98
k = torch.tensor(
99
[[1 ,2 ,1] ,[2 ,4 ,2] ,[1 ,2 ,1]] ,
100
dtype=r_dtype , device=device).view (1,1,3,3) / 16.0
101
102
# Build
notch
mask
from
amplitude
power
spectrum
103
notch_H = _build_notch_mask (amp[0], k=8).to(r_dtype)
104
105
# ====
Amplitude
denoising
(25
iterations ) ====
106
# Anisotropic
Huber -TV guided
by
structure
tensor ,
107
# with
Barzilai -Borwein
step
size
and
Armijo
acceptance
108
huber_eps = torch.tensor(huber_eps0 , dtype=r_dtype , device=device)
109
tau_amp = torch.tensor(tau_amp0 , dtype=r_dtype , device=device)
110
amp_prev = upd_prev = None
111
vx , vy = _orientation_field (amp , k)
112
113
for it in range(n_amp_iter):
114
# Re -estimate
local
orientation
periodically
115
if it % orient_every
== 0:
116
vx , vy = _orientation_field (amp , k)
117
118
gx , gy = _grad(amp)
119
g_norm = torch.sqrt(gx*gx + gy*gy + device_eps )
120
121
# Decompose
gradient
into
parallel
and
perpendicular
122
# components
relative
to the
local
edge
direction
123
g_par
= vx*gx + vy*gy
124
g_perp = -vy*gx + vx*gy
125
alpha = torch.abs(g_perp) / (
126
torch.abs(g_par) + torch.abs(g_perp) + device_eps )
127
coeff = 1.0 + (anisotropy
- 1.0) * alpha
128
129
# Huber -weighted
anisotropic
TV
gradient
130
px = gx / (coeff * g_norm + huber_eps)
131
py = gy / (coeff * g_norm + huber_eps)
132
upd = lam_tv * _div(px , py) - lam_tgv2 * _lap(amp)
133
amp_new = amp + tau_amp * upd
134
39


--- Page 41 ---
135
# Barzilai -Borwein
step
size
with
Armijo
acceptance
136
if
amp_prev
is not
None:
137
s = (amp_new
- amp_prev).flatten ()
138
y = (upd - upd_prev).flatten ()
139
sy = torch.dot(s, y)
140
yy = torch.dot(y, y) + device_eps
141
tau_bb = torch.clamp(sy / yy , 1e-4, 0.25)
142
# Accept
BB step
only if it
reduces
energy
143
E_old = (lam_tv * g_norm.mean ()
144
+ lam_tgv2 * _lap(amp).abs ().mean ())
145
amp_try = amp + tau_bb * upd
146
gx_t , gy_t = _grad(amp_try)
147
E_new = (lam_tv * torch.sqrt(
148
gx_t **2 + gy_t **2 + device_eps ).mean ()
149
+ lam_tgv2 * _lap(amp_try).abs ().mean ())
150
if E_new < E_old:
151
tau_amp = tau_bb
152
153
amp_prev , upd_prev = amp , upd
154
amp = amp_new
155
if
support
is not
None:
156
amp = amp * support
157
# Anneal
Huber
threshold
every 4 iterations
158
if (it + 1) % 4 == 0:
159
huber_eps
*= 0.9
160
# Early
stopping
on
relative
update
magnitude
161
rel = (torch.mean(torch.abs(upd))
162
/ (torch.mean(torch.abs(amp)) + device_eps ))
163
if rel < tol:
164
break
165
166
amp = torch.clamp(amp , min =0.0)
167
168
# ====
Phase
denoising
(15
iterations ) ====
169
# Amplitude -weighted
Huber -TV on the
phase
channel
170
tau_phi = tau_phi0
171
huber_eps = huber_eps0
172
w_phi = lam_phi / (amp + 1e-6)
# weight
inversely
by
amplitude
173
174
for it in range(n_phi_iter):
175
phx , phy = _grad(phi)
176
ph_norm = torch.sqrt(phx **2 + phy **2 + device_eps )
177
qx = w_phi * phx / (ph_norm + huber_eps)
178
qy = w_phi * phy / (ph_norm + huber_eps)
179
phi_new = phi + tau_phi * _div(qx , qy)
180
# Wrap
phase to [-pi , pi]
181
phi = (phi_new + torch.pi) % (2.0* torch.pi) - torch.pi
182
if (it + 1) % 4 == 0:
183
huber_eps
*= 0.9
184
rel = (torch.mean(torch.abs(phi - phi_new))
185
/ (torch.mean(torch.abs(phi)) + device_eps ))
186
if rel < tol:
187
break
188
189
# ====
Joint
complex
TV (2
iterations ) ====
190
z = torch.polar(amp , phi).to(c_dtype)
191
tau_c = 0.24
192
for _ in range( n_cplx_iter ):
193
r, i = z.real.to(r_dtype), z.imag.to(r_dtype)
194
rx , ry = _grad(r)
195
ix , iy = _grad(i)
196
rn = torch.sqrt(rx**2 + ry **2 + device_eps )
197
in_ = torch.sqrt(ix **2 + iy **2 + device_eps)
198
r = r + tau_c * lam_cplx * _div(
199
rx/(rn+device_eps), ry/(rn+ device_eps ))
200
i = i + tau_c * lam_cplx * _div(
201
ix/( in_+device_eps), iy/( in_+device_eps ))
202
z = r.to(c_dtype) + 1j * i.to(c_dtype)
203
204
# ====
Notch
filtering
of
periodic
artifacts
====
205
if
lam_fft
> 0:
206
Zf = torch.fft.fftn(z, dim=(-2,
-1))
40


--- Page 42 ---
207
Zf_shift = torch.fft.fftshift(Zf , dim=(-2,
-1))
208
Zf_shift
*= (1.0 - lam_fft * notch_H).to(c_dtype)
209
z = torch.fft.ifftn(
210
torch.fft.ifftshift(Zf_shift , dim=(-2,
-1)),
211
dim=(-2,
-1))
212
213
# Softplus
amplitude
activation
and
support
masking
214
beta = 1.0 / (amp.std(unbiased=False) + 1e -6)
215
z_amp = F.softplus(torch.abs(z), beta=beta)
216
z = torch.polar(z_amp.to(r_dtype), torch.angle(z)).to(c_dtype)
217
if
support
is not
None:
218
z = z * support.to(c_dtype)
219
220
if single:
221
self.set_data(z[0])
222
else:
223
self.set_data(z)
Apoferritin (Algorithm 6d2c9f3f, SSIM 0.836)
Listing 3: Best discovered regularizer for the apoferritin dataset. Implements a sequential
signal-processing pipeline: noise-adaptive soft-Huber shrinkage, cascaded guided filtering,
Itoh phase unwrapping, Perona–Malik anisotropic diffusion, and a weak L2 anchor to the
original estimate.
1
def
regularize_llm (self):
2
"""Hybrid
regulariser
-- crossover
of two
parental
variants.
3
Sequential
signal -processing
pipeline
operating
in polar
4
(amplitude/phase) coordinates ."""
5
import
math
6
import
torch
7
import
torch.nn.functional
as F
8
9
data0 = self.data
# [S, H, W], complex
10
dev , cdt = data0.device , data0.dtype
11
rdt = data0.real.dtype
12
eps = 1e-6
13
two_pi = 2.0 * math.pi
14
S, H, W = data0.shape
15
16
# ---- Utility
functions
----
17
def
_box(x, r):
18
"""Fast 2-D box
mean
via
average
pooling."""
19
if r <= 0:
20
return x
21
return F.avg_pool2d(x, 2*r+1, stride =1, padding=r)
22
23
def
_grad(u):
24
"""Forward
differences
via
circular
shift."""
25
gx = torch.roll(u, -1, 2) - u
26
gy = torch.roll(u, -1, 1) - u
27
return
torch.stack ((gx , gy), dim =0)
28
29
def
_div(p):
30
"""Discrete
divergence (adjoint
of _grad)."""
31
px , py = p[0], p[1]
32
return
((px - torch.roll(px , 1, 2))
33
+ (py - torch.roll(py , 1, 1)))
34
35
def _Lc(u, c):
36
""" Anisotropic
diffusion
operator: div(c * grad(u))."""
41


--- Page 43 ---
37
return
_div(c * _grad(u))
38
39
# ====
Step 1: Polar
decomposition
====
40
amp = data0.abs ()
41
phi = torch.angle(data0)
42
43
# ====
Step 2: Noise -adaptive
soft -Huber
shrinkage
====
44
# Shrink
amplitude
toward
1.0
with data -driven
threshold
45
glob_var = amp.var(unbiased=False)
46
k_min , k_max = 0.07 , 0.20
47
k_soft = k_min + (k_max - k_min) * torch.sigmoid(
48
(glob_var
- 0.02) * 25.0)
49
delta = amp - 1.0
50
amp = 1.0 + delta * (k_soft / (delta.abs () + k_soft + eps))
51
52
# ====
Step 3:
Cascaded
guided
filtering
====
53
# Multi -radius
edge -preserving
smoothing
driven by
54
# local
variance
55
for r in (1, 2):
56
mean_r = _box(amp.unsqueeze (1) , r).squeeze (1)
57
var_r = _box(
58
(amp - mean_r).pow (2).unsqueeze (1) , r).squeeze (1)
59
w_r = 1.0 / (var_r + eps)
60
amp = (mean_r + w_r * amp) / (1.0 + w_r)
61
62
# Optional 3x3
Gaussian
smoothing
for high -noise
regime
63
if
glob_var
> 0.1:
64
gk = torch.tensor(
65
[[1 ,2 ,1] ,[2 ,4 ,2] ,[1 ,2 ,1]] ,
66
dtype=rdt , device=dev).reshape (1,1,3,3) / 16.0
67
amp = F.conv2d(
68
amp.unsqueeze (1), gk , padding =1).squeeze (1)
69
70
# ====
Step 4: 2-D Itoh
phase
unwrapping
====
71
# Sequential row -then -column
pass
per
slice
72
phi_u = phi.clone ()
73
for s in range(S):
74
# Unwrap
along
rows
75
d_row = phi_u[s, :, 1:] - phi_u[s, :, :-1]
76
d_row = (d_row + math.pi) % two_pi - math.pi
77
phi_u[s, :, 1:] = phi_u[s, :, :-1] + d_row
78
# Unwrap
along
columns
79
d_col = phi_u[s, 1:, :] - phi_u[s, :-1, :]
80
d_col = (d_col + math.pi) % two_pi - math.pi
81
phi_u[s, 1:, :] = phi_u[s, :-1, :] + d_col
82
83
# Remove DC/ramp by
subtracting
slice
mean
84
phi_u = phi_u - phi_u.mean(dim =(1, 2), keepdim=True)
85
86
# ====
Step 5: Perona -Malik
anisotropic
diffusion
====
87
# Edge -preserving
smoothing
of the
unwrapped
phase
88
lam_pm = 0.1
# contrast
parameter
89
for _ in range (5):
90
grad_u = _grad(phi_u)
91
mag2 = grad_u [0]. pow (2) + grad_u [1]. pow (2)
92
# Conduction
coefficient: preserves
edges
93
c = 1.0 / (1.0 + mag2 / (lam_pm **2) + eps)
94
phi_u = phi_u + 0.1 * _Lc(phi_u , c)
95
96
# ====
Step 6: L2
anchor to
original
estimate
====
97
# Blend
regularized
result
with
original
to
prevent
98
# over -smoothing
(90%
regularized , 10%
original)
99
alpha = 0.1
100
data_new = torch.polar(amp , phi_u)
101
data_out = alpha * data0 + (1.0 - alpha) * data_new.to(cdt)
102
103
self.set_data(data_out)
42
