--- Page 1 ---
1
SLO-Aware Compute Resource Allocation for Prefill-Decode
Disaggregated LLM Inference
Luchang Li*, Dongfang Li, Bozhao Gong, Yu Zhang
Kingsoft Cloud
Abstract
Prefill-Decode (P/D) disaggregation has emerged as a widely adopted optimization strategy
for Large Language Model (LLM) inference. However, there currently exists no
well-established methodology for determining the optimal number of P/D hardware
resources, subject to constraints on total throughput, service level objectives (SLOs), and
request characteristics—specifically input and output lengths. To address this gap, we
propose
a
hybrid
approach
that
combines
theoretical
modeling
with
empirical
benchmarking. First, we present a theoretical model for calculating P/D resource counts,
which is based on total throughput requirements, request input and output lengths, as well
as prefill and decode throughput. Then, to obtain the actual prefill and decode throughput
under SLO constraints, we model the prefill process using M/M/1 queuing theory, deriving
the achieved prefill throughput from the benchmarked maximum prefill throughput and
Time-To-First-Token (TTFT). For the decode phase, we determine the decode batch sizes
that meet Time-Per-Output-Token (TPOT) requirements and obtain the corresponding
decode throughput through empirical measurements. Our experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed method can accurately predict optimal P/D resource allocation in
real-world LLM inference scenarios.
Introduction
Large Language Model (LLM) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide range
of tasks[9, 16, 20, 24], driving a surge in demand for inference serving. Deploying LLM with
high performance while satisfying Service Level Objectives (SLOs) is critical to ensuring user
experience and reducing inference costs. Traditionally, LLM inference is deployed in
non-disaggregated manner, where the same set of GPU resources handles compute-bound
prefill and memory-bandwidth-bound decode sequentially. The two distinct phases interfere
with each other, making it difficult to simultaneously optimize the Time To First Token (TTFT)
and Time Per Output Token (TPOT) metrics[12, 23]. It also hinders the independent
optimization of the two phases, for instance, employing different hardware[2, 21], diverse
parallelism strategies, and other approaches to improve throughput.
To mitigate these interference issues, Prefill-Decode (P/D) disaggregation has emerged as a
widely adopted optimization paradigm[2, 5, 12, 21, 23]. By decoupling the two phases into
separate prefill and decode instances, and transferring the KV cache between them, both SLOs
and throughput of the two phases can be independently optimized. Existing frameworks like
vLLM[7],
SGLang[22],
TensorRT-LLM[25]
etc.
have
successfully
implemented
the
mechanisms for P/D disaggregation. However, a critical operational challenge remains: how to
* Corresponding author: liluchang@kingsoft.com


--- Page 2 ---
2
determine the optimal provision of hardware resources (i.e., the specific count of prefill vs.
decode GPUs) for a given workload. Improper P/D resource allocation either results in
resource underutilization or fails to meet the SLO requirements.
Currently, the industry lacks a well established methodology to calculate P/D resource counts
precisely. SGLang deployed DeepSeek V3.1 on P3D9 instances[26], but the specific P/D
instance ratio has not been disclosed. NVIDIA's AIConfigurator[19] employs a search-based
approach to derive optimal deployment strategies for P/D under specific user SLO
requirements, such as parameter settings for Tensor Parallelism (TP), attention Data
Parallelism (DP), Expert Parallelism (EP), among others. Nevertheless, it still fails to provide
a comprehensive resource allocation method for P/D under user’s throughput and SLO
requirements. Some other works[8, 13, 17] also schedule PD resources, but they do not fully
take into account the requirements of SLOs or the actual prefill and decode throughput of the
system.
To address this gap, we propose a novel approach that integrates theoretical modeling with
empirical benchmarking to precisely determine the optimal P/D resource allocation. Our
approach does not targeting the optimal deployment of individual P/D instances. Instead,
under a pre-determined deployment, it determines the resource quantity allocated to P/D
according to user-specified throughput and SLO requirements.
The main contributions of our paper include:

We establish a theoretical model that calculates the count of P/D instances based on total
throughput, SLOs requirements, request input/output length, and the achievable
throughput of P/D stages.

To determine the achievable prefill throughput under TTFT constraints, we model the
prefill process by M/M/1 queuing theory. This allows us to derive the effective prefill
throughput that satisfies TTFT requirements, constrained by the benchmarked maximum
prefill throughput.

Simultaneously, we employ empirical measurements to identify the maximum decode
batch size that satisfies TPOT requirements, thereby deriving the effective decode
throughput .

We demonstrate that our method can accurately predict the optimal P/D resource
allocation in real-world inference scenarios, ensuring both cost-efficiency and strict SLO
compliance.
Method
PD hardware resource quantity calculation
First, the user-specified total throughput refers to the total number of input and output tokens
processed per second. Therefore, the total throughput TPtotal is calculated as follows:
TPtotal =
Nreq∗(Lin+Lout)
Ttotal
(1)
Here, Nreq denotes the number of requests, while Lin and Lout represent the average input and
output sequence lengths per request, respectively. Ttotal refers to the total time required to
complete the prefill and decode computations for all requests.
In a P/D disaggregated system, the input processing and output generation of requests are


--- Page 3 ---
3
handled by the prefill and decode components, respectively. For these two phases, prefill
throughput TPprefill and decode throughput TPdecode are defined as the number of input tokens
processed and output tokens generated per second by a single prefill or decode instance,
respectively. Thus, we obtain the processing times for the prefill and decode phases as follows:
Tprefill =
Nreq∗Lin
TPprefill ∗Nprefill
(2)
Tdecode =
Nreq∗Lout
TPdecode ∗Ndecode
(3)
Here, Nprefill and Ndecode denote the number of prefill and decode instances, respectively. The
P/D disaggregated system adopts pipelined inference, so the total computation time is the
maximum of the prefill and decode computation times. To avoid idling of either the prefill or
decode components, the computation times of the two phases should be equal, i.e.:
Ttotal = Tprefill = Tdecode
(4)
Substituting Formula (2) and Formula (3) into Formula (1), we can derive the number of
prefill and decode instances, respectively:
Nprefill =
TPtotal∗Lin
(Lin+Lout)∗TPprefill
(5)
Ndecode =
TPtotal∗Lout
(Lin+Lout)∗TPdecode
(6)
Dividing Formula (5) by Formula (6) yields the P/D ratio without requiring the total
throughput:
RP/D =
Lin∗TPdecode
Lout∗TPprefill
(7)
In these formulas, the total throughput, input length, and output length are known
user-specified requirements. To determine the number and ratio of P/D instances, it is
necessary to first obtain the throughput of individual prefill and decode instances. The
following sections describe how to calculate the corresponding prefill and decode throughput
under specific SLO requirements and given request input and output lengths.
Acquire prefill throughput under TTFT constraints
In this chapter, we introduce how to obtain the relationship between the actual prefill
throughput that meets the target TTFT and the empirically measured maximum prefill
throughput. First, for the prefill phase, given specific hardware and deployment parameters
(e.g., parallelism like TP and EP, chunked prefill size[1]), and request input length, we can
measure the maximum prefill throughput TPprefill
෣
by fully utilizing prefill GPUs without idle
time. However, different TTFT requirements lead to different prefill computation utilization
rates, resulting in distinct effective prefill throughputs.
In a P/D disaggregated deployment, TTFT includes not only the request queuing time
Tprefill_queuing and computation time Tprefill_computation in the prefill phase, but also certain overhead
time Toverhead. This Toverhead consists of the input and output transmission time of requests
between the user terminal and the GPU server, as well as the transmission time of the KV
cache between the P and D instances. The Toverhead can typically be pre-determined. Therefore,
TTFT is calculated as:


--- Page 4 ---
4
TTFT = Tprefill_queuing + Tprefill_computation + Toverhead
(8)
Second, we model the request queuing and computation process of a single prefill instance as
an M/M/1 queuing problem[3, 6]. Note that when DP[27] is enabled in prefill deployment,
each DP group processes requests independently; thus, the M/M/1 model should be applied to
each DP group separately. For the sake of simplicity, this paper only discusses the scenario
where DP is disabled.
Based on the M/M/1 queuing model, the service rate μ is defined as the ratio of the maximum
prefill throughput to the input sequence length:
μ =
TPprefill
෣
Lin
(9)
The arrival rate λ is defined as the actual request rate, which must be smaller than μ.
According to queuing theory, the system utilization ρ is calculated as:
ρ =
λ
μ
(10)
We then define the actually achieved prefill throughput based on the utilization:
TPprefill = TPprefill
෣
∗ρ
(11)
According to the M/M/1 queuing model, the formula for the sum of the prefill queuing and
computation time is:
Ts = Tprefill_queuing + Tprefill_computation = TTFT −Toverhead =
1
μ−λ
(12)
Finally, based on the above derivations, we can derive the actual throughput from the target
TTFT and the maximum prefill throughput as follows:
TPprefill = TPprefill
෣
−
Lin
TTFT−Toverhead
(13)
Two key insights can be drawn from this formula: first, the lower the target TTFT value, the
lower the actual prefill throughput that can be achieved; second, for the same target TTFT, the
higher the maximum prefill throughput, the higher the system utilization rate that can be
achieved.
Figure 1 Comparison between benchmarked TTFT and M/M/1 queuing theory-predicted TTFT.
Note that the predicted TTFT in this figure does not include the KV cache transmission time
from prefill to decode. In this figure, in means input sequence length, chunk means chunked


--- Page 5 ---
5
prefill size.
We verify the correctness of this theory by comparing the actually measured TTFT with the
value predicted by Formula (12). We deploy one P instance and one D instance using 1
NVIDIA H20 node with the Qwen3-235B-A22B-FP8 model, where each instance occupies 4
GPUs. In addition, we deploy one P instance and one D instance using 2 NVIDIA H200 nodes
with the DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus model, where each instance occupies 1 node with 8 GPUs.
We note that the prefill deployment has a parameter called chunked prefill size. Within a
certain range, the larger the chunked prefill size, the higher the peak prefill throughput, until
saturation is reached. The M/M/1 queuing model requires requests to be processed sequentially,
which holds when the request length is greater than or equal to the chunked prefill size. When
the chunked prefill size is much larger than the request length, multiple requests in the queue
may be batched and processed together, which does not fully align with the M/M/1 queuing
theory.
To fully comply with the assumptions of the M/M/1 queuing theory, we first evaluated the
case where the chunked prefill size equals the request input length. We measured the variation
in request TTFT with request rate for an input length of 4096 on the H20 deployment and for
an input length of 12288 on the H200 deployment. We then evaluated the corresponding
maximum performance and predicted the theoretical TTFT values using Formula (12); the
results are shown in Figure 1. As observed from the figure, the predicted TTFT exhibits
perfect trend consistency with the measured results, apart from a small gap. This gap is
primarily attributed to the KV cache transmission time. Note that the predicted TTFT in Figure
1 does not include the KV cache transmission time from prefill to decode, and the KV cache
transmission time increases with longer request input lengths.
As shown in Figure 1, we also evaluated scenarios where the chunked prefill size is much
larger than the request length. For example, we evaluated an input length of 4096 with a
chunked prefill size of 12288, and an input length of 6144 with a chunked prefill size of 24576.
We found that the results based on our method still serve as a good approximation.
In summary, our method first requires evaluating the maximum prefill throughput of the
deployed prefill instance under non-idle conditions. We then model the prefill process as an
M/M/1 queuing problem and derive Formula (13), which calculates the actually achieved
prefill throughput using the maximum prefill throughput, required TTFT, and request input
length. Note that our method does not account for prefix caching[4, 10, 11, 18]. If the prefill
computation time is proportional to the length of the non-prefix-cache-hit portion, it is only
necessary to replace the input length in this paper with the input length that does not hit the
KV cache.
Acquire decode throughput under TPOT constraints
In this section, we describe how to obtain the actual decode throughput that meets the target
TPOT. During the decoding phase, the LLM engine leverages continuous batching to compute
multiple requests in parallel. We find that both decode TPOT and decode throughput are
positively correlated with the decoding batch size. Specifically, a larger batch size leads to
higher decode throughput but also increases TPOT. Therefore, to achieve the decode
throughput that satisfies the target TPOT, we only need to first benchmark the curves of actual
decode throughput and TPOT against the decoding batch size, and then determine the decode


--- Page 6 ---
6
throughput that meets the TPOT requirement.
Figure 2 Benchmarked curves of TOPT and decode throughput varying with batch size for the
DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus model deployed on an H200 node. Note the multi-token prediction
was enabled in the benchmark.
As shown in Figure 2, we evaluated the variation curves of TPOT and decoding throughput
across different decoding batch sizes for the DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus model deployed with 8
NVIDIA H200 GPUs. We tested two input sequence lengths (6144 and 12288) and a fixed
output length of 512. TPOT is obtained from the results of the benchmark tool EvalScope[15],
while decoding throughput is measured via two independent approaches: one extracted from
runtime logs printed by the SGLang inference engine, and the other computed as the decoding
batch size divided by the corresponding TPOT. We observe that the throughput results from
these two methods are highly consistent. Thus, we can easily obtain decode throughput by
benchmarking TPOT and the corresponding batch size without recording and parsing runtime
logs. Notably, this throughput calculation method requires that the decoding computation
batch size is approximately consistent with the benchmarked concurrency size.
In summary, to attain the decoding throughput that meets the TPOT requirement, we first
characterize the curve of decoding TPOT as a function of batch size under realistic user input
–output workloads. We then determine the batch size that satisfies the target TPOT constraint,
and derive the corresponding decoding throughput by dividing this valid batch size by the
associated TPOT.
Evaluation
We validated our method through a realistic inference scenario. The user requirements are
specified as follows:

LLM model: DeepSeek-V3.1-Terminus

TTFT: 2 s

TPOT: 20 ms

Mean input sequence length: 6144

Mean output sequence length: 512

Total Throughput: 5 million tokens per minute (M TPM)
The hardware and software employed are listed as follows:

Deployment hardware: NVIDIA H200 GPUs


--- Page 7 ---
7

Inference engine: SGLang v0.5.8

Benchmark tool: EvalScope v1.4.2
To meet the SLO constraints, we deployed the prefill instances using a combination of TP and
EP, with a chunked prefill size of 24576; the two-batch overlap optimization was disabled. For
the decode instances, we only used TP and disabled both DP and EP. Each P/D instance ran on
an independent node, and Multi-Token Prediction (MTP) was enabled for all instances.
We evaluated that the maximum prefill throughput for this input sequence length is 28300
tokens/s. Considering a 100 ms KV cache transfer time (i.e., Toverhead = 100 ms), we derived an
effective prefill throughput of approximately 25000 tokens/s using Formula (13).
From the benchmarked curves of TPOT and decode throughput versus decode batch size, as
illustrated in Figure 2, we obtained a decode throughput of approximately 1700 tokens/s that
satisfies the TPOT constraint. Based on Formula (7), we calculated a P:D ratio of 0.82:1.
Using Formulas (5) and (6), we determined that three prefill instances and four decode
instances are required to meet the total throughput demand. In this paper, we use the notation
mPnD to denote a deployment with m prefill instances and n decode instances. Therefore, we
propose a 3P4D deployment for this scenario.
Figure 3 Curves of TTFT and TPOT varying with total throughput under different P/D
resource counts.
We evaluated the curves of TTFT and TPOT as functions of total throughput for the 3P4D
deployment. We also evaluated the 3P3D scenario for comparison. The results are shown in
Figure 3, from which we can observe that when deployed with 3P4D, both the 2 s TTFT and
20 ms SLO thresholds are achieved simultaneously at approximately 4.8 M TPM. This
demonstrates that the P/D ratio calculated by our method is well-balanced, and the achieved
total throughput is very close to the 5 M TPM target value. In contrast, when using the 3P3D
deployment, the SLO threshold can only be met at approximately 3.6 M TPM, which is mainly
constrained by TPOT, while TTFT still has a considerable margin. Under this SLO, the
average throughput per node for 3P4D is 0.69 M TPM, compared with 0.6 M TPM for 3P3D,
indicating that the deployment efficiency calculated by our method is higher.


--- Page 8 ---
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we have addressed the critical challenge of computing resource allocation for
P/D disaggregated LLM inference. We propose a hybrid methodology that integrates
theoretical modeling with empirical benchmarking. First, we derive a formula to determine the
required number of P/D resources based on total throughput requirements, SLO constraints,
request input/output lengths, and P/D throughput. In this formula, most parameters are
user-specified known values, whereas the actually achievable throughput of P/D deployments
remains unclear. Second, we employ M/M/1 queuing theory to model the prefill phase, which
enables us to derive the effective throughput that meets the TTFT constraint. For the decode
phase, we conduct empirical measurements to identify the optimal batch size that satisfies the
TPOT requirement, thereby ensuring maximum resource utilization while avoiding violations
of performance guarantees. Finally, we validate our method through real-world inference
scenarios, demonstrating its capability to accurately predict P/D resource counts and thus
maximize the efficiency of P/D resource utilization under given SLO constraints.
In the future, our method could be integrated with approaches such as AIConfigurator, which
estimates the optimal deployment of individual P/D instances and employs simulation-based
methods to predict P/D throughput. Furthermore, our method has the potential to be
generalized to multimodal EPD separation systems[14], enabling the determination of
resource counts for the three independently deployed components.
References
[1]
Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S Gulavani,
and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2023. Sarathi: Efficient llm inference by piggybacking
decodes with chunked prefills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16369 (2023).
[2]
Xing Chen, Rong Shi, Lu Zhao, Lingbin Wang, Xiao Jin, Yueqiang Chen, and Hongfeng
Sun. 2025. Disaggregated prefill and decoding inference system for large language
model serving on multi-vendor gpus. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17542 (2025).
[3]
Donald Gross and Carl M Harris. 2008. Fundamentals of Queueing Theory (John Wiley
& Sons). Inc: New Jersey (2008).
[4]
Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Xusheng Chen, Tao Xie, Chenxi
Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao, and Ninghui Sun. 2024. Memserve: Context caching for
disaggregated llm serving with elastic memory pool. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.17565
(2024).
[5]
Yibo Jin, Tao Wang, Huimin Lin, Mingyang Song, Peiyang Li, Yipeng Ma, Yicheng
Shan, Zhengfan Yuan, Cailong Li, and Yajing Sun. 2024. P/d-serve: Serving
disaggregated large language model at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08147 (2024).
[6]
Leonard Kleinrock. 1975. Queuing systems, volume i: Theory. (1975).
[7]
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu,
Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient memory management for
large language model serving with pagedattention. 2023. 611–626.
[8]
Junhan Liao, Minxian Xu, Wanyi Zheng, Yan Wang, Kejiang Ye, Rajkumar Buyya, and
Chengzhong Xu. 2025. DOPO: A Dynamic PD-Disaggregation Architecture for
Maximizing Goodput in LLM Inference Serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20982


--- Page 9 ---
9
(2025).
[9]
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang
Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, and Chong Ruan. 2024. Deepseek-v3 technical
report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 (2024).
[10] Yuhan Liu, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaoting Feng, Yuyang
Huang, Samuel Shen, Rui Zhang, and Kuntai Du. 2025. Lmcache: An efficient KV
cache layer for enterprise-scale LLM inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09665
(2025).
[11] Zaifeng Pan, Ajjkumar Patel, Zhengding Hu, Yipeng Shen, Yue Guan, Wan-Lu Li,
Lianhui Qin, Yida Wang, and Yufei Ding. 2025. KVFlow: Efficient prefix caching for
accelerating LLM-based multi-agent workflows. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.07400
(2025).
[12] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo Goiri, Saeed Maleki,
and Ricardo Bianchini. 2024. Splitwise: Efficient generative llm inference using phase
splitting. 2024. IEEE, 118–132.
[13] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Heyi Tang, Feng Ren, Teng Ma,
Shangming
Cai,
Yineng
Zhang,
and
Mingxing
Zhang.
2024.
Mooncake:
A
kvcache-centric disaggregated architecture for llm serving. ACM Transactions on
Storage (2024).
[14] Gursimran Singh, Xinglu Wang, Yifan Hu, Timothy Yu, Linzi Xing, Wei Jiang, Zhefeng
Wang, Xiaolong Bai, Yi Li, and Ying Xiong. 2024. Efficiently Serving Large
Multimodal Models Using EPD Disaggregation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05460
(2024).
[15] ModelScope Team. EvalScope: Evaluation framework for large models, 2024. URL
https://github. com/modelscope/evalscope.
[16] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux,
Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, and Faisal Azhar.
2023. Llama:
Open and efficient foundation language
models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[17] Zhibin Wang, Zetao Hong, Xue Li, Zibo Wang, Shipeng Li, Qingkai Meng, Qing Wang,
Chengying Huan, Rong Gu, and Sheng Zhong. 2025. Adaptive Rescheduling in
Prefill-Decode Disaggregated LLM Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.13668 (2025).
[18] Zhiqiang Xie, Ziyi Xu, Mark Zhao, Yuwei An, Vikram Sharma Mailthody, Scott Mahlke,
Michael Garland, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2025. Strata: Hierarchical context caching for
long context language model serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.18572 (2025).
[19] Tianhao Xu, Yiming Liu, Xianglong Lu, Yijia Zhao, Xuting Zhou, Aichen Feng, Yiyi
Chen, Yi Shen, Qin Zhou, and Xumeng Chen. 2026. AIConfigurator: Lightning-Fast
Configuration Optimization for Multi-Framework LLM Serving.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.06288 (2026).
[20] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen
Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, and Chenxu Lv. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025).
[21] Hengrui Zhang, Pratyush Patel, August Ning, and David Wentzlaff. 2025. SPAD:
Specialized Prefill and Decode Hardware for Disaggregated LLM Inference. arXiv


--- Page 10 ---
10
preprint arXiv:2510.08544 (2025).
[22] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Livia Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody
Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E Gonzalez. 2024.
Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. Advances in neural
information processing systems 37, (2024), 62557–62583.
[23] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin,
and
Hao
Zhang.
2024.
{DistServe}:
Disaggregating
prefill
and
decoding
for
goodput-optimized large language model serving. 2024. 193–210.
[24] ChatGPT. Retrieved from https://chatgpt.com/
[25] TensorRT-LLM. Retrieved from https://github.com/NVIDIA/TensorRT-LLM
[26] Deploying DeepSeek with PD Disaggregation and Large-Scale Expert Parallelism on 96
H100 GPUs. Retrieved from https://lmsys.org/blog/2025-05-05-large-scale-ep/
[27] SGLang v0.4: Zero-Overhead Batch Scheduler, Cache-Aware Load Balancer, Faster
Structured Outputs. Retrieved from https://lmsys.org/blog/2024-12-04-sglang-v0-4/
