--- Page 1 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents
for Rapid Design Evaluation
Tim Rieder∗†
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
timrieder@ethz.ch
Marian
Schneider∗†
ETH Zurich
Zurich, Switzerland
smarian@ethz.ch
Mario Truss
Adobe
Munich, Germany
mtruss@adobe.com
Vitaly Tsaplin
Adobe
Basel, Switzerland
tsaplin@adobe.com
Alina Rublea
Adobe
Basel, Switzerland
rublea@adobe.com
Sinem Dere
Adobe
Basel, Switzerland
ndere@adobe.com
Francisco
Chicharro Sanz
Adobe
Basel, Switzerland
chicharr@adobe.com
Tobias Reiss
Adobe
Basel, Switzerland
reiss@adobe.com
Mustafa Doga
Dogan
Adobe Research
Basel, Switzerland
doga@adobe.com
Input Processing
Context Documents
(e.g. Analysis results)
Target Audience
(e.g. Young professionals)
Conversion Goal
(e.g. Increase sign-ups)
Control
Challenger
Persona Generation
Fisher
Fritz
Researcher 
Riley
Developer 
Dan
Marketer 
Mia
Teacher 
Theo
Persona Generator
Persona Simulation
Next Screen
Action Predictor
Counterbalancer
Persona
Challenger
Control
„Image 1“
„Image 2“
Verdict
Rationale
Challenger Pros
• Less friction due to clear CTA
• ...
Control Pros
• Easy to find information due to structure
• ...
Actionable Insights
• Make challenger layout more structured
• ...
Verdict
Rationale
Summary Generation
Figure 1: The SimAB pipeline reframes A/B testing as a fast simulation. (1) Input Processing: The system ingests a test
specification, containing design variants, conversion goals, target audience definitions, and documents to provide context. (2)
Persona Generation: It creates a diverse population of synthetic users (e.g., “Marketer Mia”) conditioned on the specific context.
(3) Persona Simulation: Persona-driven agents interact with the designs. (4) Summary Generation: Individual verdicts and
rationales are aggregated into actionable insights. This workflow reduces feedback latency from months to minutes.
Abstract
A/B testing is a standard method for validating design decisions,
yet its reliance on real user traffic limits iteration speed and makes
certain experiments impractical. We present SimAB, a system that
reframes A/B testing as a fast, privacy-preserving simulation using
persona-conditioned AI agents. Given webpage design screenshots
and a conversion goal, SimAB generates user personas, deploys
them as agents that state their preference, aggregates results, and
synthesizes rationales. Through a formative study with experi-
mentation practitioners, we identified scenarios where traffic con-
straints hinder testing, including low-traffic pages, multi-variant
comparisons, micro-optimizations, and privacy-sensitive contexts.
Our design emphasizes speed, early feedback, actionable rationales,
and audience specification. We evaluate SimAB against 47 histor-
ical A/B tests with known outcomes testing webpage layout and
∗Equal contribution. The author ordering was randomized.
†Work done during an internship at Adobe Research.
content, achieving 67% overall accuracy, increasing to 83% for high-
confidence cases. Additional experiments show robustness to nam-
ing and positional bias and demonstrate accuracy gains from per-
sonas. Practitioner feedback suggests that SimAB supports faster
evaluation cycles and rapid screening of designs difficult to assess
with traditional A/B tests.
CCS Concepts
• Human-centered computing →User models; Human com-
puter interaction (HCI); • Computing methodologies →Multi-
agent systems.
Keywords
A/B testing, synthetic audiences, large language models, user simu-
lation, web optimization, generative agents
1
arXiv:2603.01024v1  [cs.HC]  1 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
1
Introduction
A/B testing has established itself as a gold standard for estimating
causal effects of design decisions. It offers a data-driven method
to measure the impact of changes by simultaneously deploying
the original (Control) and a modified (Challenger) variant to real
users to obtain user behavior data for both variants. Based on the
collected data, the better variant can be identified according to
metrics, such as click-through rate and annual recurring revenue.
This methodology is commonly used in web development, where
traffic can be easily routed to different variants to quantify how
design changes impact performance metrics [30].
While very effective, the reliance on real user data creates a
significant bottleneck. Reaching statistically significant results re-
quires large amounts of user traffic, often requiring months to
collect, which is especially severe for pages with low traffic, that
might never reach statistical significance. Furthermore, traditional
testing validates ideas only at the end of the development cycle.
This implies that significant effort is expended on variants that
effectively yield no return if the test fails. These limitations high-
light the need for a fast evaluation environment that makes testing
accessible without the reliance on real users.
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have sparked
interest in using these models to simulate human behavior [4, 25,
38]. These synthetic audience approaches promise to generate pre-
dictions about design variants without waiting for real users. How-
ever, existing approaches either lack rigorous validation efforts [10]
or are limited to critiquing designs, instead of validating them [51].
In this work, we address these limitations by presenting SimAB, a
system that leverages scalable, persona-conditioned, and interactive
AI agents to generate synthetic preference judgments, reducing the
time necessary to reach statistical significance to minutes. SimAB
generates diverse user personas based on provided design vari-
ants and a test specification, deploys these personas as AI agents
that evaluate design variants, and aggregates their judgments. We
acknowledge systematic biases in LLMs, such as naming and posi-
tional bias [71], and employ counterbalancing and neutral naming
to mitigate them. We conduct extensive validation efforts using a
custom corpus of 47 historical A/B tests to assess SimAB’s accuracy,
evaluate the effectiveness of our persona-conditioning and bias mit-
igation methods, and conduct feedback sessions with practitioners
to validate the effectiveness of SimAB in real-world settings.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
(1) A formative study (Section 3) identifying the need for
a rapid A/B testing system through four pain points and
deriving the design implications of the system.
(2) A synthetic A/B testing system (Section 4) leveraging
persona-conditioned agents to allow rapid A/B testing.
(3) Comprehensive empirical validation (Section 5) demon-
strating 67% accuracy against 47 historical A/B tests, im-
proving to >80% when considering high-certainty tests.
2
Related Work
In this section, we discuss prior work that informs our approach to
validating and optimizing designs without reliance on extensive real
user traffic. We review research on A/B testing and optimization
platforms, LLM-based design feedback and evaluation, and user-
simulating agents, and we situate our contribution relative to their
capabilities and limitations.
2.1
A/B Testing and Optimization Platforms
A/B testing has been the cornerstone of data-driven design op-
timization since its popularization in web contexts [30]. While
algorithms such as multi-armed bandits [53] and Thompson sam-
pling [20, 70] reduce the traffic required by dynamically allocating
users to better-performing variants, these optimizations address
efficiency rather than the fundamental dependency on real user traf-
fic. Recent work has explored the simulation of user traffic via
statistical frameworks [2] and LLM-based approaches for market
research [6]. However, these still require initial real-world observa-
tions or face limitations in generating externally valid consumer
insights, limiting their applicability and effectiveness.
2.2
LLMs for Design Feedback and Evaluation
LLM-based approaches have been explored for design feedback
and UI evaluation [5, 12, 14–18, 48, 51, 54, 72]. Prior work has
developed tools such as Figma plugins that use GPT-4 to automate
heuristic evaluation of UI mockups [18], finding that while GPT-4
performs well on poor UI designs and is useful for catching errors
and improving text, its performance decreases over iterations as
designs improve, making it less suitable for iterative use by expert
designers.
Datasets have been created to improve LLM-based automated
UI evaluation, with targeted datasets achieving 55% performance
gains through few-shot and visual prompting techniques [16]. More
recent work has proposed multimodal approaches using visual
prompting and iterative refinement that reduce the gap from hu-
man performance by 50% for UI critique generation [15], and these
advancements have been applied to UX evaluation [72]. Persona-
based approaches have been explored to generate on-demand feed-
back [5, 12, 51] and support design iteration [54], and to derive
design requirements from qualitative interview data [13]. However,
these approaches essentially model the behavior of a UX expert
critiquing an interface, rather than a user trying to achieve a goal.
While useful for spotting standard usability flaws, they fail to cap-
ture the complex, often irrational preferences real users can have.
2.3
User Simulating Agents
Based on these foundational usages of LLMs for design feedback,
researchers have explored simulating actual users and their behav-
iors. Prior work has demonstrated that LLM agents can navigate
real websites [24] and established benchmarks for autonomous web
agents [33, 73]. Agent-based systems have been proposed for A/B
testing [60] and usability testing [34], although their alignment
with actual human behavioral responses to design interventions
remains underexplored.
The use of AI to simulate human behavior has gained signif-
icant traction. Prior work has introduced generative agents that
simulate believable human behavior through memory retrieval
and action planning [38], with subsequent work demonstrating
generative agent simulations of real individuals that replicate sur-
vey responses with high accuracy [40], finetuning approaches that
2


--- Page 3 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
improve simulation accuracy [31], and large-scale simulations ad-
vancing understanding of collective behaviors [42]. Early work
explored creating populated prototypes for social computing sys-
tems [39] and generating synthetic human-computer-interaction
(HCI) research data [27]. Researchers have explored LLMs as prox-
ies for human participants, coining terms such as “algorithmic
fidelity” [4] and “silicon samples” [25, 47], surveying user modeling
approaches [56], and introducing “Synthetic User” personas [22].
Building on foundational work on personas [44], prior work has in-
vestigated how people customize and interact with agent personas
in LLMs [23]. The digital twins paradigm has emerged as a powerful
extension, with work introducing large-scale datasets [57] and eval-
uating digital twins across multiple studies, finding that detailed
personal information improves correlation beyond demographics-
only personas [41].
Prior work has demonstrated LLM-based agents simulating com-
plex multi-turn user behaviors for recommendation systems [11,
61, 68, 69], with e-commerce applications including datasets of
shopping behaviors [63], persona-aligned frameworks [35], com-
parisons with human participants [55], and reinforcement learn-
ing approaches for personalization [64]. For persona development
and evaluation, prior work has systematically reviewed GenAI ap-
proaches [3], proposed methods for generating personas aligned
with population distributions [26], introduced benchmarks for per-
sona consistency [45], developed trainable agents for role-play-
ing [49], created datasets for evaluation [7], studied human-AI
workflows for collaborative persona generation [52], and addressed
consistency through multi-turn reinforcement learning [1].
However, significant concerns remain about the validity of syn-
thetic data for understanding human preferences. Prior work has
shown that LLM outputs reflect perspectives of specific demo-
graphic groups [46], identified systematic failures in capturing
nuanced preferences [74], quantified behavioral gaps between hu-
mans and agents [62], found limitations in GenAI-based usability
testing [43], and highlighted challenges in validating simulated
behaviors [9]. Systematic reviews have raised validity and repro-
ducibility concerns about LLM use in HCI research [37], and studies
have shown that LLMs replacing human participants can harmfully
misportray and flatten identity groups [59]. Motivated by this, we
conduct a comprehensive evaluation (Section 5) of our proposed
system to ensure that it provides reliable outputs.
In summary, existing approaches either depend on real user
traffic (traditional A/B testing) or provide open-ended qualitative
critiques instead of validation. SimAB distinguishes itself by leverag-
ing synthetic audiences within a structured aggregation framework
that enables direct pairwise comparison of designs. Unlike prior
agent-based explorations, we move beyond proof-of-concept sim-
ulations by integrating systematic bias mitigation and providing
the first extensive empirical validation against a large corpus of
historical A/B tests with known ground-truth outcomes.
3
Formative Study
We grounded the design of SimAB in a formative study consisting
of a qualitative synthesis of practitioner challenges derived from
sustained collaboration with experimentation teams.
3.1
Informative Interviews with Practitioners
Based on participatory design engagements with 14 practitioners
across four enterprise organizations, we identified key contextual
factors that shaped the design of SimAB. These organizations span
diverse sectors, including telecommunications, industrial equip-
ment manufacturing, and software distribution. All participating
companies operated mature experimentation programs and were
responsible for high-traffic software products and marketing pages.
The A/B testing practices in the participating organizations were
established for up to 15+ years. The participants (10 men, 4 women)
held senior roles ranging from product marketing specialists to
principal product managers and senior managers of digital experi-
ence platforms. This cohort possessed significant domain expertise,
reporting an average of 14 years of marketing experience (max
20+ years) and an average of 5.8 years specifically in A/B testing
(max 10+ years). We engaged in 1-5 sessions of 30 minutes of online
meetings with each of those organizations and also received written
feedback on personalized test results we provided. We collected
detailed notes from these sessions, which we iteratively synthesized
to extract recurring challenges and design implications.
In the following, we describe both the pain-points our tool should
address (Section 3.2) as well as key design principles that the tool
should follow whilst addressing these pain-points (Section 3.3).
3.2
A/B Testing Pain Points
We identified four primary scenarios where traditional A/B testing
becomes costly or infeasible:
Low-Traffic Pages: Many pages, in emerging markets, serving
niche audiences or business-to-business (B2B) segments, lack the
traffic to reach statistical significance in a reasonable timeframe.
According to industry estimates, 70-80% of proposed tests are aban-
doned before reaching significance due to insufficient traffic [50].
High Volume of Design Variants: When the number of design
variants is large, exhaustive A/B/n testing becomes infeasible be-
cause the required traffic grows rapidly with the number of variants
(linearly, and often super-linearly) [28, 29]. Consequently, practi-
tioners feel forced to limit their creativity, testing only one or two
conservative changes rather than exploring diverse design hypothe-
ses, simply to ensure the test concludes within a business cycle.
Low-Value Changes: Small changes are often not tested because
the expected lift does not justify the cost and time of a full A/B test.
Practitioners know of multiple tests to run, knowing they have an
impact and lift, but they are too marginal to justify running them.
Instrumentation & Sampling Constraints: Even on high-
traffic pages, capturing valid human feedback is increasingly diffi-
cult. Practitioners noted that privacy regulations often limit data
collection to users who opt in to cookies, creating a biased subset
that may not represent the general population.
These pain points create a barrier that frequently forces teams
to abandon testing entirely. As a result, practitioners often deploy
changes based on intuition rather than data, despite recognizing
the necessity of validation.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
3.3
Design Implications & Principles
To address these challenges and effectively integrate into practi-
tioner workflows, we derived four key design principles to guide
the development of SimAB.
(1) Shift-Left in the Design Process: Traditional experimenta-
tion feedback arrives too late in the development cycle. Even
if live results were instantaneous, they occur at the end of a
long design pipeline, after substantial investment in ideation,
implementation, and iteration. To provide meaningful value,
SimAB therefore needed to support predictive screening earlier
in the workflow, before full implementation.
(2) Prioritize Speed Over Perfect Accuracy: Given that the alter-
native to synthetic A/B testing is often no testing, practitioners
prefer fast, directional guidance. The system should reach con-
clusions in minutes, not days, functioning as a rapid screening
mechanism that filters distinct failures before they reach live
traffic.
(3) Audience Restrictions & Additional Context: Long-time
A/B testing practitioners have prior knowledge of their (target)
audience and want to leverage this to better specify the audi-
ence and their behavior (as potentially retrieved from finished
A/B tests) accordingly. We additionally see an appealing use
case, where the user can restrict the audience to test how a prod-
uct would land in a new market using the same mechanism,
but this feature was secondary to leveraging prior knowledge
from old A/B-tests to improve accuracy on the new tests.
(4) Rationales & Actionable Insights: A major limitation of tra-
ditional A/B testing is that it reveals which variant won, but
determining the why is infeasible. To provide long-term value
and allow for fast iteration, SimAB must be interpretable, mov-
ing beyond binary winners to ensure that the system functions
as an explanatory tool rather than a black box.
4
System Design
Based on insights from the formative study, we designed SimAB,
a system to test, validate, and iterate on early-stage designs using
persona-conditioned AI agents simulating user interaction with
and preference between design variations. The pipeline, visualized
in Figure 1 consists of four stages: (1) input processing and con-
text retrieval, (2) persona generation, (3) persona simulation, and
(4) aggregation and summary generation. We describe each stage,
emphasizing design decisions informed by our formative study and
validation experiments. We will conclude each of the following
introductory subsections with a pictorial walkthrough of the com-
plete flow, whereby an A/B test from the Wikimedia Foundation1
serves as an example.
4.1
Input Processing
Users set up an experiment by providing up to four inputs that
inform SimAB of the experiment, along with the corresponding
context:
(1) Variant Images (required): Images of Control and Challenger
designs. Following the design principle to Shift-left in the Design
Process (Section 3.3), SimAB operates on screenshots rather than
1https://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fundraising_2011/Test_Updates/October/21
fully implemented webpages. This enables teams to validate
design directions during ideation and early iteration, when
changes are still inexpensive and actionable. For simple ex-
periments, a single viewport for each variant is sufficient. For
experiments exceeding a single viewport, users can provide
full-page screenshots that agents explore through simulated
scrolling, and for multi-page flows (e.g., checkout processes),
multiple screenshots can represent various steps (Section 4.3.4).
(2) Conversion Goal (required): A natural language description
of the success metric for the experiment. Goals can range from
simple (“button clicks”) to sophisticated (“subscription signups
weighted by plan value”). This specification is incorporated
into agent prompts to guide evaluation criteria.
(3) Target Audience (optional): Constraints on the simulated user
distribution, aligning with the principle of Audience Restric-
tions (Section 3.3). Specifications can include demographics
(“age 25–35”), behavioral characteristics (“users arriving from
paid search”), or psychographic segments (“price-sensitive com-
parison shoppers”). When omitted, personas are generated to
represent the broad potential audience for the page content.
(4) Contextual Documents (optional): Additional documents,
such as analytics reports, past experiment results, or domain
knowledge, that might contain relevant information for persona
generation and simulation. This input, aligns with the princi-
ple of Additional Context (Section 3.3). These documents are
used for retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [32] to retrieve
relevant information (Section 4.1.1).
An example Control image, Challenger image, and primary con-
version goal can be found in Figure 2.
4.1.1
Retrieval-Augmented Generation. When users provide con-
textual documents, SimAB employs a RAG pipeline to extract rel-
evant information for persona generation and simulation. The
pipeline handles two document types: Textual documents are chun-
ked and embedded using an embedding model. For tabular, we
employ a two-stage approach: (1) an LLM generates SQL queries,
given the table schema and experiment context, (2) query results are
retrieved and summarized into textual insights. These summaries
are then embedded alongside textual chunks.
During persona generation and simulation, we retrieve the top-𝑘
most relevant chunks using nearest neighbor search based on the
embeddings. The query for this search is constructed based on the
user’s inputs, with generated textual descriptions for both variant
images. Optional enhancements include Hypothetical Document
Embeddings (HyDE) query expansion [19] and cross-encoder re-
ranking [36] to improve retrieval precision.
4.2
Persona Generation
Personas represent the simulated users who will evaluate both
variants. Each persona is represented with 13 attributes organized
into four categories:
(1) Demographics: Name, age range, occupation, income level,
education, location
(2) Psychographics: Interests, goals, pain points, technical savvi-
ness
(3) Behavioral: Online behavior patterns, typical browsing con-
text
4


--- Page 5 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
Figure 2: Example Input. Control can be found on the left; Challenger on the right. Together with a primary conversion goal
(‘Will users donate to the Wikimedia Foundation?’), this constitutes the mandatory input to start an A/B test using SimAB.
The test itself is created for this work, using an old Wikipedia A/B test from 2010 fitted to the current Wikipedia page for A/B
testing. They tested 2 different group photo positions to determine the more effective one in terms of Wikimedia Foundation
donations.
(4) Task-specific: Specific tasks the persona would perform on
the page, circumstances of their visit (e.g., “researching before
a major purchase,” or “arrived from a social media ad”)
Personas are generated by prompting GPT-5-mini-2025-08-07
with the variant screenshots, target audience specification (if pro-
vided), and retrieved context from any supplied documents. A sam-
ple of generated personas for the Wikimedia donation test can
be found in Figure 4. The generation prompt explicitly instructs
diversity. Our full prompt can be found in Appendix A.1.
4.2.1
Batched Generation & Diversity Constraints. To balance effi-
ciency with diversity, personas are generated in batches of 5–10.
Within each batch, previously generated personas are included in
the context, encouraging the model to produce distinct individuals.
However, across batches, this context is lost, leading to potential
duplication. Our evaluation (Section 5.4.1) quantifies the impact of
persona diversity on accuracy.
When users provide known audience segment distributions (e.g.,
from analytics showing 30% “Tech-Savvy Creators,” 25% “Budget-
Conscious Browsers”), we align persona generation to match these
proportions. Passing in the segment distributions as audience re-
strictions, the MSE and RMSE are reduced significantly as seen
in Figure 3. We note that more elaborate schemes to align with
arbitrary fixed audience restrictions could be implemented.
TF-IDF
OpenAI
0
1
2
3
4
5
MAE
Baseline
Audience Alignment
TF-IDF
OpenAI
0
2
4
6
8
RMSE
Baseline
Audience Alignment
Figure 3: Comparing the target distribution as provided in au-
dience restrictions from a user to the distribution generated
by the SimAB persona generation module. Blue: baseline with-
out providing segment information to the LLM call, orange:
using the segments as audience restriction to align gener-
ated personas on it. Left: absolute mean squared error (MSE),
right: root mean squared error (RMSE). Term Frequency-
Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF): evaluates a word’s
importance in a document relative to the whole corpus; us-
ing cosine-similarity to measure the similarity of words in
two collections. Both TF-IDF and direct requests to LLMs
were used to classify generated personas to the most similar
persona segment (the alignment objective provided in audi-
ence restrictions). Note that outliers (RMSE) in particular are
reduced significantly.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
Figure 4: Example Personas. The generated personas include a context, ranging from age, education, and background, to the
present context (the main goals in the current browser session).
4.3
Persona Simulation
Each generated persona is executed as an AI agent that evaluates
both variants. The evaluation is structured as a multi-turn conver-
sation with the LLM, proceeding through three phases.
The winner of the Wikipedia A/B testing webpage donation
banner can be found in Figure 5.
4.3.1
Contextualization. The agent receives a system prompt con-
taining:
(1) The complete persona specification
(2) The conversion goal, framed as the criterion for preference.
(3) Retrieved context from any provided documents.
(4) Evaluation guidelines covering clarity, friction points, trust sig-
nals, value communication, and legal/accessibility compliance.
4.3.2
Variant Presentation with Counterbalancing. The agent re-
ceives both variant images in a single prompt, labeled with neutral
names (“Image 1” and “Image 2”). To mitigate position bias [71],
we employ deterministic counterbalancing by alternating the order
in which the variants are presented in between agents. We further
validated the effectiveness of both neutral naming and counterbal-
ancing in Section 5.3 to validate that these methods are successful
at mitigating biases in the LLM.
4.3.3
Structured Response. The agent produces a structured JSON
response containing:
• Verdict: One of “Image 1,” “Image 2,” or “None”
• Rationale: A short explanation identifying specific elements
that influenced the preference, in line with the design principle
to provide Rationales & Actionable Insights (Section 3.3).
The “None” option allows agents to indicate that the persona
would not convert on either variant, which serves as an important
signal for pages where baseline conversion rates are low.
4.3.4
Interactive Actions. For pages that extend beyond the initial
viewport or involve multi-step flows, SimAB supports interactive
exploration. Agents can invoke tool functions to manipulate their
view before making a verdict. These actions can either be scrolling
actions moving the viewport (with configurable aspect ratio) on
the provided (full-size) screenshot of a design or custom actions
transitioning between different pages of the design, e.g., a checkout
button navigating the user to the next page of the checkout flow.
This capability is critical for testing pages where key conversion
elements (e.g., call-to-action elements, pricing) appear below the
fold. Without scrolling, agents might evaluate based only on hero
content, missing factors that drive real-world conversions. Agents
iterate through actions up to a configurable maximum, stopping
early if they express sufficient confidence to make a verdict.
4.3.5
Statistical Aggregation. After each persona provides their
stated preference, we utilize asymptotic confidence sequences [65]
to test whether the aggregate synthetic preference differs signifi-
cantly from random chance. If the synthetic consensus reaches the
significance threshold, persona simulation is stopped, and the ex-
periment is completed. We acknowledge that the use of asymptotic
confidence sequences does not meet all necessary assumptions, e.g.,
due to batched generation of the personas, the samples (personas)
are not independent within one batch. Nevertheless, we empirically
observe that the approach serves as a highly effective empirical
heuristic for early stopping.
4.4
Summary and Actionable Insight
Generation
Upon experiment completion, SimAB generates an aggregated sum-
mary through a final LLM call. The summary prompt includes all
individual rationales and instructs the model to:
6


--- Page 7 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
Figure 5: Example Winner. After just 31 agents (1-2 minutes, all started in parallel) conclude, statistical significance is reached.
The result coincides with the ground truth data gathered from real users.
Figure 6: Example Insights. The rationales of all agents are aggregated to show the top reasons why Control/Challenger/None is
preferred (for those that preferred Control/Challenger/None). Additionally, SimAB proposes immediate action items to improve
and iterate on the Challenger.
(1) Identify the 3–5 most common themes driving preferences for
both Control and Challenger
(2) Surface actionable improvements suggested by dissenting agents
The resulting summary, along with synthetic personas and the
statistical verdict, can be exported as a PDF report for stakeholder
communication.
The summary and actionable insights for the example Wikipedia
A/B test can be found in Figure 6.
4.5
Reproducibility
We use GPT-5-mini-2025-08-07 as the default model for persona genera-
tion and GPT-5-2025-08-07 as the default model for persona simulation,
whilst being model-agnostic subject to requiring multi-modality (image
input). We use up to 200 concurrent requests, sufficient to complete experi-
ments in 1–5 minutes with early stopping enabled. We note that a higher
degree of concurrency was not required in our use case, but is easily achiev-
able by scaling the number of concurrent agents. Prompt templates can be
found in Appendix A.
5
Evaluation
We evaluate the effectiveness of SimAB through five different evaluation
measures: (1) backtesting against historical A/B tests with known outcomes
(Section 5.1), (2) robustness and consistency evaluation (Section 5.2), (3) val-
idation of bias mitigation strategies (Section 5.3), (4) a persona ablation
study (Section 5.4), and (5) feedback from sessions conducted with multiple
different experimentation practitioners (Section 5.5).
5.1
Backtesting Against Historical Tests
To assess if SimAB predictions align with historical experimental outcomes,
we evaluate its accuracy on a corpus of 47 historical A/B tests with doc-
umented outcomes. The corpus consists of manually curated real-world
A/B tests that reached statistical significance, stemming from three sources:
(1) large-scale commerce web applications and (2) a commercial desktop
application by our organization , and (3) publicly available tests from the
Wikimedia Foundation [66, 67]. The corpus captures a wide range of design
changes, including changes to call-to-action elements, headlines, layouts,
and imagery, conducted across multiple geographic regions. Further, these
7


--- Page 8 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
Table 1: Confusion matrix SimAB achieved on our corpus of
47 diverse historical A/B tests. Note that two tests did not
reach statistical significance and subsequently are not taken
into account for the confusion matrix.
Ground Truth
Challenger
Control
Precision
Predicted
Challenger
22 (TP)
9 (FP)
71%
Control
6 (FN)
8 (TN)
Recall
79%
Acc: 67%
experiments targeted varied objectives, such as increasing sign-ups, increas-
ing engagement, or decreasing bounce rates. The data spans a broad time
frame, with tests from our organization collected over the last five years and
the Wikimedia dataset covering experiments from 2010 and 2011. For each
test, we configured SimAB with the Control and Challenger screenshots,
conversion goal, and target audience constraints if available for the test,
and ran experiments with an 𝛼= 0.05 to test for statistical significance.
Table 1 presents the confusion matrix.
The results demonstrate that SimAB provides a strong predictive signal,
agreeing with the historical experimental outcome in two-thirds of cases
(67% agreement rate) and agreeing with 80% of cases where the historical
test favored the challenger (recall). While this agreement rate, well above
the 50% chance baseline, suggests SimAB provides useful predictive signal,
we note that predictive accuracy represents only one part of the system’s
overall value. As highlighted by our practitioner feedback (Section 5.5), the
accompanying rationales and actionable insights were often deemed more
valuable than the binary verdict itself. By articulating the reasoning behind
a preference, SimAB exposes specific design trade-offs and usability friction,
guiding further iteration and refinement even in cases where the statistical
prediction is imperfect.
Additionally, we find that including an analytics report that breaks down
the performance of webpages over the last three years as a contextual
document reduces the number of agents required to reach statistical signifi-
cance by over 50%, concluding the experiment significantly quicker, while
maintaining the same accuracy.
Beyond the aggregated metrics, we identify a strong correlation between
accuracy and the number of agents necessary to reach statistical significance.
Stratifying the accuracy by the required number of agents (Figure 7) reveals
that the fewer agents are required to reach statistical significance, the more
accurate the results are. This pattern aligns with intuition: for very distinct
variants, fewer agents suffice to accurately detect the preference. When
differences are subtle, more agents are needed, and the synthetic signal
becomes more uncertain, similar to the cases where real A/B tests also
struggle.
We define high-confidence tests as tests for which a significant result is
reached within at most 70 agents. Filtering by high-confidence results, we
report 75% accuracy, 75% precision, 88% recall, and 81% F1-score. 60% of all
tests are high-confidence tests. We note that very-high-confidence tests that
reach significance within 20 agents exceed 80% accuracy and 90% F1-score.
However, very-high-confidence tests come at the cost of being at a traditional
A/B testing market-usual percentage of tests that reach significance of 30%.
This suggests a practical operating mode where users act on fast-con-
verging predictions while treating slower, lower-confidence results as in-
conclusive to boost accuracy in the significant results (even restricted to
high-confidence tests, we report 60% of tests reaching significance as com-
pared to industry estimates of only 20-30% for traditional A/B testing [50]).
In addition to being more accurate, stopping early increases speed sig-
nificantly, directly addressing the design requirement to “prioritize speed
0
200
400
Number of Agents
0.70
0.75
0.80
Accuracy
Agent Accuracy
Figure 7: Trade-off between agent count and accuracy. We
plot the cumulative accuracy for the subset of experiments
that concluded with ≤𝑥agents. Experiments that reach sta-
tistical significance quickly exhibit substantially higher ac-
curacy compared to those requiring more agents.
Run 1
Run 2
Run 3
Run 4
Number of Agents
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Count
Control
Challenger
Neither
Figure 8: Consistency analysis across four independent runs
of the same experiment. While exact vote counts fluctuate
slightly due to LLM stochasticity, the system consistently
identifies the same winner (Challenger) with a significant
margin.
over perfect accuracy” identified in Section 3.3, enabling the critical, high-
velocity feedback loops necessary for time-sensitive design environments.
We frequently observed a <1 minute result for those 60% of fast tests, which
is satisfactory for end-user applications and will become more tangible with
LLM calls expected to speed up.
5.2
Robustness and Consistency
For SimAB to be practically useful, results must be reproducible and consis-
tent. We conducted three experiments for robustness analyses.
5.2.1
Repeated Experiments. To assess stability across runs, we executed
the same experiment (a well-differentiated pricing page test) four times. As
8


--- Page 9 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
0
2
4
6
8
Minority Vote Count
0
10
20
30
40
50
Number of Personas
Persona Frequency
 
 
 
Figure 9: Persona Consistency Analysis. We ran each persona
20 times on identical inputs. The x-axis shows the number of
deviation votes (minority votes). The steep drop-off indicates
that individual personas hold stable, deterministic prefer-
ences, with the majority showing 0 or 1 deviation out of 20
runs.
shown in Figure 8, all four runs identified the same winner (Challenger) de-
spite variation in vote distributions. The Challenger preference rate ranged
from 56% to 62% across runs, which is within expected statistical variation.
This demonstrates robustness to the inherent stochasticity in LLM sampling.
5.2.2
Multi-Challenger Transitivity. Since SimAB conducts pairwise com-
parisons, multi-variant tests require running all pairwise comparisons. A
critical requirement is transitivity: if A beats B and B beats C, then A should
beat C. Intransitive results (cycles) would undermine confidence in rankings.
We analyzed 50+ pairwise comparisons from multi-variant experiments
curated from the same sources as our backtesting corpus (Section 5.1). In all
cases, results were perfectly transitive, establishing a unique total ordering
for every design set. We observed zero instances of cyclic preferences (e.g.,
𝐴> 𝐵> 𝐶> 𝐴). This consistency confirms that SimAB is suitable for
iterative “hill-climbing” workflows, where designers progressively refine a
Challenger against previous winners, and further validates its robustness
against random (seed) variations.
5.2.3
Persona Consistency. To evaluate if personas provide consistent an-
swers, we tested whether individual personas provide deterministic verdicts
when presented with identical inputs. We executed 100 distinct personas 20
times each against the same Control-Challenger pair and measured the Mi-
nority Vote Count: the number of times an agent deviated from its personas’
majority verdict.
The results, visualized in Figure 9, demonstrate high consistency. Over
50% of personas exhibited perfect stability (0 minority votes), identifying
the same preference in 20/20 trials. Furthermore, 85% of personas had two
or fewer deviations. This confirms that SimAB agents produce internally
consistent stated preferences.
5.3
Bias Mitigation Validation
LLM evaluation biases are well-documented [71]. In this section, we assess
whether our approach effectively mitigates these biases.
Table 2: Validation for our bias mitigation techniques coun-
terbalancing and neutral names. The table displays the num-
ber of votes both variants received during a test conducted
with identical images to isolate bias.
Counter-
balancing
Neutral
Names
Control
Challenger
None
p-value
✗
✗
126
749
125
0.0000
✗
✓
52
887
61
0.0000
✓
✗
442
434
124
0.8131
✓
✓
460
469
71
0.7930
5.3.1
Counterbalancing Effectiveness. We validated counterbalancing in
our system by running an experiment where Control and Challenger are
identical images. Results after 4,756 agents:
• Votes for image presented first: 2,187
• Votes for image presented second: 2,191
• “None” votes: 378
The 4-vote difference is statistically negligible (𝜒2 = 0.0004, 𝑝= 0.984).
For comparison, without counterbalancing (Control first), we observed Chal-
lenger being preferred 6–17 times more than Control, i.e., a bias that would
substantially distort results. In Table 2 we report the effects of combining
counterbalancing and neutral naming.
5.4
Persona Ablation Study
5.4.1
Persona Diversity Ablation. To assess whether the use of personas
impacts accuracy, we compared three setups:
• Baseline: Standard batched generation (5–10 per batch) with no explicit
duplication across batches
• No Diversity: A single, fixed persona for all agents
• High Diversity: De-duplication using embedding2 cosine similarity
(𝜃= 0.85) with regeneration until diversity was reached. Regeneration
was done using persona-to-persona generation [8]
The results are summarized in Figure 10. We observe that removing
diversity degrades agreement rates by 10 percentage points, suggesting
that diverse synthetic perspectives improve predictive alignment with real
experimental outcomes. However, extreme diversity (High Diversity condi-
tion) did not improve over baseline, suggesting diminishing returns. The
baseline approach, which naturally produces moderate diversity through
batched generation, appears to strike an effective balance between diversity
and efficiency.
5.4.2
Personas Analyzed per Group. In the following, we aim to demon-
strate that different segments (if split by some classification) of the per-
sonas admit different voting behavior. In Figure 11, splits by age, profession
archetype, income level, and technical savviness are given. For three of the
four splits, at least one of the groups are significantly out of distribution,
with a p-value for the age-group ‘60-69’ of 4·10−32, for the archetype-group
‘Teacher’ of 3 · 10−7 and for the technical-savviness-group ‘Low’ of 7 · 10−23
to stem from the same distribution as the other groups, demonstrating that
different personas behave differently.
In addition, SimAB is sufficient to produce significantly different per-
sonas when provided with different input images, even without specifying
audience restrictions, which suggests that persona generation is responsive
to input images.
2Embeddings were generated using OpenAI text embeddings based on the textual
description of the personas.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
Random
No Div.
High Div.
Baseline
Spacer Label
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Accuracy
50%
63%
70%
73%
Random Chance
Training
Diversity
Persona
Figure 10: Persona Diversity Ablation study. We show the
effect of not using personas at all (that is, a single fixed per-
sona) versus multiple adaptive personas per experiment, sub-
sequently increasing accuracy.
10-19
20-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60-69
70-79
0
20
40
60
80
100
Vote share (%)
148
338
934
1447
1374
1808
590
957
274
410
69
362
84
479
By Age
Total
3473
5801
Analyst
Engineer
Journalist
Major
Manager
Owner
Reporter
Student
Teacher
Other
0
20
40
60
80
100
Vote share (%)
24
31
36
71
20
18
17
17
38
44
27
24
18
25
64
117
29
124
321
475
By Archetype
Total
594
946
Low
Low-Medium
Medium
Medium-High
High
Unknown
0
20
40
60
80
100
Vote share (%)
723
1315
91
190
2248
3603
21
35
386
634
4
24
By Income Level
Total
3473
5801
Low
Low-Medium
Medium
Medium-High
High
0
20
40
60
80
100
Vote share (%)
223
758
23
76
1516
2399
26
61
1685
2507
By Technical Savviness
Total
3473
5801
Control
Challenger
Figure 11: Voting distributions by different persona splits:
By age, profession archetype, income level, and technical
savviness. Vote share for control is given in blue vs. vote
share for challenger in orange by group.
5.5
Feedback from Practitioners
As part of ongoing participatory design engagements, we evaluated SimAB
with the same 14 practitioners from four enterprise organizations described
in Section 3. We maintained this cohort to directly validate whether the
system effectively addressed the specific pain points identified in our initial
sessions Section 3.
The evaluation methodology was adapted to fit organizational con-
straints. Due to organizational policies, external users utilized a “concierge”
evaluation model: they provided assets for active design questions, and
we executed the simulations and shared the results with them. In contrast,
four internal practitioners were able to access the SimAB UI directly to
run independent experiments. Following these evaluations, we conducted
review sessions to analyze the results.
Enabling Previously Untestable Scenarios: A recurring theme across
organizations was the value of SimAB for scenarios that are impractical
or infeasible with traditional A/B testing. Participants highlighted low-
traffic pages (e.g., niche, regional, or B2B-facing content), as well as changes
expected to yield small but meaningful improvements, which directly con-
tributes to the Low-traffic Pages pain point identified in Section 3.2.
Practitioners were excited when they realized that SimAB can be used
for pages that do not receive enough traffic to be tested, i.e., that it can not
only help with the existing tests, but also enables completely new pages to
be optimized in a more consistent and data-driven way.
Consistency and Alignment Across Stakeholders: Several partic-
ipants noted that SimAB has the potential to help reduce inconsistencies
in internal decision-making. Design reviews often involve multiple stake-
holders with differing opinions and heuristics, leading to subjective debates.
The simulated results and accompanying rationales provided a shared, data-
driven reference point that supported alignment and more efficient discus-
sions, validating the design principle to provide Rationales & Actionable
Insights (Section 3.3).
Acceptance of Accuracy Trade-offs: Participants demonstrated a prag-
matic understanding of the system’s limitations. Rather than expecting per-
fect accuracy, teams emphasized transparency, known failure modes, and
appropriate use, viewing SimAB as a tool for guiding early decisions and
prioritization while reserving live testing for high-stakes candidates. This
adoption pattern confirms the validity of our design principles to Prioritize
Speed over Perfect Accuracy and Shift-left in the Design Process (Section 3.3),
as practitioners successfully acknowledged the tool as a rapid filter rather
than a replacement for real testing.
6
Discussion
Our evaluation demonstrates that synthetic audiences can provide a mean-
ingful signal for A/B testing, with an accuracy that varies predictably with
test difficulty. In this section, we discuss the implications of these findings,
characterize appropriate use cases, acknowledge limitations, and outline
directions for future research.
6.1
Accuracy Results in the Context of Design
Research
Some of the accuracy rates reported may initially seem modest compared
to the certainty practitioners expect from traditional A/B testing. However,
several contextual factors suggest this performance is more useful than it
appears:
Stratified Confidence as a Filter: The 75% accuracy on high-confidence
predictions (tests concluding in ≤70 agents as defined in Section 5.1) and
>80% accuracy on very-high-confidence predictions (≤20 agents) are substan-
tially more actionable. In practice, users can treat SimAB as a high-precision
filter: results that emerge quickly are likely reliable; results requiring many
agents are uncertain and warrant live testing. This framing, i.e., that fast
results are confident, slow results are uncertain, aligns with intuition about
A/B testing generally.
Simulation as an Alternative to Intuition: Traditional A/B tests
themselves have non-trivial error rates due to multiple testing, seasonality,
and external confounds. The relevant comparison is SimAB versus no testing
at all, which is the default for low-traffic pages, multi-variant comparisons,
and micro-optimizations. A 67% agreement rate achieved in 5 minutes may
outperform intuition-based decisions, though direct comparison would
require further study.
The Value of Explanatory Rationales: Even when verdicts are incor-
rect, the generated rationales often surface legitimate design considerations.
10


--- Page 11 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
Several practitioners noted using rationales to identify potential issues, even
when they disagreed with the overall verdict.
6.2
Use Cases
Based on our evaluation and deployment experience, we identify four pri-
mary use cases where SimAB provides the most substantial value:
Preflight Screening: The clearest use case is rapid screening of design
variants before committing to live experiments. SimAB can quickly eliminate
obviously suboptimal options, reducing the variant space for more expensive
live testing. One deployment partner described this as “killing bad ideas fast”.
If SimAB strongly rejects a variant, it can be assumed that this simulated
A/B test result will likely align with future real users’ feedback, saving time
and resources for design, marketing, and product practitioners.
Testing the “Untestable”: Many design optimization opportunities are
structurally excluded from traditional testing due to low-traffic pages, highly
specific audience segments, new market exploration, and large variant
spaces, e.g., 5 potential designs. SimAB provides directional signal where
previously there was often only intuition. The 67% accuracy is most valuable
precisely in these scenarios where the alternative is guesswork.
Privacy-First Testing: Unlike traditional A/B testing, SimAB requires
no user data collection. This provides a privacy-preserving alternative for
organizations with strict data governance requirements (e.g., GDPR compli-
ance) or for testing in privacy-sensitive contexts (e.g., healthcare, finance).
The ability to simulate user feedback without observing real user behavior
represents a meaningful privacy improvement.
Rapid Design Iteration: Traditional A/B testing provides feedback only
after development is complete. SimAB enables evaluation of mockups and
prototypes before any implementation, shifting feedback left in the design
process. This changes the iteration cadence from “design →develop →test
(months) →learn” to “design →test (minutes) →refine →develop”.
6.3
Limitations and Boundary Conditions
We identify several important limitations that constrain SimAB’s applicabil-
ity:
Behavioral Complexity Beyond Screenshots. SimAB evaluates static
screenshots with optional simulated scrolling, so for tests where these
factors are primary drivers, live experiments remain necessary, as it does
not capture:
• Performance Effects: Page load time, responsiveness, and perceived
speed significantly impact conversion but are invisible in screenshots.
• Interaction Dynamics: Hover states, animations, micro-interactions, and
complex form behavior influence user experience in ways static images
cannot convey.
• Temporal Effects: Repeat visits, brand perception over time, and network
effects unfold across sessions.
Novel Interaction Patterns: LLM evaluations reflect patterns learned
from training data. For genuinely novel interfaces, e.g., designs that differ
substantially from existing web conventions, agents may not accurately
predict human responses. The further a design deviates from the training
data distribution, the less reliable the predictions become. We note that such
a shift in training distribution versus test-time design might stem from both
changes in domain and shifts in human behavior over time.
Subtle Effect Sizes: Our accuracy stratification reveals that SimAB
performs best on tests with clear differentiation. For subtle optimizations
where even humans struggle to express preferences (i.e., the “hard cases”
that real A/B tests also struggle with), synthetic evaluation may not provide
a reliable signal. This is not unique to our approach; it reflects a fundamental
limit of preference elicitation for near-identical options. However, it must be
noted that with the increased run time of our simulation (2-10 minutes), 95%
of our tests achieved significance, which is much higher than the typical
30% for traditional A/B testing [50].
Representation Validity: Synthetic personas inherit biases from under-
lying language models. Santurkar et al. [46] showed that LLM outputs dis-
proportionately reflect perspectives of Western, educated populations. Our
personas may not accurately represent global, cross-cultural, or marginal-
ized user groups. Practitioners should critically evaluate whether generated
personas adequately cover their intended audience, particularly for products
serving diverse populations.
Automation of Manipulation: A/B testing has long raised concerns
about “dark patterns”, i.e., designs that exploit psychological biases to drive
conversions against user interests [21]. SimAB’s speed and cost make it
easier to rapidly iterate on persuasion techniques. Although the tool itself
is neutral, responsible deployment requires ethical guidelines on what
optimizations are appropriate.
Generalization to Other Domains: Our A/B testing corpus consists
primarily of marketing and e-commerce webpages. Further testing and
development might be needed to generalize both the results and potentially
adapt the system to other domains.
6.4
Future Directions
Our work opens up several directions for future research.
Domain-Adaptive Fine-Tuning. The 67% accuracy reflects zero-shot
performance without domain adaptation. Fine-tuning on historical A/B test
outcomes within a specific domain could substantially improve accuracy in
that domain. Organizations with extensive experimentation archives could
train domain-specific evaluators calibrated to their users.
Multi-Modal and Dynamic Evaluation. Extending beyond screen-
shots to evaluate video recordings, interactive prototypes, or even live
websites would capture behavioral dynamics currently missing. Integration
with tools like Browser Use [58] for full page interaction could bridge the
gap between static and dynamic evaluation.
Calibrated Uncertainty Quantification. Our current confidence esti-
mates are heuristic. Developing principled uncertainty quantification (cali-
brated probability estimates for verdict correctness) would enable users to
make better decisions.
Evaluation of LLM-Facing Interfaces. As AI agents increasingly inter-
act with websites (for shopping, information retrieval, etc.), optimizing for
LLM “users” may become as important as optimizing for humans. SimAB’s
architecture naturally extends to this emerging use case, evaluating how
well designs support AI interaction patterns.
7
Conclusion
Traditional A/B testing depends on real user traffic, which creates a fun-
damental bottleneck limiting experimentation capacity across the web. In
this paper, we presented SimAB, a system that reframes A/B testing as a
fast, privacy-preserving simulation using persona-conditioned AI agents.
Through formative work with experimentation practitioners, we identi-
fied three scenarios where traffic constraints prevent testing: low-traffic
pages, multi-variant comparisons, and micro-optimizations. These insights
informed a system design centered on speed, actionable rationales, and
flexible audience specification. Our technical contribution comprises a com-
plete pipeline for synthetic A/B testing: diverse persona generation from
webpage content, evaluation by counterbalanced AI agents, sequential sta-
tistical aggregation enabling valid early stopping, and rationale synthesis
for actionable insights. We demonstrated that counterbalancing effectively
neutralizes position bias (4-vote difference across 4,756 identical-image
evaluations, 𝑝> 0.99) and that persona diversity improves accuracy by 10
percentage points. Evaluation against 47 historical A/B tests with known
outcomes revealed 67% overall alignment, improving to 75% and >80% for
high-confidence and very-high-confidence predictions that conclude quickly.
Perfect transitivity across 50+ multi-variant comparisons confirms consis-
tent rankings. Deployment with four enterprise partners validated practical
11


--- Page 12 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
utility: teams valued rapid screening, explanatory rationales, and the ability
to test previously infeasible scenarios.
We position SimAB not as a replacement for live experimentation, but
as a complementary tool that expands the boundaries of what can be tested.
The stratified accuracy results suggest a practical operating mode: treat fast-
converging results as stronger directional signals; treat slow-converging
results as weak hypotheses warranting live validation. This “preflight check”
framing, i.e., eliminating bad ideas fast, screening the variant space, and
shifting feedback left in the design process, captures the primary value
proposition. We believe SimAB represents a shift in who can conduct rigor-
ous design evaluation. Traditional A/B testing requires substantial traffic,
technical infrastructure, and organizational patience. Synthetic A/B testing
democratizes experimentation, making data-driven design accessible to
small organizations, emerging markets, and individual designers.
As generative AI transforms both content creation and user interaction
patterns, the need for rapid evaluation will only grow. SimAB demonstrates
that synthetic audiences can provide predictive signal that aligns with
historical experimental outcomes more often than chance. We hope this
work catalyzes further research on AI-assisted evaluation and contributes
to a future where data-driven design is accessible to all.
Acknowledgments
We thank David Arbour for valuable discussions and feedback on this work.
References
[1] Marwa Abdulhai, Ryan Cheng, Donovan Clay, Tim Althoff, Sergey Levine, and
Natasha Jaques. 2025. Consistently Simulating Human Personas with Multi-Turn
Reinforcement Learning.
[2] Anish Agarwal, Devavrat Shah, and Dennis Shen. 2024. Synthetic A/B Testing
Using Synthetic Interventions. arXiv preprint (2024).
[3] Danial Amin, Joni Salminen, Farhan Ahmed, Sonja M. H. Tervola, Sankalp
Sethi, and Bernard J. Jansen. 2025. How Is Generative AI Used for Persona
Development?: A Systematic Review of 52 Research Articles. arXiv:2504.04927
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2504.04927
[4] Lisa P. Argyle, Ethan C. Busby, Nancy Fulda, Joshua R. Gubler, Christopher
Rytting, and David Wingate. 2023. Out of One, Many: Using Language Models
to Simulate Human Samples. Political Analysis 31, 3 (2023), 337–351. doi:10.1017/
pan.2023.2
[5] Karim Benharrak, Tim Zindulka, Florian Lehmann, Hendrik Heuer, and Daniel
Buschek. 2024. Writer-Defined AI Personas for On-Demand Feedback Genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2024-05-11) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing
Machinery, 1–18. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642406
[6] James Brand, A. Israeli, and Donald Ngwe. 2024. Using GPT for Market Research.
In ACM Conference on Economics and Computation.
[7] Aurélien Bück-Kaeffer, Je Qin Chooi, Dan Zhao, M. P. Touzel, Kellin Pelrine, J.
Godbout, Reihaneh Rabbany, and Zachary Yang. 2025. BluePrint: A Social Media
User Dataset for LLM Persona Evaluation and Training.
[8] Xin Chan, Xiaoyang Wang, Dian Yu, Haitao Mi, and Dong Yu. 2024. Scaling
Synthetic Data Creation with 1,000,000,000 Personas. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2406.
20094
[9] Chaoran Chen, Bingsheng Yao, Ruishi Zou, Wenyue Hua, Weimin Lyu, Yanfang
Ye, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. Towards a Design Guideline for
RPA Evaluation: A Survey of Large Language Model-Based Role-Playing Agents.
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2502.13012 arXiv:2502.13012 [cs].
[10] Junzhe Chen et al. 2024. AgentA/B: Automated and Scalable Web A/B Testing
with Interactive LLM Agents. https://arxiv.org/abs/2400.00000
[11] Luyu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Zeyu Zhang, Xueyang Feng, Mingyu Zhang, Pengcheng
Tang, Xu Chen, Yue Zhu, and Zhenhua Dong. 2025. RecUserSim: A Realistic and
Diverse User Simulator for Evaluating Conversational Recommender Systems.
In The Web Conference.
[12] Yoonseo Choi, Eun Jeong Kang, Seulgi Choi, Min Kyung Lee, and Juho Kim.
2025. Proxona: Supporting Creators’ Sensemaking and Ideation with LLM-Powered
Audience Personas. arXiv:2408.10937 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2408.10937
[13] Stefano De Paoli. 2026. User Personas, Ideation and Large Language Models: A
Post-Hoc Study. 208 (2026), 103690. doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2025.103690
[14] Shiying Ding, Xinyi Chen, Yan Fang, Wenrui Liu, Yiwu Qiu, and Chunlei Chai.
2023. DesignGPT: Multi-Agent Collaboration in Design. In 2023 16th International
Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID). 204–208. doi:10.
1109/ISCID59865.2023.00056 ISSN: 2473-3547.
[15] Peitong Duan, Chin-Yi Cheng, Bjoern Hartmann, and Yang Li. 2025. Visual
Prompting with Iterative Refinement for Design Critique Generation. (2025).
arXiv:2412.16829 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2412.16829
[16] Peitong Duan, Chin-Yi Cheng, Gang Li, Bjoern Hartmann, and Yang Li. 2024.
UICrit: Enhancing Automated Design Evaluation with a UI Critique Dataset.
In Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (New York, NY, USA, 2024-10-11) (UIST ’24). Association for
Computing Machinery, 1–17. doi:10.1145/3654777.3676381
[17] Peitong Duan, Jeremy Warner, and Bjoern Hartmann. 2023. Towards Gen-
erating UI Design Feedback with LLMs. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 36th
Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ’23
Adjunct). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–3.
doi:10.1145/3586182.3615810
[18] Peitong Duan, Jeremy Warner, Yang Li, and Bjoern Hartmann. 2024. Generating
Automatic Feedback on UI Mockups with Large Language Models. In Proceedings
of the 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York,
NY, USA, 2024-05-11) (CHI ’24). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–20.
doi:10.1145/3613904.3642782
[19] Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. 2023. Precise Zero-Shot
Dense Retrieval without Relevance Labels. doi:10.48550/arXiv.2212.10496
[20] Aditya Gopalan, Shie Mannor, and Yishay Mansour. 2014. Thompson Sampling
for Complex Online Problems. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference
on Machine Learning (Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 32). PMLR,
100–108.
[21] Colin M. Gray, Yubo Kou, Bryan Battles, Joseph Hoggatt, and Austin L. Toombs.
2018. The Dark (Patterns) Side of UX Design. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. doi:10.1145/3173574.3174108
[22] (Eric) Heng Gu, Senthil Chandrasegaran, and Peter Lloyd. 2025. Synthetic Users:
Insights from Designers’ Interactions with Persona-Based Chatbots. Artificial
Intelligence for Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing 39 (2025), e2.
doi:10.1017/S0890060424000283
[23] Juhye Ha, Hyeon Jeon, Daeun Han, Jinwook Seo, and Changhoon Oh. 2024.
CloChat: Understanding How People Customize, Interact, and Experience Per-
sonas in Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2024-05-11) (CHI ’24).
Association for Computing Machinery, 1–24. doi:10.1145/3613904.3642472
[24] Hongliang He, Wenlin Yao, Kaixin Ma, Wenhao Yu, Yong Dai, Hongming Zhang,
Zhenzhong Lan, and Dong Yu. 2024. WebVoyager: Building an End-to-End Web
Agent with Large Multimodal Models. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Lun-Wei
Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 6864–6890. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.371
[25] John J. Horton. 2023. Large Language Models as Simulated Economic Agents:
What Can We Learn from Homo Silicus? NBER Working Paper (2023). doi:10.
3386/w31122
[26] Zhengyu Hu, Zheyuan Xiao, Max Xiong, Yuxuan Lei, Tianfu Wang, Jianxun Lian,
Kaize Ding, Ziang Xiao, Nicholas Jing Yuan, and Xing Xie. 2025. Population-
Aligned Persona Generation for LLM-based Social Simulation.
[27] Perttu Hämäläinen, Mikke Tavast, and Anton Kunnari. 2023. Evaluating Large
Language Models in Generating Synthetic HCI Research Data: A Case Study.
In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems (New York, NY, USA, 2023-04-19) (CHI ’23). Association for Computing
Machinery, 1–19. doi:10.1145/3544548.3580688
[28] Kevin Jamieson and Robert Nowak. 2014. Best-arm identification algorithms for
multi-armed bandits in the fixed confidence setting. In Information Sciences and
Systems.
[29] Emilie Kaufmann, Olivier Cappé, and Aurélien Garivier. 2016. On the complexity
of best-arm identification in multi-armed bandit models. Journal of Machine
Learning Research 17 (2016), 1–42.
[30] Ron Kohavi, Alex Deng, Brian Frasca, Toby Walker, Ya Xu, and Nils Pohlmann.
2013. Online Controlled Experiments at Large Scale. Proceedings of the 19th
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(2013). doi:10.1145/2487575.2488217
[31] Akaash Kolluri, Shengguang Wu, Joon Sung Park, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2025.
Finetuning LLMs for Human Behavior Prediction in Social Science Experiments.
arXiv:2509.05830 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.05830
[32] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-
täschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp
tasks. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020), 9459–9474.
[33] Yuxuan Lu, Jing Huang, Yan Han, Bennet Bei, Yaochen Xie, Dakuo Wang, Jessie
Wang, and Qi He. 2025. Can LLM Agents Simulate Multi-Turn Human Behavior?
Evidence from Real Online Customer Behavior Data.
[34] Yuxuan Lu, Bingsheng Yao, Hansu Gu, Jing Huang, Jessie Wang, Laurence Li,
Jiri Gesi, Qi He, Toby Jia-Jun Li, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. UXAgent: An LLM
Agent-Based Usability Testing Framework for Web Design. In CHI Extended
Abstracts. doi:10.1145/3706599.3719729
12


--- Page 13 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
[35] Saab Mansour, Leonardo Perelli, Lorenzo Mainetti, George Davidson, and Stefano
D’Amato. 2025. PAARS: Persona Aligned Agentic Retail Shoppers. In Proceedings
of the 1st Workshop for Research on Agent Language Models (REALM 2025).
[36] Rodrigo Nogueira and Kyunghyun Cho. 2019. Passage Re-ranking with BERT.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.04085 (2019).
[37] Rock Yuren Pang, Hope Schroeder, Kynnedy Simone Smith, Solon Barocas, Ziang
Xiao, Emily Tseng, and Danielle Bragg. 2025. Understanding the LLM-ification
of CHI: Unpacking the Impact of LLMs at CHI through a Systematic Literature
Review. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2025-04-25) (CHI ’25). Association for Computing
Machinery, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3706598.3713726
[38] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra
of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on
User Interface Software and Technology. ACM, San Francisco CA USA, 1–22.
doi:10.1145/3586183.3606763
[39] Joon Sung Park, Lindsay Popowski, Carrie Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2022. Social Simulacra: Creating Populated
Prototypes for Social Computing Systems. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (New York, NY, USA,
2022-10-28) (UIST ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–18. doi:10.1145/
3526113.3545616
[40] Joon Sung Park, Carolyn Q Zou, Aaron Shaw, Benjamin Mako Hill, Carrie Cai,
Meredith Ringel Morris, Robb Willer, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. 2024.
Generative Agent Simulations of 1,000 People. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10109
(2024).
[41] Tianyi Peng, George Gui, Daniel J. Merlau, Grace Jiarui Fan, Malek Ben Sliman,
Melanie Brucks, Eric J. Johnson, Vicki Morwitz, et al. 2025. A Mega-Study of
Digital Twins Reveals Strengths, Weaknesses and Opportunities for Further
Improvement. arXiv:2509.19088 [cs.AI] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.19088
[42] J. Piao, Yuwei Yan, Jun Zhang, Nian Li, Junbo Yan, Xiaochong Lan, Zhihong
Lu, Zhiheng Zheng, Jing Yi Wang, Di Zhou, Chen Gao, Fengli Xu, Fang Zhang,
Ke Rong, Jun Su, and Yong Li. 2025. AgentSociety: Large-Scale Simulation of
LLM-Driven Generative Agents Advances Understanding of Human Behaviors
and Society.
[43] Ali Ebrahimi Pourasad and Walid Maalej. 2024. Does GenAI Make Usability
Testing Obsolete? arXiv:2411.00634 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2411.00634
[44] John Pruitt and Jonathan Grudin. 2003. Personas: Practice and Theory. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 Conference on Designing for User Experiences (New York,
NY, USA, 2003-06-06) (DUX ’03). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–15.
doi:10.1145/997078.997089
[45] Vinay Samuel, Henry Peng Zou, Yue Zhou, Shreyas Chaudhari, A. Kalyan, Tan-
may Rajpurohit, A. Deshpande, Karthik Narasimhan, and Vishvak Murahari.
2024. PersonaGym: Evaluating Persona Agents and LLMs. In Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
[46] Shibani Santurkar, Esin Durmus, Faisal Ladhak, Cinoo Lee, Percy Liang, and
Tatsunori Hashimoto. 2023. Whose Opinions Do Language Models Reflect?. In
Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning.
[47] Marko Sarstedt, Susanne J. Adler, and Christian M. Ringle. 2024. Using Large
Language Models as Silicon Samples: Practical Guidelines and Best Practices.
Psychological Methods (2024). doi:10.1002/mar.21982
[48] Albrecht Schmidt, Passant Elagroudy, Fiona Draxler, Frauke Kreuter, and Robin
Welsch. 2024. Simulating the Human in HCD with ChatGPT: Redesigning
Interaction Design with AI. Interactions 31, 1 (2024), 24–31. doi:10.1145/3637436
[49] Yunfan Shao, Linyang Li, Junqi Dai, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023. Character-LLM: A
Trainable Agent for Role-Playing. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.
[50] Disha Sharma. 2025. A/B Testing Statistical Significance: How and When to
End a Test. https://www.convert.com/blog/a-b-testing/experiments-statistical-
significance-speed/. Accessed: 13 January 2026.
[51] Donghoon Shin, Daniel Lee, Gary Hsieh, and Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan. 2025.
PosterMate: Audience-driven Collaborative Persona Agents for Poster Design.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software
and Technology (New York, NY, USA, 2025-09-27) (UIST ’25). Association for
Computing Machinery, 1–20. doi:10.1145/3746059.3747769
[52] Joongi Shin, Michael A. Hedderich, Bartłomiej Jakub Rey, Andrés Lucero, and
Antti Oulasvirta. 2024. Understanding Human-AI Workflows for Generating
Personas. In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference
(New York, NY, USA, 2024-07-01) (DIS ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
757–781. doi:10.1145/3643834.3660729
[53] Aleksandrs Slivkins. 2019. Introduction to Multi-Armed Bandits. Foundations and
Trends in Machine Learning. doi:10.1561/2200000068
[54] Sangho Suh, Michael Lai, Kevin Pu, Steven P. Dow, and Tovi Grossman. 2025.
StoryEnsemble: Enabling Dynamic Exploration & Iteration in the Design Process
with AI and Forward-Backward Propagation. In Proceedings of the 38th Annual
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (New York, NY, USA,
2025-09-27) (UIST ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, 1–36. doi:10.1145/
3746059.3747772
[55] Lu Sun, Shihan Fu, Bingsheng Yao, Yuxuan Lu, Wenbo Li, Hansu Gu, Jiri Gesi,
Jing Huang, Chen Luo, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. LLM Agent Meets Agentic AI:
Can LLM Agents Simulate Customers to Evaluate Agentic-AI-based Shopping
Assistants? arXiv:2509.21501 doi:10.48550/arXiv.2509.21501
[56] Zhaoxuan Tan and Meng Jiang. 2023. User Modeling in the Era of Large Language
Models: Current Research and Future Directions. IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin
(2023).
[57] Olivier Toubia, George Z. Gui, Tianyi Peng, Daniel J. Merlau, Ang Li, and Haozhe
Chen. 2025. Database Report: Twin-2K-500: A Data Set for Building Digital Twins
of over 2,000 People Based on Their Answers to over 500 Questions. Marketing
Science 44, 6 (2025), 1446–1455. doi:10.1287/mksc.2025.0262
[58] Browser Use. 2024. Browser Use: AI Browser Automation. https://github.com/
browser-use/browser-use
[59] Angelina Wang, Jamie Morgenstern, and John P. Dickerson. 2025. Large Language
Models That Replace Human Participants Can Harmfully Misportray and Flatten
Identity Groups. arXiv:2402.01908 [cs] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2402.01908
[60] Dakuo Wang, Ting-Yao Hsu, Yuxuan Lu, Hansu Gu, Limeng Cui, Yaochen Xie,
William Headean, Bingsheng Yao, Akash Veeragouni, Jiapeng Liu, Sreyashi Nag,
and Jessie Wang. 2025. AgentA/B: Automated and Scalable Web A/B Testing with
Interactive LLM Agents. arXiv:2504.09723 [cs.HC] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2504.09723
[61] Lei Wang, Jingsen Zhang, Hao Yang, Zhi-Yuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Zeyu Zhang, Xu
Chen, Yankai Lin, Hao Sun, Ruihua Song, Xin Zhao, Jun Xu, Zhicheng Dou, Jun
Wang, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. User Behavior Simulation with Large Language
Model-based Agents. ACM Transactions on Information Systems 43, 2 (2025),
55:1–55:37. doi:10.1145/3708985
[62] Zhefan Wang, Ning Geng, Zhiqiang Guo, Weizhi Ma, and Min Zhang. 2025.
Human vs. Agent in Task-Oriented Conversations. In Proceedings of the 2025
Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval in the Asia Pacific Region.
[63] Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Wenbo Li, Amirali Amini, Bo Sun, Yakov Bart, Weimin
Lyu, Jiri Gesi, Tian Wang, Jing Huang, Yu Su, Upol Ehsan, Malihe Alikhani,
Toby Jia-Jun Li, Lydia Chilton, and Dakuo Wang. 2025. OPeRA: A Dataset of
Observation, Persona, Rationale, and Action for Evaluating LLMs on Human
Online Shopping Behavior Simulation.
[64] Ziyi Wang, Yuxuan Lu, Yimeng Zhang, Jing Huang, and Dakuo Wang. 2025.
Customer-R1: Personalized Simulation of Human Behaviors via RL-based LLM
Agent in Online Shopping.
[65] Ian Waudby-Smith, David Arbour, Ritwik Sinha, Edward H Kennedy, and Aaditya
Ramdas. 2024. Time-uniform central limit theory and asymptotic confidence
sequences. The Annals of Statistics 52, 6 (2024), 2613–2640.
[66] Wikimedia Foundation. 2010. Fundraising 2010: Example Test 2. https://meta.
wikimedia.org/wiki/Fundraising_2010/Report/Example_Test_2. Accessed: 2026-
01-19.
[67] Wikimedia Foundation. 2011. Fundraising 2011: Test Updates (October 21). https:
//meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Fundraising_2011/Test_Updates/October/21.
Ac-
cessed: 2026-01-19.
[68] An Zhang, Leheng Sheng, Yuxin Chen, Hao Li, Yang Deng, Xiang Wang, and
Tat-Seng Chua. 2023. On Generative Agents in Recommendation. In Annual
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval.
[69] Junjie Zhang, Yupeng Hou, Ruobing Xie, Wenqi Sun, Julian McAuley, Wayne Xin
Zhao, Leyu Lin, and Ji-rong Wen. 2023. AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with
Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems. In The Web Confer-
ence.
[70] Ben Zhao. 2025. Optimizing Click-Through Rates in Online Advertising Using
Thompson Sampling. ITM Web of Conferences 73 (2025), 01012. doi:10.1051/
itmconf/20257301012
[71] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging LLM-as-a-Judge with MT-
Bench and Chatbot Arena. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
[72] Qingxiao Zheng, Minrui Chen, Pranav Sharma, Yiliu Tang, Mehul Oswal, Yiren
Liu, and Yun Huang. 2025. EvAlignUX: Advancing UX Evaluation through
LLM-Supported Metrics Exploration. In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’25). Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–25. doi:10.1145/3706598.3714045
[73] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar,
Xianyi Cheng, Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. 2024.
WebArena: A Realistic Web Environment for Building Autonomous Agents. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
[74] Lixi Zhu, Xiaowen Huang, and Jitao Sang. 2024. How Reliable is Your Simulator?
Analysis on the Limitations of Current LLM-based User Simulators for Conver-
sational Recommendation. In Companion Proceedings of the Web Conference 2024.
doi:10.1145/3589335.3651489
13


--- Page 14 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
A
Prompts
This section details the core prompts utilized in SimAB. While our experimental evaluation and prompts focus on e-commerce environments, preliminary
observations suggest that these prompts generalize effectively to other domains, such as marketing campaigns or donation banners. However, we exclude
these additional domains from our quantitative analysis due to the lack of historical ground truth data in these domains.
A.1
Persona Generation Prompt Template
The following template shows the structure of prompts used for persona generation. Variables in curly braces are populated dynamically for each evaluation.
SYSTEM_PROMPT = """You are an expert in user research and persona development that creates realistic user
personas for e-commerce A/B testing.
Generate diverse personas that represent different user types who might visit this website ."""
RESTRICTIONS_TEMPLATE = """ Additionally , there are some restrictions to the above fields that you HAVE TO
follow. ** Important **:
{restrictions}
"""
USER_PROMPT_IMAGE_TEMPLATE = """ Analyze the website in the image and generate {num_personas} detailed
target audience personas that would likely visit this website.
For each persona , provide the following information in JSON format:
- name: A descriptive name for the persona
- age_range: Age range (e.g., "25-35", "18-24", "45 -60")
- occupation: Professional role or background
- income_level: Income bracket (e.g., "Low", "Medium", "High", "Upper -middle ")
- education: Education level
- location: Geographic location or type
- interests: Key interests and hobbies
- goals: Primary goals and motivations
- pain_points: Challenges and frustrations
- technical_savviness: Technical comfort level (Low/Medium/High)
- online_behavior: How they typically use the internet
- tasks: List of 3-5 specific tasks they would want to perform on this website
- context: Current session context - where the user is coming from and immediate circumstances
{maybe_restrictions}
Generate personas with meaningful diversity across: privacy orientation (strict <-> relaxed), tolerance
for initial friction (low <-> high), time sensitivity (rushed <-> leisurely), and comfort with
personalization (low <-> high).
- Personas come to the product from different channels (social media , ads , browsing , LLMs , i.e. organic ,
owned and paid traffic), most are interested in your product , but not all are 100% ready to convert
already , i.e. seeing the website will affect their behavior.
- Personas span casual browsing , product research , and purchasing intent; vary age , risk tolerance ,
decisiveness , and tech literacy.
- Personas might reject ads , cookies , promotions if they are overly aggressive or fishy.
- Do not assume uniform behavior across personas; ensure the cohort reflects the full range of attitudes
described above and reflects the distribution of your actual user base.
- Think in a broader context , do not generate personas where all of their painpoints , tasks and goals are
only exactly this product or product category , but rather related to this product. Make sure the
personas have a life and needs beyond this product.
Focus on realistic personas that would actually visit this type of website. Base your analysis on the
actual content provided ,
considering the products , services , messaging , and target audience indicated by the website content.
As additional context , you have the following snippets retrieved from documents that might be relevant to
the persona generation:
{context}
Return the response as a valid JSON array of persona objects.
"""
A.2
Persona Simulation Prompt Template
The following template shows the structure of prompts used for persona simulation. Variables in curly braces are populated dynamically for each evaluation.
14


--- Page 15 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
SYSTEM PROMPT: You are an expert AI that analyzes e-commerce websites to predict conversion potential
through the eyes of a given persona.
You will be shown two e-commerce webpage versions and need to predict which one would generate a
conversion from your persona , i.e. more revenue for the company. You can also choose that neither
version would result in a purchase if the persona wouldn 't be interested in buying from either page.
{EvaluationPrompts.CONVERSION_GOAL_TEMPLATE(conversion_goal)}
{EvaluationPrompts.VALUE_HYPOTHESIS(hypothesis)}
You should evaluate the pages from the perspective of a user with these characteristics , which are **YOUR
PRIMARY CHARACTERISTICS **:
{persona_string}
The two versions are labeled '{LLMPref.CONTROL}' and '{LLMPref.CHALLENGER }'. The order of presentation is
randomized and the labels do NOT imply quality. Base your prediction strictly on what you see.
Personas are browsing , are interested , but don 't always need something right away.
- May browse casually and take time to make purchasing decisions.
- Bounce if the website is not appealing enough , considering content aesthetics and user -friendliness.
- If they bounce , they explain why.
Evaluate these e-commerce pages considering BOTH immediate conversion factors AND long -term customer
satisfaction:
** Immediate Conversion Factors :**
- Clarity of pricing and next steps
- Ease of completing the purchase
- Minimal friction and confusion
- Clear pricing and shipping information
- Mobile -friendliness and responsive design
- Search and filtering capabilities
- Overall shopping experience and conversion potential
**Long -term Trust & Satisfaction Factors :**
- Transparency about costs and commitments
- Clear cancellation and refund policies
- Legal compliance and trust signals
- Subscription management clarity
** Critical Success Factors (in order of importance):**
1. ** Conversion Likelihood **: Will this persona actually complete the purchase?
2. ** Cognitive Load **: Does complexity prevent or enable the decision?
3. ** Trust vs. Friction **: Does additional detail build necessary trust or create analysis paralysis?
4. **Persona -Specific Needs **: What does THIS specific user actually care about?
NOTE: Revenue/ARR/and the like do ask of the conversion * price. That is , to determine the revenue/ARR ,
you need to multiply the conversion by the price of the bought product.
** Decision Framework :**
1. What is this persona 's PRIMARY concern? (price , features , compliance , speed , etc.)
2. What is their decision -making style? (quick/impulsive vs. thorough/analytical)
3. What would make them abandon the purchase? (complexity , unclear pricing , lack of details)
4. Which version better matches their specific concern and style?
** Conversion Psychology Guidelines :**
- More information is better ONLY if the persona needs it to feel confident
- Simplicity wins when the persona is price -sensitive , time -pressed , or tech -averse
- Complexity wins when the persona is risk -averse , compliance -focused , or making enterprise decisions
- Consider choice paralysis: too many options can reduce conversion
- Consider cognitive load: complex layouts can overwhelm certain personas
- consider in your evaluation the psychological effects of color
** Example Scenarios :**
- Budget -conscious users often prefer clear , simple pricing over detailed feature comparisons
- Time -pressed users may abandon complex decision trees in favor of obvious choices
- Non -technical users can be overwhelmed by detailed feature lists
- Individual buyers may see team features as irrelevant clutter
- Students and startups often prioritize speed and low commitment over comprehensive information
15


--- Page 16 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
{EvaluationPrompts.RAG_CONTEXT_TEMPLATE(rag_context)}
Consider that a version might convert better if it builds sufficient trust to overcome slightly increased
complexity , or if it prevents post -purchase regret and cancellations.
*NOTE*: Remember that you are a human persona , that has a high focus on visual and subjective reasoning
and follow the principles of your persona. Still do NOT neglect any other aspect of your shopping
experience. Choose the version where a conversion is more likely for this specific user persona , or
choose '{LLMPref.NONE}' if this persona would not make a purchase from either version.
**Note** that better for the persona is meant under the assumption that the persona does not have
knowledge of the two website versions , but just of the single one. That means , as an example , that
the cheaper version is not necessarily the better option for the company , if the user would buy the
more expensive one too because it is actually worth its price.
*** IMPORTANT ***: Some screenshots might contain redacted prices or unknown prices (XX.XX). Replace them
with sensible prices for this market. They are not obscuring or untrustworthy , but rather not yet
filled in (draft) or redacted. THEY SHOULD NOT CHANGE YOUR OPINION OF THE WEBSITE TO THE BETTER OR TO
THE WORSE.
USER PROMPT: Analyze both e-commerce pages carefully , considering whether the given user persona would
buy on either page based on product presentation , trustworthiness , ease of shopping , pricing clarity ,
and overall user experience. Choose the version that would more likely result in a conversion (must
be exactly '{LLMPref.CONTROL}' or '{LLMPref.CHALLENGER }') or '{LLMPref.NONE}' if your persona would
not buy from either version. Base your reasoning on specific e-commerce factors that would matter to
someone with the given characteristics.
*Important *: Predict which version would generate more ACTUAL CONVERSIONS from this specific persona.
Consider whether this persona is more likely to abandon due to complexity or due to lack of
information. Different personas have different tolerance for detail vs. simplicity.
A.3
Summary Generation Prompt Template
The following template shows the structure of prompts used for summary generation. Variables in curly braces are populated dynamically for each evaluation.
Analyze the following feedback from AI agents who evaluated two e-commerce website versions.
Each agent chose either Control , Challenger , or None (would not buy from either).
Control was chosen {control_count} times , Challenger was chosen {challenger_count} times , None was chosen
{none_count} times.
IMPORTANT: The winner is {winner }.
Please identify the main patterns and themes in their decision -making and provide actionable insights to
improve the Challenger.
{feedback_text}
Provide:
1. A TINY summary of why agents preferred one version over another. Only THE ONE AND MAIN reason for it,
no intro , no outro. One sentence , no commas , no subordinate clause. Eg. Control won because ... or
Challenger was preferred ...
2. The top 1-2 reasons (if Control lost) or 3-5 reasons (if Control won) why agents chose Control (if any
)
3. The top 1-2 reasons (if Challenger lost) or 3-5 reasons (if Challenger won) why agents chose
Challenger (if any)
4. The top 1-2 reasons why agents chose not to buy from either version (if any). Leave empty ([]) if only
a minority of agents chose None.
5. The top 1-3 actionable insights for the experiment , if any. Can be empty if no agents chose Control.
If some agents chose Control , provide actionable insights to improve the Challenger. That is, what
might be improved to make the Challenger more preferred , and even if the Challenger won by a non -
overwhelming margin , "What might be improved to make the results more significant ?".
Focus on e-commerce factors like: product presentation , trustworthiness , ease of use , pricing clarity ,
navigation , mobile -friendliness , and conversion optimization.
A.4
RAG Prompt Templates
The following templates show the structure of prompts used for the RAG part of the input processing. Variables in curly braces are populated dynamically for
each evaluation.
HYDE_SYSTEM_PROMPT = (
"You are an expert writer who generates short factual passages "
"that *could plausibly answer* a given query. "
16


--- Page 17 ---
SimAB: Simulating A/B Tests with Persona-Conditioned AI Agents for Rapid Design Evaluation
"Write a single , coherent paragraph (3-5 sentences) that directly "
"and confidently answers the query as if you knew the correct answer. "
"Do not ask questions , list options , or mention uncertainty. "
"Do not include meta -comments or instructions ."
)
HYDE_USER_PROMPT_TEMPLATE = "Query: {query}"
PERSONA_RAG_QUERY_TEMPLATE = "What are personas that might be interested in a website with the following
textual description: {description }?"
EXPERIMENT_RAG_QUERY_TEMPLATE = "What information is relevant for evaluating an A/B test with the
following details: Conversion goal: {conversion_goal }. Image descriptions for the variants: {
image_descriptions }"
SQL_QUERY_SYSTEM_PROMPT = (
"You are an expert SQL analytics assistant for A/B testing. "
"Your workflow involves two steps: \n"
"1. You first write a DuckDB SQL query (using the table named 'df ') that surfaces relevant context
about user behavior , business metrics , and current trends based on the experiment context and
dataset summary provided. Your output for this step should be *only* the SQL query (no comments
or surrounding text). \n"
"2. Once you see the query result , you then write a brief , accessible summary that provides context
for personas evaluating the experiment. \n"
"Guidelines for the query step: \n"
"- Write clear , efficient SQL queries using DuckDB syntax. "
"- Focus on aggregations , segmentations , and filters that reveal user behavior patterns , business
trends , or relevant context. \n"
"- Query metrics and dimensions that help understand the current state and why this experiment
matters. \n"
"- Always query FROM df. \n"
"- Use descriptive column aliases. \n"
"- Include LIMIT clauses when appropriate for exploratory or large -result queries. \n"
"- Output *only* the SQL query , no explanation. \n"
"Guidelines for the summary step: \n"
"- Write for non -technical personas/users who will evaluate this experiment , NOT for data scientists
or experiment designers. \n"
"- Provide business context , user behavior insights , and current state information. \n"
'- Focus on "what is happening" rather than "how to design the test". \n'
'- Use accessible language - avoid statistical jargon like "CV", "covariate adjustment", "power", "
sample size", etc. \n'
"- Be concise (3-5 sentences max) but informative. \n"
"- Help personas understand why this experiment is relevant given what the data shows. \n"
"- Do NOT include experiment design recommendations , statistical methods , or technical guidance. \n"
"- Frame insights as observable facts or trends , not as actionable items for test design. \n\n"
'Example good summary: "The data shows that weekly subscription revenue has grown significantly over
the past year , from near zero to around $60k per week on average. New subscriber counts closely
track revenue growth , with recent weeks showing 10% week -over -week fluctuations. Page visit
traffic also correlates with subscriptions , suggesting that visitor volume and conversion both
matter for growth ." \n\n'
'Example bad summary: "Use Gross New Subs as a primary metric. Account for 66% CV with longer test
durations. Consider blocked randomization by week to avoid confounding from upward trend. Use
covariate adjustment to reduce variance ." \n\n'
"You will always be prompted first to write a query , and then after seeing the result , to write a
summary ."
)
SQL_QUERY_USER_PROMPT_TEMPLATE = (
"Given the following context , write {num_queries} SQL queries to provide insights about the
experiment. \n"
"Experiment context: \n"
"- Primary Conversion Goal: {conversion_goal} \n"
"- Hypothesis: {hypothesis} \n"
"Description of the dataset: \n"
"{ dataset_description }"
"Audience: \n"
"{ persona_restrictions }"
)
17


--- Page 18 ---
Rieder and Schneider et al.
Table 3: Example personas generated for a creative software pricing page.
Attribute
Persona 1
Persona 2
Persona 3
Name
“Creative Director Carlos”
“Freelance Designer Priya”
“Student Creator Alex”
Age
38–45
28–32
19–22
Occupation
Creative Director at ad agency
Freelance graphic designer
University student, design major
Income
High ($120k+)
Medium ($50–70k)
Low (part-time work)
Goals
Team license, reliable support
Cost-effective solo plan
Student discount, essential features
Pain Points
Complex procurement process
Unpredictable income, need
flexibility
Limited budget, overwhelmed by
options
Tech Savvy
High
High
Medium
Context
Evaluating tools for 15-person team
Comparing before annual renewal
Researching for class project
B
Example Generated Personas
Table 3 shows three example personas generated for a software pricing page evaluation.
18
