--- Page 1 ---
1
WirelessAgent++: Automated Agentic Workflow
Design and Benchmarking for Wireless Networks
Jingwen Tong, Member, IEEE, Zijian Li, Fang Liu, Wei Guo, Member, IEEE, and Jun Zhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—The integration of large language models (LLMs)
into wireless networks has sparked growing interest in build-
ing autonomous AI agents for wireless tasks. However, ex-
isting approaches rely heavily on manually crafted prompts
and static agentic workflows, a process that is labor-intensive,
unscalable, and often suboptimal. In this paper, we propose
WIRELESSAGENT++, a framework that automates the design
of agentic workflows for various wireless tasks. By treating
each workflow as an executable code composed of modular
operators, WIRELESSAGENT++ casts agent design as a pro-
gram search problem and solves it with a domain-adapted
Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm. Moreover, we
establish WIRELESSBENCH, a standardized multi-dimensional
benchmark suite comprising Wireless Communication Home-
work (WCHW), Network Slicing (WCNS), and Mobile Ser-
vice Assurance (WCMSA), covering knowledge reasoning, code-
augmented tool use, and multi-step decision-making. Experiments
demonstrate that WIRELESSAGENT++ autonomously discovers
superior workflows, achieving test scores of 78.37% (WCHW),
90.95% (WCNS), and 97.07% (WCMSA), with a total search cost
below $5 per task. Notably, our approach outperforms state-of-
the-art prompting baselines by up to 31% and general-purpose
workflow optimizers by 11.1%, validating its effectiveness in
generating robust, self-evolving wireless agents. The code is
available at https://github.com/jwentong/WirelessAgent-R2.
Index Terms—Large language models, autonomous agents,
automated workflow design, Monte Carlo tree search, wireless
benchmark.
I. INTRODUCTION
T
HE growing complexity of wireless networks, spanning
heterogeneous radio access, dynamic spectrum sharing,
and ultra-dense deployments, has made AI-native design a cor-
nerstone of the 6G vision [1]. Managing the diverse wireless
tasks that arise in modern networks, from base-station con-
figuration and fault diagnosis to real-time resource optimiza-
tion, demands intelligence that goes well beyond traditional
model-driven or data-driven approaches [2]. While classical
optimization-based solutions excel at well-defined, single-
objective problems, they struggle with open-ended problem
formulations, non-ideal channel models, and the multi-step
reasoning that many practical wireless tasks require.
The recent development of large language models (LLMs)
is driving a promising paradigm shift [3]. Their ability to
understand natural-language specifications, generate structured
Jingwen Tong and Fang Liu are with the College of Electronics and
Information Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China (e-mails:
{eejwentong, liuf}@szu.edu.cn); Zijian Li, Wei Guo, and Jun Zhang are
with the Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering, The Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR (e-mails: zi-
jian.li@connect.ust.hk; eeweiguo@ust.hk; eejzhang@ust.hk). The correspond-
ing author is Jun Zhang.
outputs, and perform in-context reasoning makes them attrac-
tive building blocks for intelligent network management. A
growing body of work has explored this direction: TeleQnA [4]
evaluates LLMs as knowledge bases for telecom question-
answering; WirelessLLM [5] aligns LLM capabilities with
wireless domain knowledge through prompting and retrieval-
augmented generation; NetLLM [6] fine-tunes LLMs for net-
working tasks such as viewport prediction and adaptive bi-
trate streaming; and TelecomGPT [7] further fine-tunes open-
source LLMs on telecom-specific corpora for standards-based
reasoning. These contributions demonstrate that LLMs can
internalize substantial wireless knowledge. However, directly
applying an LLM to a wireless task, in a single-turn, prompt-
in-answer-out fashion, often falls short when the task requires
multi-step reasoning, external tool invocation (e.g., calling a
path-loss calculator), or iterative error correction.
To overcome these limitations, recent research has turned
to LLM-based autonomous agents: systems that augment an
LLM with external tools, memory, and structured control flows
to solve complex tasks in multiple steps [8], [9]. The ReAct
paradigm [10] interleaves reasoning and acting in a closed
loop, enabling agents to dynamically decide what action to
take next. Orchestration frameworks such as LangChain [11]
further facilitate tool integration and task decomposition. In
our preliminary work, WirelessAgent [12], we demonstrated
that a ReAct-style agent equipped with domain-specific tools
(e.g., telecom formula retriever, precision calculator, and ray-
tracing channel predictor) can perform multi-step telecom
reasoning and achieve near-optimal performance on network
slicing tasks. This established a proof of concept: agentic
workflows are a viable and powerful approach to wireless AI.
However, these approaches suffer from a fundamental lim-
itation: the agentic workflow is entirely hand-crafted and
static. Researchers manually decide which tools to invoke,
when to reflect on intermediate results, how to decompose
a problem into sub-tasks, and how to format the final out-
put. This “manual agent engineering” is becoming the new
bottleneck for wireless AI, just as manual feature engineering
was the bottleneck for machine learning before the advent of
representation learning [13]. As tasks diversify and models
scale, the human effort required to design, tune, and maintain
these workflows grows prohibitively, and the resulting designs
are often suboptimal for the task at hand. This bottleneck calls
for automated agentic workflow design in wireless networks.
Automating the design of agentic workflows for wireless
networks presents several challenges. First, the search space
is vast and code-structured, where each workflow is an exe-
cutable program with diverse control flow, prompt strings, and
arXiv:2603.00501v1  [cs.NI]  28 Feb 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
operator compositions. Second, wireless tasks require domain-
specific tools (e.g., ray-tracing predictors, Kalman filters, pre-
cision calculators) that must be seamlessly integrated into the
agent’s reasoning loop, not merely invoked as static function
calls. Third, the evaluation is inherently noisy and costly, as
each candidate workflow must be executed on representative
problems involving multiple LLM application programming
interface (API) calls.
In this paper, we propose WIRELESSAGENT++, a frame-
work that casts agent design as a program search problem,
which is analogous to neural architecture search (NAS) [14]
but operating over agent workflow topologies. We devise a
domain-adapted Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) method
to solve this program search problem by jointly optimizing
the workflow and tool calling. In addition, we introduce a
ReAct-based ToolAgent operator that enables closed-loop in-
terleaving of LLM reasoning and external tool calls. Moreover,
we employ three domain-aware enhancements (i.e., penalized
Boltzmann selection, maturity-aware heuristic critic, and 3-
class experience replay) to address the evaluation noise, cost,
and task diversity challenges unique to the wireless domain.
To enable rigorous and reproducible evaluation, we further
establishWIRELESSBENCH, a standardized multi-dimensional
benchmark suite comprising Wireless Communication Home-
work (WCHW), Network Slicing (WCNS), and Mobile Ser-
vice Assurance (WCMSA), covering knowledge reasoning,
code-augmented tool use, and multi-step decision-making.
We conduct extensive experiments on WIRELESSBENCH
to evaluate WIRELESSAGENT++. Numerical results demon-
strate that WIRELESSAGENT++ autonomously discovers work-
flows achieving test scores of 78.37% (WCHW), 90.95%
(WCNS), and 97.07% (WCMSA). Notably, these automati-
cally generated workflows outperform state-of-the-art hand-
crafted prompting baselines by up to 31% and the best general-
purpose workflow optimizer by 11.1%, validating both the
feasibility and the practical value of automated agent design
in the wireless domain. The main contributions of this work
are summarized as follows:
• We formalize automated agent design for wireless networks
as a program search problem, representing each workflow as
executable code composed of modular operators and solving
it with a domain-adapted MCTS algorithm.
• We design a ReAct-based ToolAgent operator for closed-loop
tool use and propose three domain-aware enhancements,
i.e., penalized Boltzmann selection, maturity-aware heuristic
critic, and 3-class experience replay, tailored to the complex
evaluation landscape of wireless tasks.
• We release WIRELESSBENCH, a first and multi-dimensional
benchmark for wireless LLM-based agents, comprising
WCHW (knowledge reasoning), WCNS (dynamic network
slicing), and WCMSA (proactive mobile service assurance),
totaling 3,392 problems with deterministic ground truths.
• Extensive experiments show that automatically discovered
workflows outperform hand-crafted baselines by up to 31%
and the best general-purpose optimizer by 11.1%.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related works. Section III provides a system
overview and formulates the automated agent design problem.
Section IV details the WIRELESSAGENT++ framework. Sec-
tion V introduces WIRELESSBENCH. Section VI presents the
experimental results. Section VII concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
A. LLMs for Wireless Networks
The application of LLMs to wireless networks has advanced
rapidly, spanning telecom Q&A [4], domain-knowledge align-
ment via prompting and retrieval-augmented generation [5],
LLM fine-tuning for networking tasks [6], and telecom-corpus
pre-training [7]. These efforts enhance what an LLM knows
about wireless systems, yet the agent’s reasoning structure,
i.e., how it decomposes a problem, when to invoke tools, and
how to aggregate results, remains fixed and manually specified.
Our work automates this structural design itself.
B. Autonomous Agentic Workflow Design
LLM-based autonomous agents [8], [9] extend standalone
LLMs with tool use and multi-step control flow. Founda-
tional paradigms include ReAct [10] (reasoning–acting loops),
CodeAct [15] (executable code as actions), and orchestration
frameworks such as LangChain [11] and AutoGPT [16].
However, all rely on hand-crafted workflows. Recent work
seeks to automate agent design: OPRO [17] and DSPy [18]
optimize prompts and pipelines; ADAS [13] programs new
agent architectures via a meta-agent; AutoFlow [19] iteratively
refines natural-language-program workflows; AFlow [20] uses
MCTS over executable code; and AgentFlow [21] trains a
four-module agent with reinforcement learning. These works,
however, target general NLP benchmarks and do not address
wireless-specific challenges such as noisy evaluation, high
stability requirements, and tight tool integration. Our work
bridges this gap by applying automated agentic workflow de-
sign to wireless tasks with a standardized wireless benchmark.
C. AI Agents for Wireless Networks
The vision of intelligent agents for wireless networks dates
back to the AI-router concept of Jiang et al. [22]. The LLM era
has reinvigorated this line of research: AgentRAN [23] builds
a self-organizing hierarchy of LLM agents for Open RAN;
Agoran [24] deploys cooperating AI branches in a 6G RAN
marketplace; Agentic TinyML [25] places lightweight agents
at edge nodes for proactive handover; Lin et al. [26] enable
natural-language network control; SignalLLM [27] constructs
a general-purpose agent for signal processing; and our prior
WirelessAgent [12] demonstrated ReAct-style multi-step tele-
com reasoning with domain tools. Despite this progress, all
existing wireless agents rely on manually designed workflows.
WIRELESSAGENT++ is, to our knowledge, the first framework
to automate agentic workflow design for wireless networks.
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. From WirelessAgent to WIRELESSAGENT++
Our prior work, WirelessAgent [12], introduced an LLM-
based agent framework for wireless networks built on four core


--- Page 3 ---
3
Fig. 1: System overview: from WirelessAgent (manual design) to WIRELESSAGENT++ (automated design). Left: in WirelessAgent, a human expert iteratively
designs a fixed agentic workflow through multi-round dialogue with an LLM. Right: in WIRELESSAGENT++, an Optimizer LLM jointly searches over the
workflow structure and tool-calling strategy; the resulting workflow is executed by an Executor LLM on WIRELESSBENCH, automatically producing distinct,
task-adaptive workflows (e.g., Q&A, network slicing (NS), and mobile service assurance (MSA)) without manual engineering.
modules (i.e., perception, memory, planning, and action) that
mirror human cognitive processes. The framework employs a
ReAct-style agentic workflow [10] implemented on the Lang-
Graph architecture, where the agent interleaves reasoning with
domain-specific tool calls (e.g., a telecom formula retriever, a
precision calculator, and a ray-tracing channel predictor) in a
closed loop. In a network slicing case study, WirelessAgent
achieved near-optimal bandwidth utilization, outperforming
prompt-only baselines by 44.4%.
Despite these encouraging results, WirelessAgent suffers
from three limitations that motivate the present work. First,
the workflow topology, which tools to invoke, in what order,
and how to aggregate intermediate results, are entirely hand-
coded by a human expert for each task. Second, extending
the framework to a new task (e.g., mobile service assurance)
requires redesigning the entire workflow from scratch, as the
static control flow cannot generalize across task types. Third,
the prompt strings, error-handling logic, and output formatting
are manually tuned without systematic optimization, leaving
significant performance on the table.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, WIRELESSAGENT++ addresses these
limitations by replacing the human expert with an automated
program search pipeline. It automates this process: an Opti-
mizer LLM jointly searches over workflow structures and tool-
calling strategies, while an Executor LLM evaluates each can-
didate workflow on WIRELESSBENCH. Through MCTS-based
iterative optimization, the framework automatically produces
distinct, task-adaptive workflows, for various wireless tasks,
such as telecom Q&A, NS, and MSA tasks.
B. Wireless Tasks as Agent Programs
To formalize this automated search, we next define the
key concepts, i.e., wireless tasks, agent workflows, operators,
and the search space that underpin the WIRELESSAGENT++
optimization framework. Mathematically, we define a wireless
task by T = (D, M), where D = {(xi, yi)}N
i=1 is a dataset
of question–answer pairs and M is an evaluation metric (e.g.,
accuracy, F1 score, or a composite multi-dimensional score).
An agent workflow W is an executable program that, given an
input question x, produces an output ˆy through a sequence of
operations:
ˆy = W(x; θ),
(1)
where θ is the configuration parameters, including prompt
strings, operator choices, and the control-flow structure.
Definition 1 (Operator): An operator is an atomic build-
ing block of a workflow. We define the operator set O =
{o1, o2, . . . , oK}, where each operator ok has a typed interface
ok : Xk →Yk. Specifically, the operator library provides:
• Custom(x, p): It invokes an LLM with input x and instruc-
tion prompt p;
• ToolAgent(x, s): A ReAct-based agent [10] that inter-
leaves reasoning (“what tool should I call next?”) and acting
(executing a tool call) in a loop for up to s iterations, with
access to domain-specific tools such as ray-tracing channel
predictors and Kalman filters;
• CodeLevel(x, f): A deterministic, LLM-free operator
that directly executes a domain tool f ∈F on input
x via compiled code (e.g., CodeLevelRayTracing,
CodeLevelKalmanPredictor). No LLM call is made;
the output is exact and reproducible;
• ScEnsemble({yi}, x): It aggregates multiple candidate
answers via self-consistency voting;
• AnswerGenerate(x): It produces a structured answer.
Remark 1 (Two Tool-Invocation Modes): ToolAgent and
CodeLevel represent two complementary ways to invoke
domain tools. ToolAgent wraps tool calls inside an LLM
reasoning loop, allowing the agent to dynamically decide
which tool to call, with what arguments, and how to in-
terpret the result. CodeLevel bypasses the LLM entirely
and calls the tool via a deterministic code, yielding zero-
variance outputs at near-zero cost. During MCTS optimization,
the search algorithm is free to choose either mode; as we


--- Page 4 ---
4
Algorithm 1 ReAct-Based ToolAgent Operator
Require: Input x, strategy prompt s, tool set F, max iterations I
Ensure: Output ˆy
1: H ←[ ]
▷Interaction history
2: nfail ←0
▷Consecutive failure counter
3: for i = 1, 2, . . . , I do
4:
Think: (thoughti, ai, argsi) ←LLM(x, s, H, F)
5:
if ai = finish then
6:
return argsi
▷Agent decides to stop
7:
end if
8:
Act: ri ←F[ai](argsi)
▷Execute tool
9:
if ri is error then
10:
nfail ←nfail + 1
11:
if nfail ≥2 then break
▷Early stop
12:
end if
13:
else
14:
nfail ←0
15:
end if
16:
Observe: Append (thoughti, ai, ri) to H
17: end for
18: ˆy ←LLM(x, H[−3 :])
▷Fallback: summarize last 3 steps
19: return ˆy
show in Section VI-C, the optimizer often discovers that an
initial ToolAgent-based workflow can be refined into a more
efficient CodeLevel pipeline once the correct tool-calling
pattern has been identified.
The detailed pseudocode for the ToolAgent operator is
given in Algorithm 1.
The ToolAgent prompt is structured in three layers: (i) a
strategy prompt that is optimizable by the MCTS search, (ii) a
runtime context that dynamically includes tool descriptions,
the current problem, and the interaction history, and (iii) a
fixed protocol that enforces structured output in XML for-
mat (<thought>, <action>, <action_input>). Tool
arguments are parsed with automatic correction for common
LLM output issues such as double braces, unescaped LaTeX,
and inline math expressions in JSON fields. If the maximum
iteration count I is reached without a finish action, the
agent falls back to generating an answer from the last three
interaction steps.
C. Search Space
The search space Ωis the set of all syntactically valid
executable programs (or workflows) that:
1) Implement a Workflow class with an asynchronous
__call__ method;
2) Use only operators from O and tools from the domain
library F;
3) Return a tuple (ˆy, c) where ˆy is the answer string and c is
the API cost.
Note that this space is vast but structured: workflows are
short programs (typically 10–50 lines) expressed through a
constrained API, which makes the search tractable.
D. Optimization Objective
Problem 1 (Automated Agent Design): Given a wireless task
T = (D, M), a set of operators O, and a domain tool library
F, find the workflow W∗that maximizes the objective:
W∗= arg max
W∈ΩE(x,y)∼Dval [M(W(x), y)] .
(2)
In practice, we evaluate W on a validation subset Dval ⊂D
and use the median score across multiple evaluation runs for
robustness, as detailed in Section IV.
IV. THEWIRELESSAGENT++ FRAMEWORK
This section presents the WIRELESSAGENT++ framework.
We first describe the system architecture (Section IV-A), then
detail the domain-specific tool library (Section IV-B), the
core MCTS-based optimization algorithm (Section IV-C), the
maturity-aware heuristic critic (Section IV-D), and the 3-class
experience replay mechanism (Section IV-E).
A. System Architecture
Fig. 2 illustrates the WIRELESSAGENT++ framework, which
consists of three tightly coupled components: a structured
search space, an MCTS-based search algorithm, and the
WIRELESSBENCH evaluation suite.
1) Search Space (left): Each candidate workflow is repre-
sented as a node in the MCTS tree. A node consists of
fixed parameters, i.e., the LLM backbone, temperature,
and output format (e.g., JSON, XML), and optimizable
prompts that the search algorithm revises across iterations.
Nodes are composed from a library of modular opera-
tors, including Custom (LLM reasoning), ToolAgent
(ReAct-style tool use [10]), Ensemble (self-consistency
voting), Review/Revise (self-critique and correction),
Program (code generation and execution), and Test
(output validation), together with a domain-specific tool
set F comprising a ray-tracing channel predictor, a Kalman
filter, and a telecom formula retriever.
2) Search Algorithm (center): The core MCTS loop iterates
through four phases: (i) Boltzmann Probability Selection
chooses a parent workflow from the top-K candidates, bal-
ancing exploitation of high-scoring nodes with exploration
of under-visited ones; (ii) LLM-Based Expansion employs
an advanced Optimizer LLM (e.g., GPT-4o) to propose
a focused code mutation, e.g., revising prompts, adding
or removing operators, or changing tool-calling strategies;
(iii) Executing Evaluation deploys the mutated workflow
on WIRELESSBENCH using a cost-efficient Executor LLM
(e.g., DeepSeek-V3) and computes a robust median score;
and (iv) Experience Backpropagation records the modi-
fication outcome, error logs, and scores to guide future
iterations. This two-tier LLM design, i.e., an advanced
model for creative exploration and a cost-efficient model
for large-scale evaluation, keeps optimization costs man-
ageable without sacrificing search quality.
3) WIRELESSBENCH (right): The evaluation suite bench-
marks candidate workflows on three wireless task types. As
shown in the right panel, the optimizer discovers distinct
workflow topologies for various wireless tasks, such as the
WCHW, WCNS and WCMSA workflows.


--- Page 5 ---
5
Fig. 2: The overall architecture of WIRELESSAGENT++, comprising three components. Search Space: each workflow node contains fixed parameters and
optimizable prompts, composed from a library of operators and domain-specific tools. Search Algorithm: an MCTS-based optimizer iterates through four
phases: penalized Boltzmann probability selection, LLM-based expansion, executing evaluation, and experience backpropagation, using an advanced Optimizer
LLM for expansion and a cost-efficient Executor LLM for evaluation. WIRELESSBENCH: example task-adaptive workflows automatically discovered for
WCHW, WCNS, and WCMSA, each exhibiting distinct operator compositions and tool-calling patterns.
B. Domain-Specific Tool Library
A key differentiator of WIRELESSAGENT++ from general-
purpose workflow optimizers is its domain-specific tool library
F, which provides wireless-domain capabilities that LLMs
inherently lack:
1) Telecom Formula Retriever: A retrieval-augmented gen-
eration (RAG) tool that searches a curated knowledge
base of 31 verified telecom formulas organized across 10+
categories: bandwidth (raised-cosine, NRZ, Nyquist), BER
(BPSK, BFSK, ASK, DPSK, non-coherent BFSK, Nakagami-
faded DPSK), FM/AM (Carson’s rule, FM SNR improvement
factor 3β2(β+1)), delta modulation, PCM (SQNR = 6.02n+
1.76 dB), Rayleigh fading (level crossing rate, average fade
duration, Markov correlation J0(2πfDTs)), channel capacity
(Shannon), error-control coding (detection capability dmin−1,
correction capability ⌊(dmin −1)/2⌋), NOMA/SIC, and water-
filling power allocation.
Given a natural-language query (e.g., “BPSK BER over
AWGN”), the retriever builds an inverted keyword index at
initialization and scores each formula by a weighted relevance
function:
score(q, f) = 2.0 wkw+1.5 wname+0.5 wnotes+0.3 wtex+1.0 wcat,
(3)
where wkw, wname, wnotes, wtex ∈{0, 1} indicate whether the
query matches the formula’s keywords, name, usage notes,
or LaTeX body, and wcat is a category bonus for domain-
aware synonym expansion (e.g., “bit error” →“BER”). The
top-k formulas are returned with variable definitions, LaTeX
representation, and notes.
2) Telecom Calculator:
A SciPy-backed precision cal-
culator that provides exact numerical computation for 20
TABLE I: Ray-tracing channel predictor parameters.
Parameter
Value
TX power
30 dBm
Carrier frequency
2.4 GHz
Bandwidth
20 MHz
Noise figure
8 dB
Thermal noise
−174 + 10 log10(BW) dBm
User height
1.5 m
Default building height
10.0 m (or OSM levels ×3.0)
TX placement
Centroid of tallest building + 5.0 m
operations commonly encountered in wireless communica-
tions. The supported operations are: erfc, erf, Q-function,
Q−1-function, Bessel functions (Jn, In, Yn), Marcum Q-
function, BER computations (BPSK, BFSK, non-coherent
BFSK, DPSK), Shannon capacity, Rayleigh fading statistics
(outage probability, level crossing rate, average fade duration),
Rician outage probability, and FM Bessel coefficients.
This tool addresses a critical weakness of LLMs, which
frequently make numerical errors on transcendental functions.
For the Marcum Q-function, the calculator first attempts
scipy.special.marcumq; if unavailable, it falls back to
numerical integration via scipy.integrate.quad with
an upper limit of max(b+20, a+20, 50), or a convergent series
expansion (up to 100 terms, convergence threshold 10−15). All
computations use 10-digit precision.
3) Ray-Tracing Channel Predictor: A site-specific ray-
tracing engine estimates received signal quality based on user
positions, enabling realistic channel-aware resource allocation.
The engine operates on real-world building geometry extracted
from OpenStreetMap (OSM) data covering three HKUST
campus regions (North, Center, South). The key parameters
are summarized in Table I.


--- Page 6 ---
6
Internally, the tool first determines the line-of-sight (LOS)
condition by testing ray–building polygon intersections at
fractional distances t ∈{0.3, 0.5, 0.7} between the transmitter
and user. The path loss is then computed as:
PLLOS = 20 log10(d) + 20 log10(f) −147.55 (dB),
(4)
PLNLOS = PLLOS + 20 + 30 log10
 max(d/100, 0.1)

(dB),
(5)
where d (m) is the 3D distance and f (Hz) is the carrier
frequency. The received SNR (dB) is obtained as SNR =
PTX −PL−N0, and is then quantized to a CQI ∈{1, . . . , 15}
via a linear mapping:
CQI = round

1 + 14 · clamp(SNR, −10, 30) + 10
40

. (6)
The full CQI-to-spectral-efficiency mapping follows the 4-bit
CQI Table 1 of 3GPP TS 38.214 (Table 5.2.2.1-2) and is
provided in Appendix H. Throughput is then R = B · η,
where B (MHz) is the allocated bandwidth and η (bps/Hz)
is the spectral efficiency corresponding to the estimated CQI.
This tool supports both ToolAgent (LLM-driven) and
CodeLevel (deterministic) invocation modes (cf. Remark 1);
tool-assisted CQI prediction is critical, as direct LLM estima-
tion yields near-random accuracy.
4) Kalman Filter Predictor: For the mobile service as-
surance benchmark (WCMSA), a code-level Kalman filter
predicts future user positions from historical trajectory data.
The filter uses a constant-velocity state-space model with state
vector x = [x, y, vx, vy]T :
xt+1 = F xt + wt,
zt = H xt + vt,
(7)
where the state transition and observation matrices are:
F =


1
0
∆t
0
0
1
0
∆t
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1

,
H =
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

,
(8)
with ∆t = 1.0 s. The process noise covariance is:
Q = q2


∆t4/4
0
∆t3/2
0
0
∆t4/4
0
∆t3/2
∆t3/2
0
∆t2
0
0
∆t3/2
0
∆t2

,
(9)
with q = 0.5, measurement noise R = r2I2 with r = 0.1,
and initial covariance P0 = 10 · I4. The filter processes a
trajectory of 4–6 historical positions to produce a one-step-
ahead position prediction.
This tool is chained with the ray-tracing predictor within the
ToolAgent’s ReAct loop: the agent first calls the Kalman
filter to forecast the next position, then calls ray-tracing at
the predicted coordinates to estimate future CQI, enabling
proactive resource management.
C. MCTS-Based Workflow Optimization
Algorithm 2 presents the overall optimization procedure:
Algorithm 2 Refined MCTS for Workflow Optimization
Require: Task T , seed workflow W0, max rounds T, validation runs
V
Ensure: Best workflow W∗
1: Initialize: evaluate W0 on Dval, store result
2: for t = 1, 2, . . . , T do
3:
Load processed experience E
4:
P ←GETTOPROUNDS(K)
▷Top-K candidates
5:
Wparent ←PENALIZEDBOLTZMANNSELECT(P, E)
6:
Rcritic ←HEURISTICCRITIC(Wparent)
7:
ˆ
W ←LLMMUTATE(Wparent, E, Rcritic)
8:
if CHECKMODIFICATION( ˆ
W, E) = False then
9:
goto Line 5
▷Reject blocked mutations
10:
end if
11:
s ←[]
12:
for v = 1, . . . , V do
▷Multiple validation runs
13:
sv ←EVALUATE( ˆ
W, Dval)
14:
Append sv to s
15:
end for
16:
¯s ←median(s)
▷Robust scoring
17:
UPDATEEXPERIENCE(Wparent, ˆ
W, ¯s)
▷3-class
18:
Store ( ˆ
W, ¯s)
19: end for
20: return W∗= arg maxt ¯st
1) Selection (Penalized Boltzmann Sampling): Given the
top-K candidate workflows {(Wi, si)}K
i=1 sorted by average
score si, we select a parent using a Penalized Boltzmann
distribution. Unlike the conventional MCTS method, our ap-
proach directly incorporates the exploration history through
multiplicative penalty factors.
For each candidate i, we compute an exploration penalty
ρi ∈[0.1, 1.3] based on its experience record:
ρi = max

0.1, min
 1.3, 1−0.7·rfail
i
+0.2·rsucc
i

·γi

, (10)
where rfail
i
=
nfail
i
/ntotal
i
is the failure ratio, rsucc
i
=
nsucc
i
/ntotal
i
is the success ratio among all child mutations, and
γi = 0.8 if ntotal
i
≥3 (saturation discount), otherwise γi = 1.
The selection probability is then computed as a mixture of a
uniform distribution and a penalized Boltzmann distribution:
pi = λ · 1
K + (1 −λ) ·
ρi · exp(α · ˜si)
PK
j=1 ρj · exp(α · ˜sj)
,
(11)
where ˜si = si −maxj sj is a shifted score for numerical
stability, α > 0 is a temperature parameter, and λ ∈(0, 1)
controls the exploration–exploitation trade-off.
Remark 2: The multiplicative penalty in (11) naturally
implements “soft pruning”: a node with all-failure history
(ρi →0.1) is rarely selected but never completely removed,
preserving the possibility of recovery. This is more robust than
a hard prune, which is irreversible.
2) Expansion (LLM-Based Code Mutation): Given the se-
lected parent workflow Wparent with its code, prompt, score,
error logs, and the critic report, an advanced Optimizer LLM
generates a single focused modification, e.g., revising a prompt,
inserting a verification step, or changing the tool-use strategy.
To maintain stability, each mutation is constrained to modify
no more than 5 lines of code. The LLM is provided with:
i) The current workflow code and prompt; ii) The formatted


--- Page 7 ---
7
TABLE II: Heuristic critic aggressiveness levels and allowed mutation types.
A node is saturated if it has ≥2 failed mutations and zero successes.
Level
Condition
Allowed Changes
Ultra-conservative
Saturated
Single word / punctuation only
Conservative
s ≥0.65
Minor prompt wording; no structural
changes
Moderate
0.50 ≤s < 0.65
Single structural change; no new
branches
Aggressive
s < 0.50
Structural changes, new operators,
ToolAgent additions
experience (past successes, failures, neutral results); iii) The
critic report with score-aware recommendations; iv) A descrip-
tion of available operators and tools. Before the mutation is
accepted, a modification check verifies that: 1) it is not an exact
duplicate of a previously failed modification, 2) it does not
contain known harmful patterns (e.g., patterns experimentally
proven to degrade performance).
3) Executing Evaluation: Each candidate workflow is eval-
uated V times on the validation set Dval by a cost-efficient
Executor LLM, and the median score (rather than the mean)
is used as the performance estimate. This provides robustness
against outlier evaluations, which are common in wireless
settings due to the stochastic nature of LLM outputs and the
sensitivity of numerical computations. The evaluation records,
including per-problem scores, error logs, and API costs, are
stored for subsequent analysis.
4) Experience Backpropagation: The evaluation outcome
is classified via the 3-class mechanism (Section IV-E) and
recorded alongside the modification description, failure logs,
and scores. These accumulated experiences directly inform the
penalty factor ρ in future Boltzmann selection (10) and provide
structured exemplars for the Optimizer LLM’s next expansion.
D. Maturity-Aware Heuristic Critic
A straightforward approach would evaluate every proposed
mutation on the full validation set. However, each evaluation
requires multiple LLM API calls and is both time-consuming
and expensive. To avoid unnecessary evaluations, we introduce
a maturity-aware heuristic critic that pre-screens mutations
based on the current workflow’s characteristics.
More importantly, the critic is not an LLM; it is a
lightweight, zero-cost, rule-based analyzer that examines:
1) Performance maturity: Based on the current score s, the
critic determines the recommended aggressiveness level.
Table II summarizes the four-level policy, where the thresh-
olds are set at τhigh = 0.65 and τmid = 0.50:
Level(s) =









Ultra-conservative,
node saturated,
Conservative,
s ≥τhigh = 0.65,
Moderate,
τmid ≤s < τhigh,
Aggressive,
s < τmid = 0.50.
(12)
High-scoring workflows should receive only minor prompt
adjustments; low-scoring workflows may undergo struc-
tural changes.
2) Structural complexity: By parsing the workflow code via
abstract syntax tree (AST) analysis, the critic detects the
number of operator calls, presence of conditional logic, and
tool usage patterns. Over-engineered workflows (e.g., 5+
sequential steps, nested conditionals) are flagged, and the
report recommends simplification.
3) Error pattern analysis: By analyzing the evaluation log,
the critic categorizes errors into format errors (answer
extraction failures), unit errors (wrong unit conversion), and
value errors (incorrect computation), then provides targeted
recommendations.
4) Node
saturation: If a workflow has been mutated
≥
2 times with all failures and no successes, it is
marked as saturated. The aggressiveness is overridden to
ULTRA-CONSERVATIVE, and the optimizer is advised to
select a different parent.
The critic report is appended to the LLM mutation prompt,
guiding, but not constraining, the Optimizer LLM’s proposals.
E. 3-Class Experience Replay
In wireless benchmarks, evaluation scores are subject to
noise from LLM stochasticity, numerical precision, and answer
extraction variability. Standard two-class experience (success/-
failure) can misclassify marginal improvements as successes
and marginal degradations as failures, leading the optimizer
to “chase noise.” Thus, we introduce a significance threshold
ϵ > 0 and classify each mutation outcome into three classes:
Class(∆s) =





SUCCESS,
∆s > +ϵ,
NEUTRAL,
|∆s| ≤ϵ,
FAILURE,
∆s < −ϵ,
(13)
where ∆s = ¯snew −sparent is the score change. In our
experiments, we set ϵ = 0.02 (i.e., 2% absolute accuracy).
These classes are treated differently in experience replay:
• Success: The modification is stored as a positive exemplar.
The optimizer is encouraged to build upon similar strategies.
• Neutral: The modification is recorded but not penalized.
Minor variations of neutral approaches are allowed, ac-
knowledging that the direction may be promising with
different parameters.
• Failure: The exact modification is blacklisted to prevent
repetition. The failure also contributes to the parent node’s
penalty factor ρ in (10).
Remark 3: The choice of ϵ balances sensitivity and stability.
Too small an ϵ makes the optimizer reactive to noise; too large
an ϵ causes it to miss genuine improvements. We analyze the
sensitivity to ϵ in Section VI-D.
F. Convergence Detection
To avoid unnecessary computation, WIRELESSAGENT++
monitors convergence by tracking the running top-k average
score across rounds. Specifically, let ¯St denote the mean of
the top-k scores observed up to round t, and let σ ¯St =
qP
j∈top-k σ2
j /k2 be the associated standard error computed
from the per-round score variances (obtained from the V
validation runs). We define the inter-round improvement and
its uncertainty as:
∆t = ¯St −¯St−1,
σ∆t =
q
σ2
¯St + σ2
¯St−1.
(14)


--- Page 8 ---
8
The search terminates early if |∆t| ≤z·σ∆t for C consecutive
rounds, where z is a significance level (default z = 0, i.e.,
strictly no improvement) and C = 5 is the patience parameter.
In our experiments, we set k = 3. This criterion ensures that
the optimizer stops only when the top-performing workflows
have genuinely plateaued, rather than reacting to single-round
fluctuations.
V. WIRELESSBENCH: A COMPREHENSIVE WIRELESS
BENCHMARK
Existing LLM benchmarks (e.g., MMLU, GSM8K, Hu-
manEval) do not capture the unique challenges of wireless
communication tasks: domain-specific formulas, unit-sensitive
numerical reasoning, tool-assisted computation, and multi-step
network management decisions. We introduce WIRELESS-
BENCH1 to fill this gap.
A. Design Principles
WIRELESSBENCH covers three complementary dimensions
of wireless AI capability:
• Knowledge Reasoning (WCHW): Can the agent under-
stand and apply wireless communication theory?
• Intent Understanding (WCNS): Can the agent understand
correct user intent that interact with wireless environment?
• Multi-Step Decision Making (WCMSA): Can the agent
predict, estimate, and allocate resources for mobile users
with proactive service assurance?
B. Data Construction Pipeline
All three WIRELESSBENCH benchmarks are constructed
through a unified four-stage pipeline, as summarized below.
1) Data collection. Seed problems are curated from author-
itative sources: wireless communication textbooks [28],
[29] for WCHW, and 3GPP/IEEE standards (e.g., 3GPP
TS 38.214, TS 38.901) for WCNS and WCMSA. Each
problem is paired with a step-by-step CoT solution.
2) Psychometric data cleaning. Inspired by [30], we treat
multiple LLMs as “examinees” and apply a funnel-style
cleaning pipeline: (i) rule-based pre-cleaning removes non-
computational or incomplete items; (ii) ten LLMs inde-
pendently solve each problem, and a hierarchical five-
level judge determines correctness; (iii) three psychome-
tric metrics, item-total correlation, Mokken scale analysis,
and inter-item consistency, identify low-quality items; and
(iv) an advanced LLM auditor diagnoses flagged items,
correcting erroneous samples and ambiguous ones.
3) LLM-based augmentation. Multiple LLMs expand the
cleaned corpus through parameter variation, bidirectional
conversion, cross-topic integration, and boundary explo-
ration, followed by TF-IDF-based deduplication. Impor-
tantly, LLMs are used only to generate new problem text
and parameter variations; all ground-truth answers and
chain-of-thought solutions are recomputed by deterministic
numerical solvers or analytical formulas and subsequently
verified by human annotators (Stage 4).
1The code is available at https://github.com/jwentong/WirelessBench.
TABLE III: WCHW numeric scoring tiers. The system also detects common
errors such as factor-of-103 and factor-of-2 mistakes.
Condition
Score
Relative error < 1%
1.0
Relative error < 5%
0.9
Relative error < 10%
0.7
Off by ×103 or ×106 (unit error)
0.5
Off by ×2 (common miscalculation)
0.3
Otherwise
0.0
4) Human validation. Graduate students verify every prob-
lem: checking solution correctness, correcting chain-of-
thought reasoning, and standardizing answer formats.
C. WCHW: Wireless Communication Homework
WCHW consists of 1,392 problems (348 validation, 1,044
test) drawn from university-level wireless communication text-
books, covering topics such as modulation (BPSK, QPSK,
QAM), channel capacity (Shannon, ergodic), error probability
(coherent/non-coherent detection), signal processing (PCM,
delta modulation), and antenna theory (see Appendix B for
representative examples). Each problem requires multi-step
reasoning and involves: (1) Application of domain-specific
formulas (e.g., Pe = 1
2erfc
p
Eb/N0

for BPSK); (2) Unit
conversion (e.g., kHz →Hz, dBm →W); (3) Numerical
computation with special functions.
Answer format classification. Each reference answer is
first classified into one of nine format types: PURENU-
MERIC, NUMERICWITHUNIT, SCIENTIFIC, FORMULA, PER-
CENTAGE, TEXTSHORT, TEXTLONG, CODESEQUENCE, and
RATIO. A QuestionAnalyzer uses regex-based pattern
matching on the question text to predict the expected answer
format, including unit detection (frequency, data rate, time,
power, distance, spectral efficiency) and fill-in-the-blank de-
tection.
Multi-strategy scoring. The evaluation pipeline applies
four scoring strategies in parallel and returns the maximum
score, reducing false negatives from format mismatches. Ta-
ble III summarizes the numeric scoring tiers; formula answers
are compared via LaTeX normalization and character-level
Jaccard similarity (> 0.7 →0.8, > 0.5 →0.5); text answers
are scored by weighted keyword overlap (60% number match
+ 40% word match). The system automatically recognizes
38 unit multipliers across six physical dimensions (frequency,
data rate, power, time, distance, spectral efficiency) and con-
verts all values to base SI units before comparison.
D. WCNS: Wireless Communication Network Slicing
WCNS models a 5G network slicing scenario with two slice
types: eMBB (enhanced Mobile Broadband, 90 MHz capacity)
and URLLC (Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communication,
30 MHz capacity). Each problem presents (see Appendix C
for an example): (1) A network state (number of active users
per slice), (2) A new user’s position (2D coordinates on the
HKUST campus) and a natural-language service request, and
(3) The requirement to predict the user’s CQI using a ray-
tracing tool before making a slicing decision.


--- Page 9 ---
9
TABLE IV: WCNS composite scoring: 4-metric weighted scheme.
Sub-Metric
Weight
Scoring Rule
Slice type
25%
Binary: exact match →1.0, else 0.0
CQI
15%
Exact →1.0; ±1 →0.8; . . .; ±3–4 →0.2
Bandwidth
35%
Rel. err.: <2%→1.0; . . .; <20%→.70
Throughput
25%
Same tiered scheme as bandwidth
Dataset generation. User positions are sampled uniformly
at random from outdoor regions (verified outside building
footprints via a ray-casting point-in-polygon test) across three
HKUST campus regions using real OpenStreetMap building
data. The number of existing users is drawn as neMBB ∼
U[2, 12] and nURLLC ∼U[2, 10]. For each problem, a service
request is randomly selected from a bank of 15 eMBB and 15
URLLC natural-language templates (e.g., “I need to stream a
4K video” →eMBB; “autonomous vehicle V2X communica-
tion” →URLLC). The ground-truth CQI is computed by the
ray-tracing engine (Section IV-B3), and bandwidth is allocated
via proportional fairness: B = Btotal/(n + 1), clamped to
[Bmin, Bmax] per slice type.
Agent pipeline. For the task, an agent must: (1) classify the
service type (eMBB vs. URLLC), (2) invoke the ray-tracing
predictor via the ReAct-based ToolAgent to obtain accurate
CQI values, (3) calculate resource allocation following the
proportional-fairness policy, and (4) output a structured de-
cision.
Composite scoring. Table IV defines the 4-metric weighted
scoring function. Bandwidth and throughput use a tiered
relative-error scheme (see the rightmost column); CQI allows
partial credit for near-misses.
E. WCMSA: Wireless Communication Mobile Service Assur-
ance
WCMSA extends the WCNS scenario to include user mo-
bility, requiring the agent to predict future positions, estimate
channel conditions at predicted locations, and make proactive
resource management decisions (see Appendix D for an ex-
ample).
Trajectory
generation.
Each
mobile
user
follows
a
constant-velocity trajectory with Gaussian perturbations. A
start position is sampled uniformly in an outdoor region
at distance 50–150 m from the base station; the walking
speed is drawn from U[1.0, 2.5] m/s, and position noise
∼N(0, 0.15) m is added at each step. The direction undergoes
small angular noise ∼N(0, 0.1) rad with a 10% probability
of a large turn (±[0.3, 0.8] rad). Each problem provides 4–
6 historical positions (including the current position) and
requires prediction of the next position.
Service types and QoS requirements. WCMSA defines
10 eMBB and 10 URLLC service types, each with a mini-
mum throughput requirement. Representative services include
“4K video streaming” (eMBB, ≥25 Mbps), “cloud gaming
with high graphics” (eMBB, ≥35 Mbps), “8K live sports
broadcast” (eMBB, ≥80 Mbps), “remote robotic surgery”
(URLLC, ≥10 Mbps), “autonomous vehicle V2X” (URLLC,
≥5 Mbps), and “real-time drone control” (URLLC, ≥8 Mbps).
The full service type list and QoS requirements are provided
in Appendix J.
TABLE V: WCMSA composite scoring: 6-metric weighted scheme.
Sub-Metric
Weight
Scoring Rule
Position prediction
15%
Distance decay: max(0, 1 −(d/20)1.2)
CQI prediction
15%
Exact →1.0; . . .; ±3 →0.50
Slice type
20%
Binary: exact →1.0, else 0.0
Bandwidth allocation
25%
Same tiered scheme as WCNS
Throughput
20%
Same tiered scheme as WCNS
QoS verification
5%
Binary: correct Yes/No →1.0, else 0.0
TABLE VI: Statistics of the WIRELESSBENCH benchmark suite.
Benchmark
Val.
Test
Metric
Task Type
WCHW
348
1,044
Accuracy
Knowledge reasoning
WCNS
250
750
Composite
Code + tool use
WCMSA
250
750
Composite
Multi-step diagnosis
Agent pipeline. Each problem provides a time series of
user positions, current network state (active users per slice), a
service request, and a minimum QoS requirement. The agent
must: (1) predict the user’s next position via the Kalman
filter tool, (2) estimate the CQI at the predicted (not cur-
rent) position via the ray-tracing tool—both invoked through
the ReAct-based ToolAgent in a chained reasoning-acting
loop, (3) classify the service type and allocate bandwidth,
(4) compute expected throughput, and (5) determine whether
QoS requirements will be satisfied.
Composite scoring. Table V defines the 6-metric weighted
scoring function. Position prediction uses a smooth distance-
decay function score = max(0, 1 −(d/20)1.2), where d is
the Euclidean distance between predicted and ground-truth
positions; score reaches zero at d ≥20 m. QoS verification
(5% weight) is treated as a bonus metric.
F. Dataset Statistics and Oracle Construction
Table VI summarizes the WIRELESSBENCH datasets. All
ground truths are constructed from deterministic rules or
expert solutions, ensuring reproducibility.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) LLM Backbones: We use Claude-Opus-4.5 as the Opti-
mizer LLM (for generating workflow mutations) and Qwen-
turbo-latest as the Executor LLM (for running the actual
workflows). This separation facilitates lightweight deployment
in practice and allows us to study cost-performance trade-offs.
2) Baselines: We compare WIRELESSAGENT++ against
the following baselines on both general NLP benchmarks
(HotpotQA, DROP, MATH) and the WIRELESSBENCH:
• Qwen-turbo-latest [31]: Zero-shot prompting with the
Qwen-turbo model, serving as a non-agentic LLM baseline.
• CoT [32]: Chain-of-thought prompting that elicits step-by-
step reasoning before producing the final answer.
• MedPrompt [33]: A state-of-the-art prompting strategy
combining CoT, self-consistency, and ensemble selection.
• ADAS [13]: Automated Design of Agentic Systems, a
concurrent agent architecture search method.
• AFlow [20]: MCTS-based workflow optimization without
our domain-specific enhancements (ToolAgent, Penalized
Boltzmann Selection, Heuristic Critic, 3-Class Experience).


--- Page 10 ---
10
TABLE VII: Performance comparison on general NLP benchmarks and the wireless benchmark. WIRELESSBENCH “Before” uses the original dataset; “After”
applies the psychometric data-cleaning pipeline (Section V-B) that detects and corrects low-quality samples. Best results in bold.
WIRELESSBENCH (Solve Rate)
Method
HotpotQA (F1)
DROP (F1)
MATH (Solve Rate)
Before
After
Qwen-turbo-latest [31]
0.1423
0.5641
0.6412
0.5013
0.5834
CoT [32]
0.5379
0.7607
0.6828
0.5032
0.6032
MedPrompt [33]
0.5411
0.7559
0.6996
0.5422
0.6122
ADAS [13]
0.5110
0.7423
0.4953
0.4813
0.5313
AFlow [20]
0.5823
0.7811
0.7864
0.5152
0.6992
WIRELESSAGENT++ (Ours)
0.7273
0.8021
0.8210
0.7164
0.8102
For AFlow and WIRELESSAGENT++, the optimization model
is Claude-Opus-4.5 and the execution model is Qwen-turbo-
latest. In addition, for the WCNS and WCMSA case studies,
we compare against WirelessAgent [12], our prior hand-
designed, fixed-workflow baseline that uses the same domain
tools (ray-tracing predictor, Kalman filter, precision calculator)
within a manually engineered ReAct pipeline.
3) Hyperparameters: All experiments use the following
default settings unless otherwise stated: top-K = 5 candidates
for selection, λ = 0.3 for exploration mixing, α = 0.2 for
Boltzmann temperature, ϵ = 0.02 for 3-class threshold, V = 5
validation runs per evaluation, and a maximum of T = 20
optimization rounds. All LLM models are accessed via APIs,
and the temperature is set to 0 for all models.
B. Main Results
Table VII compares WIRELESSAGENT++ with baselines
on
three
general
NLP
benchmarks
(HotpotQA,
DROP,
MATH) and the wireless-domain benchmark WIRELESS-
BENCH. WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves the highest scores on
every benchmark, reaching F1 scores of 0.7273 on HotpotQA
and 0.8021 on DROP, and solve rates of 0.8210 on MATH
and 0.8102 on WIRELESSBENCH (After). These consistent
gains across both general and domain-specific tasks confirm
that the MCTS-based workflow optimizer generalizes well.
In addition, the improvements over AFlow, the strongest
automated baseline, are particularly pronounced on the wire-
less benchmark: WIRELESSAGENT++ outperforms AFlow by
20.12 pp on WIRELESSBENCH (Before) and 11.10 pp on
WIRELESSBENCH (After). This gap highlights the value of our
three domain-aware enhancements and ToolAgent which
together enable the optimizer to navigate the noisy, tool-
dependent evaluation landscape of wireless tasks far more
effectively. Finally, the “After” column, which reflects the psy-
chometric data-cleaning pipeline (Section V-B), yields higher
scores than “Before” with WIRELESSAGENT++ benefiting
from an additional 9.38 pp boost. This underscores that high-
quality benchmark data and robust evaluation are essential
complements to workflow optimization.
Search cost. The entire MCTS optimization is remark-
ably inexpensive: the total API cost for the full search is
$4.95 on WCHW (19 rounds, ∼63 min wall-clock), $0.99
on WCNS (11 rounds, ∼13 min), and $1.05 on WCMSA
(11 rounds, ∼14 min). At inference time with the optimized
workflow, the per-problem cost is <$0.001 for all three
benchmarks ($0.00083/problem on WCHW, $0.00056/prob-
Qwen-Turbo
-Latest
GPT-4o
CoT-SC
(k=5)
MedPrompt
ADAS
AFlow
WirelessAgent++
(Ours)
0
20
40
60
80
Accuracy (%)
58.34
60.32
60.01
61.22
53.13
69.92
77.94
Baseline LLM
Prompting Method
Agentic Method
WirelessAgent++ (Ours)
Fig. 3: Method comparison on the test dataset of the WCHW benchmark.
WIRELESSAGENT++ outperforms the AFlow and all prompting baselines.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Optimization Round
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
Validation Score
R1: LLM-only
(0.6244)
R2: +RAG+Tools
(0.8086)
R14: Best prompt
(0.8178)
Validation Score
Best Score
Fig. 4: Workflow evolution of WIRELESSAGENT++ on the validation dataset
of the WCHW benchmark.
lem on WCNS, $0.00068/problem on WCMSA), confirming
that WIRELESSAGENT++ is practical for deployment.
C. Case Studies
We present detailed case studies on the three WIRELESS-
BENCH benchmarks, examining both quantitative performance
and the qualitative evolution of workflows discovered by the
MCTS optimizer.
1) WCHW (Knowledge Reasoning with Tool Verification):
Fig. 3 compares different methods on the WCHW benchmark.
WIRELESSAGENT++ significantly outperforms all baselines,
demonstrating the effectiveness of domain-specific agentic
workflow optimization for wireless knowledge reasoning.
Workflow evolution. Fig. 4 shows the workflow evolu-
tion of WIRELESSAGENT++ on the validation dataset of the
WCHW benchmark, where the optimizer follows a three-
phase trajectory. Phase 1—Seed (Round 1, 62.44%): A sin-
gle Custom operator with a manually curated formula li-
brary covering ∼10 telecom topics (DM SNR, PCM SQNR,
coherent/non-coherent BER, FM modulation, Shannon capac-
ity, Rayleigh fading). Despite the rich prompt, accuracy is


--- Page 11 ---
11
Rule-based
Prompt-based
WirelessAgent
WirelessAgent++
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average Score
1.000
0.613
0.905
0.922
(a) Overall composite score comparison
Slice Type
Classification
CQI
Prediction
Bandwidth
Allocation
Throughput
Calculation
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Metric Score
(25%)
(15%)
(35%)
(25%)
Rule-based
Prompt-based
WirelessAgent
WirelessAgent++
(b) Per-metric breakdown
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Optimization Round
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Validation Score
R1: LLM-only
(0.613)
R2: +RayTracing
(0.905)
R10: Best prompt
(0.922)
Validation Score
Best Score
(c) Workflow evolution
Fig. 5: WCNS case study. (a) Overall composite score comparison across methods. (b) Per-metric breakdown: WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves ≥89% on all
four sub-metrics. (c) Workflow evolution on the validation set showing the three-phase optimization trajectory.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of Users
0
250
500
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Total Throughput (Mbps)
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bandwidth Idle Rate (%)
(a) North scenario
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of Users
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Total Throughput (Mbps)
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bandwidth Idle Rate (%)
(b) Center scenario
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of Users
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Total Throughput (Mbps)
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
Rule-based
WirelessAgent++
WirelessAgent
Prompt-based
0
20
40
60
80
100
Bandwidth Idle Rate (%)
(c) South scenario
Fig. 6: Total throughput and bandwidth idle rate versus the number of users under three HKUST campus scenarios [12]. WIRELESSAGENT++ consistently
achieves the highest throughput among all LLM-based methods.
limited by LLM errors on transcendental-function arithmetic.
Phase 2—Tool Discovery (Round 2, 80.86%, +18.42 pp):
The optimizer introduces a ToolAgent verification step:
(1) Custom solves the problem using the formula library,
then (2) ToolAgent executes Python code to independently
verify numerics and convert answers to base SI units. This sin-
gle structural change—discovered automatically—yields the
largest improvement across all 19 rounds. Phase 3—Prompt
Refinement (Round 14, Best, 81.78%): The prompt is itera-
tively expanded with formulas for water-filling power alloca-
tion, matched-filter design, coherent-OOK optimal thresholds,
amplifier IM3 characterization, and NOMA/SIC uplink capac-
ity. The ToolAgent prompt is also refined to handle formula-
type answers (e.g., h(t) = A[U(t−2T/3)−U(t−T)]), not just
numerical outputs. The complete optimal workflow is detailed
in Appendix E.
2) WCNS (Ray-Tracing-Augmented Network Slicing):
Fig. 5 presents the WCNS results. As shown in Fig. 5(a),
the Rule-based method achieves a perfect composite score
of 1.000 by directly applying optimal algorithmic band-
width allocation, serving as the performance upper bound.
WIRELESSAGENT++ attains a composite score of 0.922, sig-
nificantly outperforming the Prompt-based baseline (0.613,
+30.9
pp)
and
approaching
the
hand-designed
Wire-
lessAgent (0.985) without any manual workflow engineer-
ing. The per-metric breakdown in Fig. 5(b) reveals that
WIRELESSAGENT++
performs competitively on all four
sub-metrics: slice type classification (96%), CQI predic-
tion (96%), bandwidth allocation (91%), and throughput cal-
culation (89%). The largest gain over Prompt-based appears
on CQI prediction (96% vs. 2%), where tool-assisted ray-
tracing (initially discovered via ToolAgent and subsequently
compiled into a deterministic CodeLevel call) replaces
unreliable LLM estimation.
Workflow evolution. Fig. 5(c) shows a three-phase trajec-
tory analogous to WCHW. Phase 1—Seed (61.3%): A bare
Custom call; CQI prediction is essentially random. Phase 2—
Tool Discovery (90.5%, +29.2 pp): The optimizer discovers
the ray-tracing tool via ToolAgent, replacing the LLM’s
unreliable CQI “guess” with algorithmic computation—the
single largest gain. Phase 3—Tool Compilation (92.18%,
+1.7 pp): The ToolAgent call is compiled into a determin-
istic CodeLevelRayTracing operator (Appendix F), and
the prompt is enriched with step-by-step instructions, CQI-
to-η mapping, and worked examples. Fig. 6 further confirms
that WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves the highest throughput and
lowest bandwidth idle rate among all LLM-based methods
across three geographic scenarios.
3) WCMSA (Multi-Tool Mobile Service Assurance): Fig. 7
presents the WCMSA results. WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves
the highest composite score of 96.89% and dominates all six
sub-metrics: position prediction (98%), CQI (98%), slice type
(96%), bandwidth (97%), throughput (96%), and QoS satisfac-
tion (98%), as shown in Fig. 7(a)–(b). The improvement over
WirelessAgent (93.59%) is driven by the optimizer-discovered
multi-tool pipeline, which chains the Kalman filter (position
forecasting) and ray-tracing predictor (CQI estimation). No-
tably, the MCTS search initially discovers this pipeline via
the ToolAgent’s ReAct loop and then compiles it into
deterministic CodeLevel operators (see Workflow Evolution
below), enabling exact and cost-free tool execution.
Workflow evolution. Fig. 7(c) shows a three-phase trajec-


--- Page 12 ---
12
Rule-based
Prompt-based
WirelessAgent
WirelessAgent++
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Average Score
1.000
0.658
0.936
0.969
(a) Overall composite score comparison
Position
Prediction
CQI
Prediction
Slice
Classification
Bandwidth
Allocation
Throughput
Calculation
QoS
Verification
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Metric Score
Rule-based
Prompt-based
WirelessAgent
WirelessAgent++
(b) Per-metric breakdown
2
4
6
8
10
Optimization Round
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Validation Score
R1: LLM-only
(0.658)
R3: +Kalman+RT
(0.936)
R11: Best prompt
(0.969)
Validation Score
Best Score
(c) Workflow evolution
Fig. 7: WCMSA case study. (a) Overall composite score comparison across methods. (b) Per-metric breakdown: WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves ≥96% on all
six sub-metrics. (c) Workflow evolution on the validation set showing the three-phase optimization trajectory.
TABLE VIII: Ablation study on WCHW validation set. ∆denotes the change
from the full WIRELESSAGENT++ configuration.
Configuration
Accuracy (%)
∆
WIRELESSAGENT++ (Full)
81.78
–
w/o Penalized Selection
79.11
−2.67
w/o Heuristic Critic
80.34
−1.44
w/o 3-Class Experience
78.59
−3.19
w/o Domain Tools
62.44
−19.34
AFlow (No enhancements)†
69.92
−11.86
tory. Phase 1—Seed (65.76%): Without position prediction
or channel estimation, accurate service assurance is impos-
sible. Phase 2—Multi-Tool Discovery (93.59%, +27.83 pp):
The optimizer discovers a multi-tool ReAct chain: Kalman
filter (position forecasting) →ray-tracing (CQI estimation) →
Custom (reasoning). This predict-then-estimate-then-reason
pattern is unattainable with single-shot invocations. Phase 3—
Tool Compilation (96.89%, +1.35 pp): As in WCNS, the
multi-tool chain is compiled into deterministic CodeLevel
operators (Appendix G), and the prompt is refined with a CQI-
to-η lookup table and a 7-point verification checklist.
D. Ablation Study
We conduct ablation experiments on WCHW to study
the contribution of each proposed component. Results are
shown in Table VIII. Removing domain tools (i.e., disabling
ToolAgent and the formula retriever) incurs the largest
degradation, reducing accuracy by 19.3 percentage points—
consistent with the Round 1 (no tools, 62.44%) vs. Round 2
(with tools, 80.86%) transition observed during optimization.
Disabling the 3-class experience mechanism (reverting to
binary success/failure) causes the optimizer to make redundant
mutations that chase noise, reducing convergence quality. The
Penalized Boltzmann Selection prevents the optimizer from
being trapped in poorly performing subtrees, and removing it
leads to wasted exploration rounds. The Heuristic Critic pro-
vides modest but consistent gains by pre-screening mutations
before expensive evaluation.
1) Effect of Significance Threshold ϵ: The 3-class experi-
ence threshold ϵ controls the sensitivity of mutation outcome
classification. With ϵ = 0.02 (our default, corresponding to
2% absolute accuracy), mutations that change the score by
less than 2 percentage points are classified as NEUTRAL
rather than Success/Failure. This prevents the optimizer from
treating noise-induced fluctuations as meaningful signals. In
TABLE IX: MCTS search cost and inference cost across benchmarks.
WCHW
WCNS
WCMSA
Search Rounds
19
11
11
Wall-Clock Time (min)
63
13
14
Total Search Cost (USD)
4.95
0.99
1.05
Per-Problem Cost (USD)
0.00083
0.00056
0.00068
the WCHW trajectory, 5 out of 18 mutations were classified
as NEUTRAL (score change < 2%), including the Round 18
mutation (∆s = −0.016) which would have been incorrectly
classified as a failure under binary classification. Smaller
values of ϵ (e.g., 0.005) lead to more volatile optimization
behavior, while larger values (e.g., 0.10) cause the optimizer
to miss genuine improvements.
2) Search Cost Analysis: Table IX summarizes the MCTS
search cost across all three benchmarks. The total optimization
cost remains below $5 for all tasks, and per-problem inference
cost is under $0.001. Notably, the WCNS and WCMSA
searches complete in ∼13–14 minutes, since tool-calling
workflows require fewer optimization rounds than knowledge-
reasoning workflows.
E. Discussion
Workflow
transferability
across
LLMs.
The
work-
flows discovered by WIRELESSAGENT++ are optimized with
Claude-Opus-4.5 as the optimizer and Qwen-turbo-latest as
the executor. An important open question is whether these
optimized workflows transfer to other executor LLMs (e.g.,
GPT-4o, Llama-3). While the structural components (operator
graphs and tool-calling patterns) are LLM-agnostic, the prompt
instructions are calibrated to the executor’s specific strengths
and formatting conventions. Investigating cross-model work-
flow transfer (and developing model-agnostic optimization
strategies) is a promising direction for future work.
Hyperparameter sensitivity. Our default hyperparameters
(top-K = 5, λ = 0.3, α = 0.2, ϵ = 0.02, temperature=
0) were empirically selected on the WCHW validation set
(Section VI-D). The effect of ϵ is analyzed in detail above;
we observe that the remaining hyperparameters are relatively
stable across benchmarks, as the same settings yield strong
performance on all three tasks without per-task tuning.
Scoring metric design. The composite scoring metrics for
WCNS and WCMSA involve sub-metrics on different scales—
some in dB, others as ratios or percentages. We adopt a
relative-error threshold of ≤5% for numerical comparisons


--- Page 13 ---
13
and weighted sub-metric aggregation. While this design is
conservative and aligns with standard engineering tolerances,
alternative metric designs (e.g., rank-based or percentile-based
scoring) may yield different optimization dynamics. We re-
lease the full scoring code with our benchmark to facilitate
community experimentation.
Rule-based oracle. The Rule-based method serves as a
performance upper bound in WCNS and WCMSA by applying
optimal algorithmic allocation with perfect knowledge of CQI
values computed directly from path-loss models. In practice,
such perfect channel knowledge is unavailable; the Rule-
based method thus represents an idealized oracle rather than a
deployable baseline. WIRELESSAGENT++’s performance gap
relative to this oracle (∼8 pp on WCNS, ∼3 pp on WCMSA)
primarily stems from residual errors in CQI-conditioned rea-
soning rather than channel estimation.
Wireless modeling simplifications. The current WIRE-
LESSBENCH benchmarks model a simplified wireless envi-
ronment: single-cell ray-tracing with fixed infrastructure, no
inter-cell interference, no MIMO spatial multiplexing, and
ideal fronthaul. These simplifications are intentional to isolate
the agent’s reasoning capability from the complexity of the
physical layer. Extending the benchmark to multi-cell inter-
ference management, beamforming optimization, and RIS-
aided scenarios is a natural next step that would test more
sophisticated tool-agent interactions.
Limitations. Our framework has several limitations that
warrant further investigation. First, WIRELESSAGENT++ cur-
rently operates in a single-agent setting; extending to multi-
agent collaboration (e.g., cooperative network management
across base stations) is an important direction. Second, the
current tool library is fixed during MCTS optimization; future
work could allow the optimizer to dynamically discover or
compose new tools. Third, while our three ϵ-thresholds (0.02)
and critic aggressiveness levels (0.50, 0.65) work well across
WIRELESSBENCH, they may need recalibration for tasks
with very different score distributions. Finally, the WCMSA
benchmark uses a simplified mobility model (constant-velocity
Kalman filter); more realistic mobility patterns (group mobil-
ity, sudden stops, indoor–outdoor transitions) would further
stress-test the agent’s proactive reasoning capabilities.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
We
presented
WIRELESSAGENT++,
a
framework
that
automates the design of LLM-based autonomous agents
for wireless network tasks. By representing agent work-
flows as executable programs and applying a domain-
adapted MCTS algorithm with penalized Boltzmann selec-
tion, maturity-aware heuristic critic, and 3-class experience
replay, WIRELESSAGENT++ discovers high-performing work-
flows without manual engineering. Our WIRELESSBENCH
benchmark suite establishes a standardized evaluation frame-
work covering knowledge reasoning (WCHW, 1,392 prob-
lems), code-based network slicing (WCNS, 1,000 problems),
and mobile service assurance (WCMSA, 1,000 problems).
Experiments demonstrate that WIRELESSAGENT++ achieves
78.37% on WCHW, 90.95% on WCNS, and 97.07% on
WCMSA, significantly outperforming prompt-based baselines
(by up to 31 pp) and general-purpose workflow optimizers
(by up to 11.1 pp). This work marks an important step
from “building agents” to “building agent builders” for next-
generation wireless networks.
REFERENCES
[1] K. B. Letaief, W. Chen, Y. Shi, J. Zhang, and Y.-J. A. Zhang, “The
roadmap to 6G: AI empowered wireless networks,” IEEE Commun.
Mag., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 84–90, Aug. 2019.
[2] N. Singh, R. Devi, J. Singh, B. Rajalakshmi, M. W. Mohammed,
N. Thandra, and C. Vidyadhari, “AI-powered 6G networks: Transform-
ing wireless communication with intelligence and terahertz waves,” in
Proc. in Inter. Con. on Intelligence Control, Comp. and Commun. (IC3),
2025, pp. 744–750.
[3] T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal,
A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell et al., “Language models
are few-shot learners,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
Dec. 2020, pp. 1877–1901.
[4] A. Maatouk, F. Ayed, N. Piovesan, A. De Domenico, M. Debbah, and
Z.-Q. Luo, “TeleQnA: A benchmark dataset to assess large language
models telecommunications knowledge,” IEEE Network, 2025.
[5] J. Shao, J. Tong, Q. Wu, W. Guo, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and J. Zhang,
“WirelessLLM: Empowering large language models towards wireless
intelligence,” J. of Commun. and Information Netw., vol. 9, no. 2, pp.
99–112, Feb. 2024.
[6] D. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Qiao, Z. Wang, J. Jiang, S. Cui, and F. Wang,
“NetLLM: Adapting large language models for networking,” in Proc.of
the ACM SIGCOMM, Aug. 2024, pp. 661–678.
[7] H. Zou, Q. Zhao, Y. Tian, L. Bariah, F. Bader, T. Lestable, and
M. Debbah, “TelecomGPT: A framework to build telecom-specific large
language models,” IEEE Trans. on Mach. Learning in Commun. and
Netw., vol. 3, no. 7, pp. 948–975, Jul. 2025.
[8] Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong, M. Zhang, J. Wang,
S. Jin, E. Zhou et al., “The rise and potential of large language model
based agents: A survey,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 68,
no. 2, p. 121101, 2025.
[9] L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen,
J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin et al., “A survey on large language model
based autonomous agents,” Frontiers Comput. Sci., vol. 18, no. 6, p.
186345, Jun. 2024.
[10] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. R. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao,
“React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in Proc.
of ICLR, May 2022.
[11] O. Topsakal and T. C. Akinci, “Creating large language model applica-
tions utilizing LangChain: A primer on developing LLM APPs fast,” in
Proc. of Inter. conf. applied engineering and natural sciences, vol. 1,
no. 1, 2023, pp. 1050–1056.
[12] J. Tong, W. Guo, J. Shao, Q. Wu, Z. Li, Z. Lin, and J. Zhang,
“WirelessAgent: Large language model agents for intelligent wireless
networks,” China Commun., Early Access, 2026.
[13] S. Hu, C. Lu, and J. Clune, “Automated design of agentic systems,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08435, 2024.
[14] B. Zoph and Q. V. Le, “Neural architecture search with reinforcement
learning,” in Proc.of Int. Conf. Learning Representations (ICLR), Apr.
2017.
[15] X. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Peng, and H. Ji,
“CodeAct: Executable code actions elicit better LLM agents,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML), Jul. 2024.
[16] S. Zhang, C. Gong, L. Wu, X. Liu, and M. Zhou, “Auto-GPT: Automatic
machine learning with GPT,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.02499, 2023.
[17] C. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Lu, H. Liu, Q. V. Le, D. Zhou, and X. Chen,
“Large language models as optimizers,” in Proc. Inter. Conf. on Learning
Representations (ICLR), May 2023.
[18] O. Khattab, A. Singhvi, P. Maheshwari, Z. Zhang, K. Santhanam,
S. Vardhamanan, S. Haq, A. Sharma, T. T. Joshi, H. Mober et al.,
“DSPy: Compiling declarative language model calls into self-improving
pipelines,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.03714, 2023.
[19] Z. Li, S. Peng, K. He, Z. Qin, Y. Fu, W. Che, Q. Jiang, F. Zhang, and
L. Li, “AutoFlow: Automated workflow generation for large language
model agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.12821, 2024.
[20] J. Zhang, J. Xiang, Z. Yu, F. Teng, X.-H. Chen, J. Chen, M. Zhuge,
X. Cheng, S. Hong, J. Wang et al., “AFlow: Automating agentic
workflow generation,” in Proc. Inter. Conf. on Learning Representations
(ICLR), Apr. 2025.


--- Page 14 ---
14
[21] Y. Li, G. Lu, W. Chen, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, S. Wang, and E. He, “In
the flow: Agentic workflow for multi-turn LLM-powered search,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.05592, 2025.
[22] C. Jiang, N. Ge, and L. Kuang, “AI-enabled next-generation commu-
nication networks: Intelligent agent and AI router,” vol. 27, no. 6, pp.
24–30, Dec. 2020.
[23] M. Elkael, S. D’Oro, L. Bonati, M. Polese, Y. Lee, K. Furueda, and
T. Melodia, “Agentran: An agentic ai architecture for autonomous
control of open 6g networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17778, 2025.
[24] I. Chatzistefanidis, N. Nikaein, A. Leone, A. Maatouk, L. Tassiulas,
R. Morabito, I. Pitsiorlas, and M. Kountouris, “Agoran: An agentic open
marketplace for 6G RAN automation,” Computer Networks, vol. 275,
no. 2, p. 111927, Feb. 2025.
[25] A. Saleh, R. Morabito, S. Tarkoma, A. Lindgren, S. Pirttikangas, and
L. Lov´en, “Agentic tinyml for intent-aware handover in 6g wireless
networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun., pp. 1–10, Early Access 2025.
[26] S. Lin, J. Zhou, and M. Yu, “An llm-based agentic framework for
accessible networkcontrol,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation
Review, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 15–20, Feb. 2025.
[27] R. Ke, Y. Chen, and Z. Liu, “SignalLLM: A general-purpose LLM agent
for signal processing tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17197, 2025.
[28] A. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications.
Cambridge University Press,
2005.
[29] A. F. Molisch, Wireless Communications, 2nd ed.
John Wiley & Sons,
2012.
[30] S. T. Truong, Y. Tu, M. Hardy, A. Reuel, Z. Tang, J. Burapacheep, J. J.
Perera, C. Uwakwe, B. W. Domingue, N. Haber et al., “Fantastic bugs
and where to find them in ai benchmarks,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Dec. 2025.
[31] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, B. Zhang, B. Hui, B. Zheng, B. Yu, C. Gao,
C. Huang, C. Lv et al., “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
[32] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V. Le,
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS),
Dec. 2022, pp. 24 824–24 837.
[33] H. Nori, Y. T. Lee, S. Zhang, D. Carignan, R. Edgar, N. Fusi, N. King,
J. Larson, Y. Li, W. Liu et al., “Can generalist foundation models
outcompete special-purpose tuning? Case study in medicine,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.16452, 2023.
[34] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdh-
ery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning
in language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171, 2023.
APPENDIX
A. WCHW Scoring Pipeline
The WCHW evaluation employs a multi-strategy scoring
pipeline to handle the diversity of answer formats in wireless
communication problems. The pipeline proceeds as follows:
Step 1: Answer format classification. Each reference
answer is classified into one of nine types using regex-
based pattern matching: PURENUMERIC, NUMERICWITHU-
NIT, SCIENTIFIC (e.g., 2.13 × 10−2), FORMULA (e.g., h(t) =
A[U(t −2T/3) −U(t −T)]), PERCENTAGE, TEXTSHORT,
TEXTLONG, CODESEQUENCE (e.g., binary codewords), and
RATIO.
Step 2: Unit detection and normalization. The system
recognizes 38 unit multipliers spanning six physical dimen-
sions: frequency (Hz, kHz, MHz, GHz), data rate (bps, kbps,
Mbps, Gbps), power (W, mW, dBm, dBW), time (s, ms, µs,
ns), distance (m, km), and spectral efficiency (bps/Hz). All
extracted values are automatically converted to base SI units
before comparison.
Step 3: Multi-strategy scoring. Four independent scoring
strategies are applied in parallel, and the maximum score is
returned:
1) Format-aware matcher: Uses the classified format type to
apply format-specific comparison (e.g., Hamming distance
for code sequences, structural equivalence for formulas).
2) Numeric scorer: Extracts numeric values (including sci-
entific notation) and computes relative error with the tiered
scheme in Table III.
3) Formula
scorer:
Normalizes
LaTeX
representations,
checks exact match (→1.0), containment (→0.8), and
Jaccard character-level similarity with variable overlap
(> 0.7 →0.8, > 0.5 →0.5).
4) Text scorer: Computes weighted keyword overlap (60%
number match + 40% word match), with thresholds >
0.8 →1.0, > 0.6 →0.8, > 0.4 →0.5.
This max-of-four-strategies approach reduces false negatives
caused by format mismatches between the agent’s output and
the reference answer.
B. WCHW Dataset Examples
WCHW problems span 10 knowledge categories with vary-
ing difficulty levels. Below are two representative examples:
WCHW Example: Wireless Knowledge Reasoning
Question 1: Shannon capacity. B = 50 MHz, SNR= 0.1 (linear).
Compute C (Mbps).
Answer: 6.87 Mbps
CoT: Step 1: C = B log2(1+SNR) = 50×106 log2(1.1). Step 2:
log2(1.1) = 0.1375. Step 3: C = 50×106×0.1375 = 6.87×106
bps = 6.87 Mbps.
. . .
Question 20: Compute BER for noncoherent BFSK at Eb/N0 = 8
dB.
Answer: 2.13 × 10−2
CoT: Step 1: Convert to linear: γ = 100.8 = 6.31. Step 2: Pb =
0.5e−γ/2 = 0.5e−3.155. Step 3: e−3.155 = 0.0426. Step 4: Pb =
0.0213.
C. WCNS Dataset Examples
WCNS problems require service intent classification and
resource allocation:
WCNS Example: Network Slicing Decision
Network State: eMBB Slice: 12 active users (90 MHz capacity);
URLLC Slice: 3 active users (30 MHz capacity)
New User: CQI = 8, Service Request: “I want to browse websites
and check email”
Answer: Slice Type: eMBB, Bandwidth: 6.92 MHz, Throughput:
13.2 Mbps
CoT: (1) Intent: Web browsing is high-throughput, low-latency-
tolerant →eMBB. (2) Bandwidth: B = 90/(12+1) = 6.92 MHz.
(3) CQI=8 →η = 1.91 bps/Hz (3GPP TS 38.214 Table 5.2.2.1-2).
(4) Throughput: R = B · η = 6.92 × 1.91 = 13.2 Mbps.
D. WCMSA Dataset Examples
WCMSA problems require trajectory prediction and proac-
tive resource allocation:


--- Page 15 ---
15
WCMSA Example: Mobile Service Assurance
Trajectory: Historical positions: (79.3, 46.0) →(80.1, 45.4) →
(81.2, 44.7) →(82.1, 44.1)
Base Station: Location (0, 0), Tx power: 30 dBm, Carrier: 2.4 GHz
Service Request: “cloud gaming with high graphics”, Min rate: 35
Mbps
Answer: Predicted Position: (83.0, 43.5), CQI: 15, Slice: eMBB,
Bandwidth: 20 MHz, Throughput: 111.0 Mbps, QoS Satisfied: Yes
CoT: (1) Kalman filter prediction: ˆx = 82.1 + (82.1 −81.2) =
83.0, ˆy = 44.1 + (44.1 −44.7) = 43.5. (2) Distance to BS:
d =
√
832 + 43.52 = 93.7 m. (3) Ray-tracing →SNR (dB)
→CQI=15. (4) CQI=15 →η = 5.55 bps/Hz (3GPP TS 38.214
Table 5.2.2.1-2). (5) Cloud gaming is high-throughput →eMBB.
(6) B = min(90/3, 20) = 20 MHz. (7) R = B ·η = 20×5.55 =
111.0 Mbps > 35 Mbps ✓.
E. WCHW Optimal Workflow
The optimal WCHW workflow (Round 14, 81.78%) imple-
ments a Reason-then-Verify pattern via Custom →ToolAgent:
WCHW Optimal Workflow (Round 14, 81.78%)
Input: problem (telecom question string)
Stage 1: Custom
←−SOLVE_PROMPT
solution = Custom(input=problem,
instruction=SOLVE_PROMPT)
Custom calls the Executor LLM with a domain-enriched prompt containing
>10 critical formulas:
• Shannon: C = B log2(1 + SNRlinear); Matched filter: h(t) = s(T −t)
• BER: BPSK 0.5 erfc(
p
Eb/N0); BFSK 0.5 e−Eb/(2N0); DPSK
0.5 e−Eb/N0
• FM Carson BW = 2(∆f + fm); NOMA/SIC ordering; water-filling
• PCM SQNR = 6.02n + 1.76 dB; DM SNR; NRZ/raised-cosine BW
y solution[’response’] (LLM-derived answer)
Stage 2: ToolAgent
←−ReAct loop, max steps = 2
verified = ToolAgent(problem + solution, "Verify via
Python code")
ToolAgent generates Python code to independently recalculate the answer
(e.g., math.log2(), math.erfc()), compares against Stage 1, and
emits the verified value.
y
Output: verified[’answer’] (final numerical answer in base units)
F. WCNS Optimal Workflow
The optimal WCNS workflow (Round 10, 92.18%) imple-
ments a Tool-then-Reason pattern via CodeLevelRayTracing →
Custom:
WCNS Optimal Workflow (Round 10, 92.18%)
Input: problem (network slicing scenario with user position)
Stage 1: CodeLevelRayTracing
(deterministic, no LLM)
cqi_info = RayTracing.get_cqi(problem)
# parse (x, y),
region
enhanced = RayTracing.inject_cqi(problem, cqi_info)
Extracts coordinates and region, queries the pre-trained ray-tracing channel
model, returns exact CQI (1–15). Injects: ‘‘ACCURATE CQI FROM RAY
TRACING: {cqi}’’
y enhanced_problem (original problem + injected CQI)
Stage 2: Custom
←−SOLVE_PROMPT
solution = Custom(input=enhanced,
instruction=SOLVE_PROMPT)
The prompt instructs the LLM to:
• Classify intent →eMBB or URLLC (keyword-based rules)
• Bandwidth: BeMBB = 90/(N+1) ∈[6, 20] MHz; BURLLC = 30/(N+
1) ∈[1, 5] MHz
• Map CQI to spectral efficiency η via 3GPP TS 38.214 Table 5.2.2.1-2;
throughput: R = B · η (Mbps)
• Three worked examples: CQI=
5 (η
= 0.88), B
= 10→8.8;
CQI= 10 (η = 2.73), B = 10→27.3; CQI= 15 (η = 5.55),
B =20→111.0 Mbps
y
Output:
solution[’response’]
(CQI,
Slice
Type,
Bandwidth,
Throughput)
G. WCMSA Optimal Workflow
The optimal WCMSA workflow (Round 11, 96.89%) im-
plements a Predict-Estimate-then-Reason pattern via Kalman-
Predictor →RayTracing →Custom:
WCMSA Optimal Workflow (Round 11, 96.89%)
Input: problem (trajectory + network state + service request)
Stage 1: CodeLevelKalmanPredictor
(deterministic, no LLM)
pos_info = KalmanPredictor.predict(problem)
enhanced = KalmanPredictor.inject_prediction(problem,
pos_info)
Parses historical positions, fits a constant-velocity Kalman filter, injects:
‘‘PREDICTED POSITION: ({x}, {y}), Region: {region}’’
y enhanced_problem (problem + predicted position)
Stage 2: CodeLevelRayTracing
(deterministic, no LLM)
cqi_info = RayTracing.get_cqi_at(pos_info.x,
pos_info.y, region)
enriched = RayTracing.inject_cqi(enhanced, cqi_info)
Ray-tracing at the predicted (not current) position—the key distinction from
WCNS enabling proactive allocation. Injects future CQI.
y enriched_problem (problem + predicted position + future CQI)
Stage 3: Custom
←−SOLVE_PROMPT
solution = Custom(input=enriched,
instruction=SOLVE_PROMPT)
The prompt provides:
• eMBB/URLLC classification rules + user-count extraction
• Bandwidth formulas with clamping (same as WCNS)
• Precomputed CQI-to-η lookup (3GPP TS 38.214 Table 5.2.2.1-2) for CQI∈
{7, 9, 11, 12, 15}
• Four worked examples (e.g., B = 20, CQI= 15, η = 5.55 →R =
20×5.55 = 111.0 Mbps)
• QoS check: Throughput ≥min. rate →Yes/No; 7-point checklist
y
Output: solution[’response’] (Position, CQI, Slice, BW, Through-
put, QoS)
H. CQI-to-Spectral-Efficiency Mapping
Table X provides the complete CQI-to-spectral-efficiency
mapping used in WIRELESSBENCH, derived from the 4-bit
CQI Table 1 of 3GPP TS 38.214 (Table 5.2.2.1-2). This
mapping is used by both the ray-tracing channel predictor
(Section IV-B3) and the LLM prompts in the optimized
workflows.
I. Operator Repertoire
Table XI lists the complete set of operators available to the
MCTS optimizer when constructing workflows. Each operator
has a typed interface and specific computational characteris-
tics.
J. WCMSA Service Types and QoS Requirements
Table XII lists the 20 service types used in the WCMSA
benchmark, each associated with a network slice type and
minimum throughput requirement that the agent must verify.


--- Page 16 ---
16
TABLE X: Complete CQI-to-spectral-efficiency mapping (3GPP TS 38.214,
Table 5.2.2.1-2).
CQI
Modulation
Code Rate ×1024
η (bps/Hz)
1
QPSK
78
0.15
2
QPSK
120
0.23
3
QPSK
193
0.38
4
QPSK
308
0.60
5
QPSK
449
0.88
6
QPSK
602
1.18
7
16-QAM
378
1.48
8
16-QAM
490
1.91
9
16-QAM
616
2.41
10
64-QAM
466
2.73
11
64-QAM
567
3.32
12
64-QAM
666
3.90
13
64-QAM
772
4.52
14
64-QAM
873
5.12
15
64-QAM
948
5.55
TABLE XI: Complete operator repertoire available to WIRELESSAGENT++.
Operator
Description
Custom
Invokes an LLM with input and instruction
prompt; the most flexible operator
ToolAgent
ReAct-based agent (Algorithm 1) with tool
calling; max I iterations with early stopping
CodeLevel
Deterministic,
LLM-free
tool
execution
via
compiled
code
(e.g.,
CodeLevelRayTracing,
CodeLevelKalmanPredictor);
zero variance, near-zero cost
ScEnsemble
Self-consistency ensemble [34]: maps N
candidate solutions to letters and selects the
most consistent answer
MdEnsemble
Medicine-inspired ensemble [33]: shuffles
N answers, votes 5 times, returns majority
answer
Programmer
Generates and executes Python code (3 re-
tries, 30s timeout per attempt)
Review
Reviews a solution for correctness (returns
boolean + feedback)
Revise
Revises a solution based on Review feed-
back
Test
Tests code against provided test cases (up
to 3 reflection loops)
AnswerGenerate
Produces a structured thought + answer pair
in XML format
Format
Reformats solutions to match expected out-
put schema
AnswerValidator
Rule-based + LLM hybrid validation of
answer format
K. Ray-Tracing Deployment Configuration
The ray-tracing engine is deployed on three HKUST campus
regions using OpenStreetMap building data. Table XIII sum-
marizes each region’s characteristics. The transmitter is placed
at the centroid of the tallest building in each region, elevated by
5.0 m above the rooftop. User positions are sampled uniformly
from outdoor areas (verified outside building footprints via a
ray-casting point-in-polygon algorithm). Each region provides
a distinct propagation environment: the North region features
dense low-rise academic buildings, the Center region has
mixed-height structures around the main plaza, and the South
region includes high-rise residential towers with deeper NLOS
shadowing.
L. MCTS Hyperparameter Summary
Table
XIV
consolidates
all
hyperparameters
used
in
WIRELESSAGENT++ with their default values and descrip-
TABLE XII: WCMSA service types and minimum QoS requirements.
Service
Slice
Min Rate (Mbps)
4K video streaming
eMBB
25
HD movie download
eMBB
50
Cloud gaming (high graphics)
eMBB
35
AR navigation (3D maps)
eMBB
20
VR social experience
eMBB
40
8K live sports broadcast
eMBB
80
Large file sync
eMBB
30
Holographic communication
eMBB
60
Remote desktop access
eMBB
15
Video analytics services
eMBB
20
Remote robotic surgery
URLLC
10
Autonomous vehicle V2X
URLLC
5
Industrial IoT control
URLLC
2
Real-time drone control
URLLC
8
Emergency response coord.
URLLC
5
Smart grid fault detection
URLLC
3
Patient vital signs monitor
URLLC
4
High-frequency trading
URLLC
2
Factory robot synchronization
URLLC
6
Precision CNC machine ctrl
URLLC
5
TABLE XIII: HKUST campus ray-tracing regions used in WIRELESSBENCH.
Region
OSM File
Typical Bldg.
Propagation
North
HKUST_North.osm
Low-rise academic
LOS-dominant
Center
HKUST_Center.osm
Mixed-height
Moderate NLOS
South
HKUST_South.osm
High-rise residential
Deep NLOS
tions.
TABLE XIV: Complete hyperparameter summary for WIRELESSAGENT++.
Parameter
Default
Description
K (top-K)
5
Parent candidates for Boltz-
mann selection
λ
0.3
Uniform exploration weight
in (11)
α
0.2
Boltzmann
temperature
in (11)
ϵ
0.02
3-class significance threshold
in (13)
V
5
Validation runs per evaluation
T
20
Maximum
optimization
rounds
k (convergence)
3
Top-k for convergence detec-
tion
C (patience)
5
Consecutive rounds for early
stopping
z (confidence)
0
Significance level for conver-
gence
τhigh
0.65
Critic: conservative threshold
τmid
0.50
Critic: moderate threshold
LLM temperature
0
All models: deterministic de-
coding
M. Prompt for LLM Optimizer
The MCTS optimizer uses the following system-level
prompt to guide the Optimizer LLM (Claude-Opus-4.5) during
the expansion phase (Algorithm 2, Line 7). This prompt
instructs the LLM to propose a single focused modification
to the parent workflow.
Workflow Optimize Prompt
WORKFLOW_OPTIMIZE_PROMPT =
"""You are building a Graph and corresponding Prompt to jointly solve
{type} problems. Referring to the given graph and prompt, which forms a
basic example of a {type} solution approach, please reconstruct and optimize


--- Page 17 ---
17
them. You can add, modify, or delete nodes, parameters, or prompts. Include
your single modification in XML tags in your reply. Ensure they are complete
and correct to avoid runtime failures.
When optimizing, you can incorporate critical thinking methods like re-
view, revise, ensemble (generating multiple answers through different/simi-
lar prompts, then voting/integrating/checking the majority to obtain a final
answer), selfAsk, etc. Consider Python’s loops, conditional statements, or
machine learning techniques. The graph complexity should not exceed 10.
Output
the
modified
graph
and
all
the
necessary
Prompts
in
prompt_custom (if needed). The prompt you need to generate is
only the one used in prompt_custom.XXX within Custom. Other methods
already have built-in prompts and are prohibited from being generated. The
generated prompt must not contain any placeholders.
Considering information loss, complex graphs may yield better results, but
insufficient information transmission can omit the solution. It’s crucial to
include necessary context during the process."""
The optimizer receives the parent workflow’s code, score,
error logs, and experience record via a structured input tem-
plate:
Workflow Input Template (Expansion Phase)
WORKFLOW_INPUT =
"""Here is a graph and prompt that performed excellently in a previous
iteration (maximum score is 1). You must make further optimizations based
on this graph. The modified graph must differ from the provided example.
<sample>
<experience>{experience}</experience>
<score>{score}</score>
<graph>{graph}</graph>
<prompt>{prompt}</prompt>
<operator_description>{operator description}</operator_description>
</sample>
Below are the logs of results that encountered errors, which can be used as
references for optimization: {log}
SCORE-BASED OPTIMIZATION RULES (YOUR CURRENT SCORE IS
{score}):
• Score ≥0.65 (HIGH): CONSERVATIVE — Minor prompt tweaks only.
• Score 0.50–0.65 (MEDIUM): MODERATE — Single structural change.
• Score < 0.50 (LOW): AGGRESSIVE — Major restructuring allowed.
Only one detail point can be modified at a time, and no more than 5 lines of
code may be changed per modification."""
N. Operator Prompts
Below are the core prompt templates used by the operators
in O. Each prompt is passed to the Executor LLM via a
Pydantic-constrained output schema.
ScEnsemble Prompt (Self-Consistency Voting)
SC_ENSEMBLE_PROMPT =
"""Given the question: {question}
Several solutions have been generated: {solutions}
Carefully evaluate these solutions and identify the answer that appears most
frequently across them. This consistency in answers is crucial for determining
the most reliable solution.
In the “thought” field, provide a detailed explanation of your thought process.
In the “solution letter” field, output only the single letter ID (A, B, C, etc.)
corresponding to the most consistent solution."""
Review Prompt
REVIEW_PROMPT =
"""Given a problem and a solution, review the solution’s correctness using
critical thinking and provide a result in boolean format.
problem: {problem}
solution: {solution}
If you are more than 95 percent confident that the final answer is incorrect,
return False and give feedback for the error. Otherwise, return True and explain
the correctness."""
Revise Prompt
REVISE_PROMPT =
"""Given a problem and a solution which is just reviewed as incorrect, revise
the solution to solve the question.
problem: {problem}
solution: {solution}
feedback: {feedback}
Ensure the output is self-contained, without additional text or test cases."""
O. ReAct Agent Protocol
The ToolAgent operator (Algorithm 1) uses a three-
layer prompt architecture. The fixed protocol layer enforces
structured XML output:
ReAct Agent Fixed Protocol
REACT_AGENT_FIXED_PROTOCOL =
"""Your response MUST be in valid XML format with ALL required tags.
If you want to use a tool, output EXACTLY this format:
<thought>Your reasoning about what to do next</thought>
<action_type>use tool</action_type>
<tool_name>name of the tool</tool_name>
<tool_args>{“arg1”: “value1”, “arg2”: “value2”}</tool_args>
If you want to provide the final answer, output EXACTLY this format:
<thought>Your reasoning about why you can answer now</thought>
<action_type>final answer</action_type>
<final_answer>Your
CONCISE
answer
to
the
ques-
tion</final_answer>
STRICT REQUIREMENTS:
• ALWAYS include <thought> and <action_type> tags.
• tool_args MUST be valid JSON: double quotes, no trailing commas.
• All numeric values must be pre-computed numbers, not expressions.
• <final_answer> tag MUST contain the actual answer, NOT be empty.
"""
The strategy prompt (optimizable by MCTS) and runtime
context are prepended:
ReAct Assembled Prompt Structure
Each iteration of the ReAct loop sends the following to the Executor LLM:
{strategy_prompt}
# Layer 1: Optimizable (MCTS)
Available Tools:
{tools_description}
# Auto-generated from tool registry
Question: {problem}
Previous Steps:
Step 1: thought=... action=... result=...
Step 2: thought=... action=... result=...
{REACT_AGENT_FIXED_PROTOCOL}
# Layer 3: Immutable
P. Heuristic Critic Report
The heuristic critic (Section IV-D) generates a structured
report that is appended to the optimizer prompt. Below is a
representative example:
Heuristic Critic Report Example (Conservative Mode)
=== SMART CRITIC REPORT (Round 14) ===
Score: 0.8178 | Mode: CONSERVATIVE
[ERROR ANALYSIS]
Total Errors: 63
- Format/Extraction: 22 (35%)
- Unit Mismatch: 6 (9%)
- Calculation/Value: 35 (56%)
[WORKFLOW COMPLEXITY]
Steps: 2 | ToolAgent: Yes | ScEnsemble: No


--- Page 18 ---
18
Conditionals: No | Custom Calls: 1
[EXPLORATION HISTORY]
Attempts: 5 | Success: 2 | Failure: 2
Node Saturated: No
[RECOMMENDATIONS]
HIGH SCORE - BE VERY CAREFUL!
[ALLOWED]
- Minor prompt wording improvements
- Add/remove one instruction line
- Clarify unit conversion instructions
[FORBIDDEN]
- Adding new operators (ToolAgent, ScEnsemble)
- Removing existing operators
- Changing workflow structure
- Adding if/else conditional logic
Q. 3-Class Experience Replay Format
The experience record provided to the optimizer during
expansion is formatted as follows:
Formatted Experience (Tree Structure)
{
"1": {
"score": 0.6244,
"success": {
"2": {
"modification": "Add ToolAgent operator to
verify numerical calculations via Python",
"score": 0.8086
}
},
"failure": {
"8": {
"modification": "Add ScEnsemble operator
to generate multiple solutions and vote",
"score": 0.4336
}
}
},
"2": {
"score": 0.8086,
"success": {},
"failure": {},
"neutral": {
"14": {
"modification": "Expand formula library
with water-filling, NOMA/SIC, and
matched-filter formulas",
"score": 0.8178
},
"18": {
"modification": "Reword ToolAgent prompt
for formula-type answers",
"score": 0.8014
}
}
}
}
The tree records the parent–child relationship: the root node (Round 1, score
0.6244) has a successful child (Round 2, +18.4 pp via ToolAgent addition)
and a failed child (Round 8, ScEnsemble caused a −19.1 pp drop). Round 2
in turn has two neutral children (Rounds 14 and 18), both with |∆s| < ϵ =
0.02: Round 14 (+0.92 pp, formula expansion) and Round 18 (−0.72 pp,
prompt rewording). This illustrates that even a best-round improvement can be
classified as NEUTRAL under the ϵ-threshold, preventing the optimizer from
over-fitting to noise.
