--- Page 1 ---
Animating Petascale Time-varying Data on
Commodity Hardware with LLM-assisted Scripting
Ishrat Jahan Eliza∗, Xuan Huang∗, Aashish Panta∗, Alper Sahistan∗, Zhimin Li†, Amy A. Gooch‡, Valerio Pascucci∗
∗University of Utah
†Vanderbilt University
‡ViSOAR LLC
Abstract—Scientists face significant visualization challenges as
time-varying datasets grow in speed and volume, often requir-
ing specialized infrastructure and expertise to handle massive
datasets. For example, petascale climate models generated in
NASA laboratories often require a dedicated group of graphics
and media experts and access to high-performance computing
resources. Scientists may need to share scientific results with the
community iteratively and quickly. However, the time-consuming
trial-and-error process incurs significant data transfer overhead
and far exceeds the time and resources allocated for typical post-
analysis visualization tasks, disrupting the production workflow.
Our paper introduces a user-friendly framework for creating
3D animations of petascale, time-varying data on a commodity
workstation. Our proposed framework includes a streamlined
animation production scripting mechanism that involves: (i)
Generalized Animation Descriptor (GAD) with a keyframe-based
adaptable abstraction for animation, (ii) efficient data access from
cloud-hosted repositories to reduce data management overhead,
(iii) tailored rendering system, and (iv) an LLM-assisted conver-
sational interface as a scripting module to allow domain scientists
with no visualization expertise to create animations of their
region of interest. We demonstrate the framework’s effectiveness
with two case studies: first, by generating animations in which
sampling criteria are specified based on prior knowledge, and
second, by generating AI-assisted animations in which sampling
parameters are derived from natural-language user prompts. In
all cases, we use large-scale NASA climate-oceanographic datasets
that exceed 1PB in size yet achieve a fast turnaround time of
1 minute to 2 hours. Users can generate a rough draft of the
animation within minutes, then seamlessly incorporate as much
high-resolution data as needed for the final version.
Index Terms—Visualization systems and tools, Scientific visual-
ization, Petascale, Animation, Visualization application domains,
LLM in Visualization
I. INTRODUCTION
Time-oriented physical phenomena are often presented as ani-
mations composed of a collection of images. Higher resolution
sensors and simulations produce unimaginable data sizes with
gigabytes and terabytes, with thousands of timesteps. Massive
data growth results from the rapid increase in computing
power, enabling closer analysis in various fields. Visualization
and analysis efforts focus on distributed strategies to handle
the demanding computational cost, especially for heavily
parallelized algorithms. Not all domain scientists possess the
supercomputer resources required for processing or storing
petascale datasets for visualization. While hardware develop-
ment continues to align with Moore’s law, the exponential
growth in data sizes outpaces advancements in computing
power. The widening gap poses significant challenges for
scientists and domain experts striving to create high-quality
animations for petascale data.
Professional visualization institutes, like the NASA Scien-
tific Visualization Studio, can create cinematic scientific visu-
alizations with large datasets by employing teams of specialists
and advanced software tools [1], [2]. An example of this,
Inside Hurricane Maria in 360° project [1] , involved four sci-
entists, four visualizers, two media professionals, and four sys-
tem support members, as well as five software platforms, in-
cluding IDL, Maya, RIB, OSL, and Renderman. By transform-
ing large-scale real-world phenomena into stunning graphics,
these animations have captured millions worldwide through
documentaries on large and small screens, demonstrating the
power of animation in scientific communication [3]. Although
domain scientists working with these datasets on commodity
hardware may not need cinematic-quality animations, they
still face significant barriers in computational knowledge,
visualization expertise, and cross-application workflows. Al-
though some movie-style features, such as audio narratives
or a complete storyline, can be skipped in scientific sharing,
data filtering, excessive application-specific programming, and
visualization steps are still unavoidable. As a result, this type
of project is far from available to general scientific research
groups.
Our paper introduces an animation production framework
for large-scale scientific datasets that operates on commodity
workstations without specialized hardware. Our goal is not
to replace the cinematic excellence of current large-scale
approaches but to allow anyone on commodity hardware to
create animations of petascale data. The contributions of our
paper include:
• An independent language layer named Generalized Ani-
mation Descriptor (GAD) for generalized animation rep-
resentation enabling highly customizable workflow and
easy translation to various visualization applications.
• An LLM-assisted conversation-style animation scripting
module that ensures user-friendly generation of time-
varying animations.
• Two real-world case studies with NASA’s DYAMOND
oceanographic datasets [4], [5] on a commodity desktop
machine, demonstrating the ability to create a broad range
of quality-intensive scientific animations.
arXiv:2603.07053v1  [cs.AI]  7 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Fig. 1: Our versatile framework generates a region of interest keyframe animations from petascale data using a generalized animation
descriptor (GAD) file and flexible scripting. We also enable AI-assisted scripting that removes the hurdles of describing more than a region
of interest to get the first image in minutes. a) The user first asks to see the “salinity of the Mediterranean Sea”. After four iterations with the
AI, the result in b) displays the salinity as a grayscale transfer function with streamlines to highlight the Meddies (Mediterranean eddies).
c) Further chatting with the AI applies the same visualization parameters to the Red Sea, including the Bab el Mandeb Strait and the Gulf
of Aden. Both b) and c) show regions of high salinity (white) with fast-moving currents (red) versus the oceanic regions with lower salinity
(gray) and slowing currents (blue).
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we examine the role of animation as a
critical tool for scientific understanding and communication,
review techniques for efficient representation and rendering,
and LLM-based autonomous tools in the visualization domain.
A. Large-Scale Time-Varying Data Visualization
Developing professional graphics APIs, such as OpenGL and
DirectX, enabled interactive scientific data visualization on
commodity hardware, as discussed in a 1994 SIGGRAPH
course [6]. However, constrained by slower I/O, limited mem-
ory capacity, and a small budget for interactive 3D render-
ing, big data is a common challenge in modern scientific
data visualization, especially on desktop machines [7]–[9].
A 2010 VIS seminar [10] discussed scientific storytelling to
better describe the findings in large-scale data. Visualization
is especially effective in communicating complex scientific
concepts, encouraging collaboration with policymakers and
fostering connection through public education [11], [12].
The scientific visualization community often uses widely
available open-source tools for large-scale data visualization.
Paraview [13], VisIt [14] is a widely used open-source appli-
cation that offers such functionalities. VTK [15] has served as
the underlying library for many of these mainstream systems
due to its comprehensiveness in object representations and
file format support. Our animation production framework is
designed to leverage these scientific visualization and ren-
dering technologies as backends for different visualization
needs. OpenVisus [16], [17] offered an efficient method to
stream large-scale scientific data stored in the IDX file format,
enabling access to data volumes at multiple resolutions, and
will be used as the underlying data loading mechanism from
which we build a disk-efficient data management system aimed
at generating animations for scientific analysis.
B. Animation Production Frameworks for Scientific Data
Despite the time-consuming nature of the process, animation is
a compelling presentation model to convey a time-dependent
scientific process. Stemming from both media editing and
scientific analysis, fundamental operations in scientific data
visualizations have formed animated views, such as cinematics
[18], [19], path design [20], [21], and parameter transfer
function adjustments [22], [23]. The basic idea of stitching
images is often adopted to produce flipbook videos. The most
popular idea is keyframing, which records only the necessary
frames and then interpolates the camera position transfer
function and parameter space via linear or spline curves for
smooth transitioning [10], [24], [25].
To align with the analysis pipeline, some abstractions were
introduced, such as an event graph [26], template-based anima-
tion [27], image-driven animation [28], analysis-driven meth-
ods [29], or hypercubes [30] to incorporate domain knowledge
into efficient animated visualization design. The template-
based AniViz [27] system offered an abstraction for producing
narrative visualization. Such domain-specific solutions were
tailored to a small group of people with a narrower focus,
making them difficult to extend to general data pipelines. Our
paper addresses these limitations by introducing a lightweight
file format that enables cross-application compatibility. Our
framework can generate these descriptors through an LLM-
assisted, natural-language-like conversation style, giving do-
main scientists greater flexibility.
C. LLMs in Visualization
The recent surge in LLMs opens the opportunity to interact
in Natural language, offering intuitive interfaces for domain
experts to query, manipulate, and generate visual outputs [31]–
[33]. A work by Praneeth et al. [34] introduces a data
visualization tool that leverages the power of Large Lan-
guage Models (LLMs) to extract meaningful insights from
vast datasets. Some tools, such as NL4DV [35], Chat2Vis
[36], NLI4VolVis [37] already support generating scientific
visualizations from natural language but lack the capabilities
for advanced scientific analysis, such as time-series under-
standing of scientific data. Shusen et al. have shown that LLMs
can serve as autonomous visualization agents and provide
feedback for action given a visualization [38]. It has also


--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2: Our framework. Unlike traditional visualizations, where the user faces an initial big data management challenge with large-than-disk,
cloud-hosted datasets, our framework starts with the event description. An optional addition of an AI-assisted scripting mechanism presents
an intuitive environment to translate the conceptual design into GAD for application-independent visualization. By hiding the complexity of
data management and cross-application translation, our framework simplifies the animation production cycle for the user with the illusion
of directly getting a rendered video from a scripting interface with full remote dataset access.
been evaluated through an information visualization literacy
test [39], [40]. Due to its strong potential for visualization
tasks, we find that an MLLM can be a valuable tool for
generating well-structured JSON-based animation abstraction
files via programmatic scripts in our framework.
III. OUR STREAMLINED ANIMATION PRODUCTION
FRAMEWORK
We introduce a framework for animating large-scale, time-
varying scientific data on commodity hardware, illustrated
in Figure 2. In this section, we discuss the modules of our
framework: the components of our application-independent,
human-readable GAD (Section III-A) scripts, how a user-
determined multiresolution subset of the datasets is read and
downloaded to the local disk (Section III-B) and rendered by
the renderer backend (Section III-C), and the pipeline of our
scripting mechanism Section III-D that generates the GAD
scripts.
A. Generalized Animation Descriptor
Our Generalized Animation Descriptor (GAD) file format
aims to represent a complex animation workflow as an ab-
straction layer providing a standardized representation. The
GAD file format is designed to be a JSON-like keyframe
system, where each keyframe contains information about static
scenes and their temporal interpolation. Parameters related to a
specific subset of data are passed to generate GAD files with
three layers of abstraction: (a) a header file, (b) a data list
file, and (c) a series of keyframe description files as shown
in Figure 3. GAD’s hierarchical structure facilitates multi-
resolution data handling, enabling users to prototype at lower
resolutions before committing to resource-intensive rendering.
The header file stores a list of keyframes and data files. The
data list file stores the local data-storage paths and dimensions
and the abstract data-type references as string descriptions. We
currently support two data types: “structured”, referring to
regular gridded patterns, and “streamline”, referring to a
structured grid with a specific visualization technique for vec-
tor fields. However, this model is easily extendable by integrat-
ing with underlying visualization libraries while maintaining a
consistent conceptual model. For example, rectilinear grid data
must be manually converted to an unstructured geometry for a
low-level graphics API, or they can be defined in mainstream
visualization packages such as VTK using vtkRectilinearGrid
[41] for ease of use and built-in optimization. The keyframe
file stores all the information for the rendering tasks, including
the following two categories.
• Base-layer objects, such as scene bounding box, frame
range, and camera (position, direction, and up vectors)
for each frame.
• A scene data list containing a list of scene info, including
color transfer function values and opacity mappings for
volume rendering.
Each attribute can be interpolated between keyframes, allow-
ing for smooth transitions in camera movement and visual-
ization properties. GAD’s piecewise attribute definition allows
animations to be designed at varying levels of detail, with the
flexibility to fine-tune specific keyframes without affecting the
overall animation.
One key strength of the GAD script format is its application-
independent design, which frees animation workflows from
the constraints of specific visualization tools. The framework
only stores pointers to raw data files in the GAD Header
File (Figure 3(a)), metadata (Figure 3(b)), and animation
descriptions (Figure 3(c)), allowing the target application to
handle the underlying data reading and interpretation.
B. Accessing Data from Remote Storage
Accessing petascale data without running out of RAM or disk
space on commodity hardware for 3D animation generation
is not a simple task [42]. Based on the NSDF data fabric
abstraction layer by Panta et al. [17], we provide user-friendly
querying of scientific information from datasets while hiding
the complexities of file systems and cloud services. The NSDF
framework converts high-performance computing (HPC) data
to cloud data in a visualization-ready IDX format [43] and


--- Page 4 ---
Fig. 3: Our novel Generalized Animation Descriptor (GAD) file format. GAD describes an animation as a sequence of keyframes stored in
an individual file. The list of data is recorded separately and accessed by keyframe files through indexing. Our modular design splits data
storage and rendering information into two pieces, allowing an independent description of animation design regardless of the dataset in use.
manages data caching. Their framework proved ideal for
researchers and scientists to manage petascale data. Hosted
on the Open Science Data Federation [44], the high-resolution
atmospheric and oceanic simulation datasets are available for
public access [17]. OpenVisus API [16] calls are needed
to access data in this framework. Our GAD script has the
appropriate parameters saved for the subset of data the user
requests. Along with the GAD script and specific downsam-
pling queries, our Python layer manages data acquisition and
downloads the subset of datasets in a local workstation.
C. Data Rendering and Visualization
Although the GAD script format can be used in any rendering
application, we leverage the existing OSPRay [45] and VTK-
based [46] offline rendering mechanisms to demonstrate its
use and develop minimal extensions to support the GAD
format. We choose OSPRay for its high-performance CPU-
based ray tracing engine, memory efficiency, and rendering
performance. We implement an AnimationHandler class
that drives OSPRay and VTK rendering engines and passes
the GAD files as JSON through Python bindings to OSPRay
via vistool_py_osp and VTK via vistool_py_vtk.
The bindings enable the same GAD script to produce consis-
tent visualizations across different rendering backends. In the
rendering backend, we write a custom loadKF() method to
read the keyframe data from GAD files. We use OpenGL and
GLFW to visualize the rendered frames as image files generated
by OSPRay volume rendering tasks. Standard VTK libraries
handle the volume rendering and visualization of VTK’s
rendered outputs. We configured both to use similar camera
and background settings, acknowledging that the rendering is
different between the two.
Our implementation processes one GAD keyframe file at
a time, loading the specific data needed for that keyframe,
rendering it, and saving the resulting image before moving on
to the next. Our approach reuses the same memory buffers
for each frame (e.g., the vtkImageData object in the
VTK implementation), achieving better memory efficiency
than loading all animation data at once.
D. Animation Scripting
Animation scripting plays the primary role in generating GAD
scripts. Our scripting interface provides an easy-to-navigate
layer to create 3D animations from a large cloud-hosted dataset
without a steep learning curve or visualization expertise.
Our animation scripting has two methods: (a) basic Python
scripting and (b) a multimodal large language model (MLLM)
assisted conversation-style scripting modules. The former suits
those who know the exact parameter inputs that work well for
a particular visualization task. The latter is for a quick start
and allows explorations through conversation with AI. The
scripting mechanisms record the region of interest in our GAD
files and download the requested data subset in preparation for
visualization.
1) Basic Scripting with Python
Our basic Python scripting module includes two modes:
a command-line interface and an interactive viewer. In the
first mode, the user can input the values of the x, y, and z
coordinate parameters, timesteps, camera positions, and data
quality by typing them at the command line. The user has
to know the coordinates of their region of interest. They also


--- Page 5 ---
Menu Window 
Clipping planes 
Transfer Function
-0.303
tf min
27.283
tf max
Color Map
Key Frames
Left click to add a point, right click remove. Left click + drag to move points.
Data time
0
time
Animation keyframe
export
Generate Key 
frames
ﬁxedCam
set
KF Timeline
Left click to add a point, right click remove.
Time
data_i
camera
tfn
active kf: setF
loadF
play
Fig. 4: Our simple interactive viewer provides a quick interface for
users to create and iteratively modify animations with just a few
settings.
need to understand the complexities of specifying a camera in
3D. To facilitate that, the user can use the second method,
which has an initial prototype of an interactive viewer to
assist with choosing the region of interest. Our viewer is
implemented in C++ with a Python layer that directly streams
the corresponding data into memory. We use ImGui [47]
for the UI implementation to adjust scene elements such as
transfer functions, clipping planes, and animation controls
by adding keyframes (Figure 4). When the user clicks the
“Export” button, the system communicates with the Python
module, reads the data, and downloads the GAD scripts
with raw data. The viewer-based method is more manageable
for some users than the text-based method; however, it still
requires understanding terms like transfer functions, clipping,
and animation keyframes.
2) LLM-Assisted Scripting
Our LLM-assisted scripting is implemented as a conversa-
tional ChatGPT-like user interaction, similar to the web-based
application familiar to the general public. We use the GPT-
4o model to build our rule-based AI-assisted [48] scripting
framework. The key principle of our scripting mechanism is to
leverage AI’s assessment and visual understanding capabilities
in a context-aware manner. Our scripting mechanism com-
prises four parts: context building, action planning, animation
evaluation, and memory.
a) Context-building
As part of context building, we summarize the dataset dur-
ing initialization and provide a parameter template consistent
with the GAD files. In the intermediate step, a function call is
made to set the parameters when the user asks for a specific
animation. Inside the function, as context, the system provides
the MLLM with predefined examples of successful parameter
sets for known events related to our example dataset. Through-
out the conversation, the MLLM preserves all conversation
history and passes it as part of the prompt, enabling the AI to
learn the user’s request context over time.
b) Action planning
We show users a command-line interface with options 1-
4 to choose an example phenomenon, or option 0 to enter
a custom description of what they want to animate. In the
case of options 1-4, the script looks for example parameters
and, if present, the pre-generated GAD scripts, and further,
the render backend works in line. In the case of option
0, when users describe a desired visualization in natural
language, the MLLM uses these examples and all the contexts
passed to it to translate the description into specific parameter
values (xrange, yrange, time steps, etc.). The script then
sets the parameters in appropriate function calls, generates
corresponding GAD scripts, and renders the animation.
c) Evaluating animations
We enable AI-empowered animation feedback by returning
the rendering results to the MLLM. Based on all the contexts
provided to the MLLM, it assesses the rendered frames and
suggests parameter adjustments to improve visualization. Then
it asks the user whether they want to animate using the sug-
gested parameters or guide MLLM in making modifications.
Upon the user’s input, it returns adjusted parameters and
continues this loop until the user exits the interface.
d) Memory
All these components need is the memory of the previous
actions or the visualization outputs it observed before. To make
our scripting more time-efficient, the animations are assigned
a unique animation ID in the format of animation_x1-y1-
z1_x2-y2-z2_t1-t2-step_dataResolution_field_streamlines.
In
any case, if the parameters for the region of interest match
locally saved animations, the system uses the GAD scripts
from storage and renders the animation. In this way, redundant
data access, load, and GAD generation are prevented. This
represents a step towards a fully automated visualization
framework with a highly human-interpretable user interface.
All four components of the AI-assisted scripting mechanism
work together to create a user-friendly environment that allows
non-visualization experts to generate animations.
IV. OVERVIEW OF CLOUD-HOSTED DATASET
For the results in this paper, we use the oceanographic
simulation of the NASA 1.8 PB DYAMOND dataset [4], [5],
shown in Figure 5. This model was run for over 10000 hourly
timesteps covering over 14 simulation months starting from
January 2020 involving five 3D fields, including temperature,
salinity, three axis-aligned velocities, and more than ten 2D
fields. “Dynamics of the Atmospheric General Circulation
Modeled On Non-hydrostatic Domains” or DYAMOND is part
of the Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere Simulation (COAS) run at
NASA Advanced Supercomputing (NAS). These datasets are
hosted on the cloud and have been publicly available through
NASA’s data portal [49]–[51]. The DYAMOND dataset well


--- Page 6 ---
Fig. 5: An ocean surface (Z=0) salinity map, ranging from 33 to
38 g/kg. This visualization represents one of 10,269 timesteps from
a 1PB dataset, each 20GB in size. The complete dataset includes
five 3D scalar fields: temperature, salinity, and velocity components
east-west, south-north, and vertical.
represents the big data visualization challenge our framework
addresses. Identifying features of interest within this large data
set is often complicated by involving multiple intermediate
steps from various applications. Our framework facilitates
interactive exploration of these massive datasets by decou-
pling the animation process from data management, allowing
domain scientists to focus on discovering important oceano-
graphic phenomena rather than struggling with visualization
technicalities.
V. EXPERIMENTS
We demonstrate our framework’s effectiveness through two
case studies using NASA’s DYAMOND LLC2160 ocean
dataset as introduced in Section IV. Our experiments show
how our approach enables visualization of petascale data on
commodity hardware with fast turnaround times, ranging from
one minute to two hours, depending on the complexity. We
present the workflow of our framework to obtain a fixed-
camera 3D animation similar to existing pre-recorded videos
targeting the oceanographic phenomenon important to the
domain scientists of the dataset. Our use cases are run on a
commodity workstation with a 12th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i7-
14700 CPU with 128GB of memory and a Quadro RTX 5000
GPU. Images are rendered at a screen resolution of 2048x2048
in all case studies.
A. Case Study 1: Visualizing Oceanographic Phenomena with
GAD generation
We targeted the Agulhas Ring for Case Study 1. Formed by
the confluence of warm Mozambique and East Madagascar
currents, the current travels southward, carrying heat and
momentum from the Indian Ocean [52]. However, as the
Agulhas current loops back to itself, an eddy is formed,
creating circular structures called “Agulhas Rings" that play
a significant role in ocean dynamics and can impact regional
climate patterns.
With the interactive viewer, we first identify the region
of interest for the Agulhas area and pass the parameters to
the Python code through the command line. We obtain 90
timesteps of full-resolution data (quality = 0), starting from
timestep 0 and spaced 24 hours apart, to generate a rough
animation overview for a 90-day duration. For the DYAMOND
dataset, this means 2020/1/20 to 2020/4/19. In about 30
minutes, the script could generate GAD scripts and download
datasets from our region of interest. We feed the GAD Header
file to our rendering backend, discussed in Section III-C, and
it takes approximately 12 minutes to render all the frames.
After rendering, we visualize the animation as a GIF file to see
the Ring formations; please see the supplementary materials
accompanying this paper. Figure 6 highlights three frames
from our animation, 1st, 24th and 90th frames generated by
GAD scripts.
Although the ring formation is distinguishable from the
temperature map in the above images, we further refined the
visualization to get a clearer ring formation view near the
warmer temperature region. Using the interactive viewer, we
loaded 10 representative timesteps and adjusted the transfer
function for better clarity. After tuning the opacity and color
mappings to achieve optimal visualization of the oceanic struc-
tures, we exported keyframes for each timestep. This process
automatically generated GAD files containing 10 keyframes
with precisely defined interpolated opacity values. The re-
sulting GAD file serves as a comprehensive, self-contained
description to reproduce the animation. Figure 7 shows the
results of these steps, and the supplementary material contains
the animation.
Due to its complexity, creating 3D animations of this event
has traditionally been time-consuming and daunting for most
researchers. However, we demonstrate that this can now be
accomplished with minimal programming knowledge and on
standard workstations in a fast turnaround time.
B. Case Study 2: LLM-Assisted Exploration of Multi-Variable
Oceanographic Data
In this case study, we demonstrate how our AI-assisted script-
ing pipeline can help generate visualizations, compare them,
and suggest visualizations with multivariate fields to better
understand data with a fast turnaround time. Case Study 2
focuses on the intriguing behaviors of the Mediterranean and
Red Seas.
a) Mediterranean Sea Salinity
The Mediterranean Sea represents a classic example of
an evaporative basin with unique water circulation patterns.
At the Strait of Gibraltar, fresher Atlantic water flows into
the Mediterranean at the surface. In contrast, saltier, denser
Mediterranean water flows outward at depth, eventually form-
ing rotating, lens-shaped bodies called Meddies [53].
To explore this region, we launch our animation scripting
module and choose option 0 to create a custom descrip-
tion in natural language at the AI prompt. We input with
“Mediterranean sea salinity with 60 days”. The AI chooses a
timeframe of 60 days, 24 hours apart, starting from 2020/01/20
to 2020/12/12 with 1/256 of the original resolution, and adds
no streamlines at first. It took about 9 seconds to download
the data and 1 minute to render. Five resulting frames with
salinity volume are then sent to the MLLM for evaluation and
adjustment suggestions. The AI suggested slightly modifying
the x, y, and z coordinates, increasing the resolution to 1/64


--- Page 7 ---
(b)
(c)
Time Progression
(a)
-0.42
27.34
Temperature (°C)
Fig. 6: A user produces an animation of the ocean temperature in the Agulhas retroflection (turns back to itself) over time from January 20,
2020, to April 19, 2020. The eddies form due to retroflection and create circular structures called “Agulhas Rings". The images show the
eddies formed in yellow-red regions, these eddies spinning off the main current and traveling into the South Atlantic: (a) at timestep 1, a
line of warm current starting retroflection, creating some eddies in the warmest ocean surface, (b) at timestep 24 the current rotated back
with ring formation with some visible eddies in merging points with cooler currents in the Southern Ocean (c) at timestep 90 the current
started rotating back again. This animation was created using our framework in 30 minutes for GAD script generation and data download,
plus 12 minutes for rendering.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Time Progression
-0.42
27.34
Temperature (°C)
Fig. 7: The user improves upon the animation in Figure 6 with our interactive viewer tool to include opacities. By reducing opacity in
cooler regions while maintaining the visibility of warmer structures, the eddies in the Agulhas current become more prominent, especially in
warmer regions. At (a) timestep 1, a line of warm water starting retroflection, showing better eddy structure in the warmest ocean surface, (b)
at timestep 5, and (c) timestep 10, the retroreflections are still forming while eddies in warmer ocean surface are more prominent visibility
than Figure 6.
.
Fig. 8: Portion of a user’s session with AI-assisted scripting to display the salinity of the Mediterranean Sea. The first region-of-interest
request results in a) a black-and-white volume of the salinity field. As the user chats with the AI more, the AI suggests visualizing both
the salinity and the velocity fields as streamlines, shown in b), where streamlines are traced from the combined u, v, and w velocity vector
fields. Image c) shows refined parameters. Then, the user asks to apply the current settings to a different time frame, as shown in d). This
region of interest showcases the dynamics near the Straits of Gibraltar, where fresh Atlantic water flows into the salty Mediterranean Sea at
the surface, and denser water flows out at the bottom, forming rotating, lens-shaped Meddies [53].
of the original resolution, and switching to visualizing salinity
with streamlines. This iteration took 15 minutes to download
the new, higher-resolution data and approximately 1 minute to
render. In the next evaluation, the frames are generated with
1/16 of the original resolution. The user was satisfied after
four iterations in this evaluation-action-memory loop. Then,


--- Page 8 ---
the user explored a different date range, asking the AI to
create the same animation from October 2020 to January 2021.
The final animation ended up with a resolution of 1/16 of
the original data downloaded. Figure 8 provides a sampling
of this AI-assisted scripting loop, which proves that iterative
exploration can help domain users with an initial screening
of a large-scale dataset. The full dialogue of this session is
provided in the supplementary materials.
b) Red Sea Salinity
To test our system’s flexibility with regions beyond the
example regions (Agulhas Ring and Mediterranean Sea) set
during context-building, we ask the AI to animate the eddies
in the Red Sea with the description: “I want to see Red Sea
Currents with Salinity”. The Red Sea is a sea inlet in the Indian
Ocean known for its high salinity due to its high evaporation
and low precipitation. Eddies in the Red Sea, particularly in the
central and northern regions, play a crucial role in transporting
salt. Our goal is to animate the eddies over time. Without
any prior examples specific to this region, the AI initially
struggled to suggest appropriate coordinates for the Red Sea
and captured somewhere near southeastern Africa in the Indian
Ocean. After some guidance like “please capture a broader
range for x and a different range at the upper regions", the AI
identified coordinates encompassing the Red Sea with some
part of the Gulf of Aden, capturing the critical Bab-el-Mandeb
strait where these water bodies connect from January 20, 2020,
to January 30, 202, 24 hours apart. Figure 1c shows one of
the rendered frames with distinctive eddy formations in this
strait and the center of the Red Sea, highlighting the circular
currents.
This case study reflect the effectiveness of AI-assisted
mechanisms to help domain scientists set parameters and
meta information for animation production without rigorous
visualization expertise. Users simply need to select the dataset
they are interested in, and then they can have a natural-
language conversation with the AI to receive focus-based
guidance.
VI. LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH
We have shown that our Generalized Animation Descriptor
(GAD) can be generated with LLM-assisted scripting and
integrated with traditional visualization packages. One lim-
itation is, the MLLM API has inherent randomness in its
inference process, resulting in slightly different outputs in each
iteration.In the future, this conversational interface may sug-
gest suboptimal parameters that require manual refinement by
users. Moreover, fine-tuning the MLLM for the 3D animation
generation pipeline will boost the framework’s capabilities.
Our preliminary framework takes a big step forward, reducing
the learning curve for domain scientists and researchers in
limited-resource environments.
We envision adding PyVista and ANARI in our framework.
PyVista provide a more ready-to-use scenario and ANARI
shares similarities with GAD in providing a standardized inter-
face. Since each tool has its own use case, the user experience
could be improved by providing more backend suggestions
tailored to the animation design. In the future, rather than
relying on the general MLLM model. By defining a robust
evaluation metric for the quality of scientific animations, the
next objective could be to create a fully automated, self-
improving animation generation system that eliminates the
need for iterative manual modifications.
VII. CONCLUSION
Large-scale scientific datasets present significant visualization
challenges for domain scientists, requiring specialized exper-
tise and infrastructure that often exceed available resources.
Our comprehensive framework enables efficient handling of
petascale, cloud-hosted datasets through progressive refine-
ment workflows that begin with rapid low-resolution proto-
typing and advance to high-quality animations. The GAD
abstraction provides a platform-agnostic method for anima-
tion generation, allowing seamless integration with existing
visualization tools (OSPRay, VTK) while hiding underlying
technical complexities from users. The natural language in-
terface further reduces barriers by translating domain-specific
descriptions into technical parameters, eliminating the need for
scientists to understand coordinate systems or visualization-
specific settings.
Through two real-world case studies using NASA’s petas-
cale DYAMOND oceanographic dataset, we demonstrate that
domain scientists can produce high-quality 3D scientific ani-
mations on commodity hardware without requiring specialized
visualization expertise or HPC infrastructure. These case stud-
ies showcase animation generation for complex oceanographic
phenomena, including Agulhas Ring formations, Mediter-
ranean Sea salinity, and Red Sea salinity patterns, with
turnaround times ranging from minutes to hours, depending
on resolution requirements.
Our approach enables researchers to focus on scientific
discovery and analysis rather than on the technicalities of
visualization, democratizing access to petascale data visualiza-
tion capabilities previously limited to specialized visualization
teams with significant computational resources.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Borkiewicz, A. Christensen, H.-N. Kostis, G. Shirah, and R. Wyatt,
“Cinematic scientific visualization: the art of communicating science,”
in ACM SIGGRAPH 2019 Courses, pp. 1–273, 2019.
[2] K. Borkiewicz, A. Christensen, R. Wyatt, and E. T. Wright, “Introduction
to cinematic scientific visualization,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2020 Courses,
pp. 1–267, 2020.
[3] E. A. Jensen, K. M. Borkiewicz, and J. P. Naiman, “A new frontier in
science communication? what we know about how public audiences re-
spond to cinematic scientific visualization,” Frontiers in Communication,
vol. 7, p. 840631, 2022.
[4] B. Stevens, M. Satoh, L. Auger, J. Biercamp, C. S. Bretherton, X. Chen,
P. Düben, F. Judt, M. Khairoutdinov, D. Klocke, et al., “DYAMOND:
the DYnamics of the atmospheric general circulation modeled on non-
hydrostatic domains,” Progress in Earth and Planetary Science, vol. 6,
no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2019.
[5] NASA, “DYnamics of the atmospheric general circulation modelled
on non-hydrostatic domains phase.” https://gmao.gsfc.nasa.gov/global_
mesoscale/dyamond_phaseII/data_access/.
[6] B. Hibbard and B. Paul, “Case study #4: Examining data sets in real
time, VIS-5D and WIS-AD for visualizing earth and space science
computations,” ACM SIGGRAPH’94 Course# 27, Visualizing and Exam-


--- Page 9 ---
ining Large Scientific Data Sets: A Focus on the Physical and Natural
Sciences, 1994.
[7] K.-H. Yoo, C. K. Leung, and A. Nasridinov, “Big data analysis and
visualization: challenges and solutions,” 2022.
[8] C. Healey and J. Enns, “Large datasets at a glance: combining textures
and colors in scientific visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 145–167, 1999.
[9] X. Han, X. Yu, G. Li, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, and G. Shan, “Narrative in situ
visual analysis for large-scale ocean eddy evolution,” IEEE Computer
Graphics and Applications, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 65–73, 2022.
[10] K.-L. Ma, I. Liao, J. Frazier, H. Hauser, and H.-N. Kostis, “Scientific
storytelling using visualization,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli-
cations, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 12–19, 2011.
[11] H. W. De Regt, “Visualization as a tool for understanding,” Perspectives
on Science, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 377–396, 2014.
[12] P.-T. Bremer, G. Tourassi, W. Bethel, K. Gaither, V. Pascucci, and W. Xu,
“Visualization for scientific discovery, decision-making, and communi-
cation,” tech. rep., US Department of Energy (USDOE), Washington DC
(United States). Office of ..., 2023.
[13] A. H. Squillacote, J. Ahrens, C. Law, B. Geveci, K. Moreland, and
B. King, The ParaView guide, vol. 366.
Kitware Clifton Park, NY,
2007.
[14] L. Data, “VisIt: an end-user tool for visualizing and analyzing very large
data,” in High Performance Visualization, pp. 395–410, Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 2012.
[15] W. J. Schroeder, L. S. Avila, and W. Hoffman, “Visualizing with VTK:
a tutorial,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 20, no. 5,
pp. 20–27, 2000.
[16] V. Pascucci, G. Scorzelli, B. Summa, P.-T. Bremer, A. Gyulassy,
C. Christensen, S. Philip, and S. Kumar, “The ViSUS visualization
framework,” in High Performance Visualization, pp. 439–452, Chapman
and Hall/CRC, 2012.
[17] A. Panta, X. Huang, N. McCurdy, D. Ellsworth, A. A. Gooch,
G. Scorzelli, H. Torres, P. Klein, G. A. Ovando-Montejo, and V. Pas-
cucci, “Web-based visualization and analytics of petascale data: Equity
as a tide that lifts all boats,” in 2024 IEEE 14th Symposium on Large
Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV), pp. 1–11, 2024.
[18] M. Christie, P. Olivier, and J.-M. Normand, “Camera control in computer
graphics,” in Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 27, pp. 2197–2218, Wiley
Online Library, 2008.
[19] W.-H. Hsu, Y. Zhang, and K.-L. Ma, “A multi-criteria approach to
camera motion design for volume data animation,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2792–2801,
2013.
[20] I. Liao, W.-H. Hsu, and K.-L. Ma, “Storytelling via navigation: a novel
approach to animation for scientific visualization,” in Smart Graphics:
12th International Symposium, SG 2014, Taipei, Taiwan, August 27-29,
2014. Proceedings 12, pp. 1–14, Springer, 2014.
[21] A. Ahmed and P. Eades, “Automatic camera path generation for graph
navigation in 3D,” in Proceedings of the 2005 Asia-Pacific Symposium
on Information Visualisation-Volume 45, pp. 27–32, 2005.
[22] T. Jankun-Kelly and K.-L. Ma, “A study of transfer function generation
for time-varying volume data,” in Volume Graphics 2001: Proceedings
of the Joint IEEE TCVG and Eurographics Workshop in Stony Brook,
New York, USA, June 21–22, 2001, pp. 51–65, Springer, 2001.
[23] J. Díaz-García, P. Brunet, I. Navazo, F. Perez, and P.-P. Vázquez,
“Adaptive transfer functions: improved multiresolution visualization of
medical models,” The Visual Computer, vol. 32, pp. 835–845, 2016.
[24] N. Burtnyk and M. Wein, “Computer-generated key-frame animation,”
Journal of the SMPTE, vol. 80, no. 3, pp. 149–153, 1971.
[25] M. Izani, A. Eshaq, et al., “Keyframe animation and motion capture for
creating animation: a survey and perception from industry people,” in
Proceedings. Student Conference on Research and Development, 2003.
SCORED 2003., pp. 154–159, IEEE, 2003.
[26] L. Yu, A. Lu, W. Ribarsky, and W. Chen, “Automatic animation for time-
varying data visualization,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 7,
pp. 2271–2280, 2010.
[27] H. Akiba, C. Wang, and K.-L. Ma, “AniViz: a template-based animation
tool for volume visualization,” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applica-
tions, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 61–71, 2009.
[28] R. M. Baecker, “Picture-driven animation,” in Proceedings of the May
14-16, 1969, Spring Joint Computer Conference, pp. 273–288, 1969.
[29] B. Nouanesengsy, J. Woodring, J. Patchett, K. Myers, and J. Ahrens,
“ADR visualization: a generalized framework for ranking large-scale
scientific data using analysis-driven refinement,” in 2014 IEEE 4th
Symposium on Large Data Analysis and Visualization (LDAV), pp. 43–
50, IEEE, 2014.
[30] C. M. Beshers and S. K. Feiner, “Real-time 4D animation on a 3D
graphics workstation,” in Proc. Graphics Interface, vol. 88, pp. 1–7,
1988.
[31] J. Kim, S. Lee, H. Jeon, K.-J. Lee, H.-J. Bae, B. Kim, and J. Seo,
“PhenoFlow: a human-LLM driven visual analytics system for exploring
large and complex stroke datasets,” 2024.
[32] Y. Tian, W. Cui, D. Deng, X. Yi, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, and Y. Wu,
“ChartGPT: leveraging LLMs to generate charts from abstract natural
language,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 31, pp. 1731–1745, Mar. 2025.
[33] “Accessible text descriptions for upset plots,” in Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 44, p. e70102, Wiley Online Library, 2025.
[34] B. Praneeth, A. K. Singh, J. K. Raju, Mohana, and B. Suma, “Natural
language interface for data visualization: Harnessing the power of large
language models,” in 2024 15th International Conference on Computing
Communication and Networking Technologies (ICCCNT), pp. 1–6, June
2024.
[35] A. Narechania, A. Srinivasan, and J. Stasko, “Nl4dv: A toolkit for
generating analytic specifications for data visualization from natural
language queries,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 369–379, 2020.
[36] P. Maddigan and T. Susnjak, “Chat2vis: Generating data visualizations
via natural language using chatgpt, codex and gpt-3 large language
models,” Ieee Access, vol. 11, pp. 45181–45193, 2023.
[37] K. Ai, K. Tang, and C. Wang, “Nli4volvis: Natural language interaction
for volume visualization via llm multi-agents and editable 3d gaussian
splatting,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
2025.
[38] S. Liu, H. Miao, Z. Li, M. Olson, V. Pascucci, and P.-T. Bremer, “AVA:
towards autonomous visualization agents through visual perception-
driven decision-making,” Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 43, no. 3,
p. e15093, 2024.
[39] A. Bendeck and J. Stasko, “An empirical evaluation of the GPT-
4 multimodal language model on visualization literacy tasks,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2024.
[40] Z. Li, H. Miao, V. Pascucci, and S. Liu, “Visualization literacy of
multimodal large language models: a comparative study,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.10996, 2024.
[41] “VTK: vtkRectilinearGrid class reference.” https://vtk.org/doc/nightly/
html/classvtkRectilinearGrid.html. [Accessed 16-11-2024].
[42] M. Cox and D. Ellsworth, “Managing big data for scientific visualiza-
tion,” in ACM Siggraph, vol. 97, pp. 21–38, MRJ/NASA Ames Research
Center, 1997.
[43] OpenVisus, “OpenVisus.” https://github.com/sci-visus/openvisus.
[44] OSDF, “Open Science Data Federation.” https://osg-htc.org/services/
osdf.
[45] I. Wald, G. Johnson, J. Amstutz, C. Brownlee, A. Knoll, J. Jeffers,
J. Gunther, and P. Navratil, “OSPRay – a CPU ray tracing framework
for scientific visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 23, pp. 1–1, 01 2016.
[46] W. Schroeder, K. Martin, and W. Lorensen, The visualization toolkit: an
object-oriented approach to 3D graphics. 01 2006.
[47] J. Knoblauch, A. Sethuraman, and J. Hey, “IMGui – a desktop GUI
application for isolation with migration analyses,” Molecular Biology
and Evolution, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 500–504, 2017.
[48] S. Servantez, J. Barrow, K. Hammond, and R. Jain, “Chain of logic:
Rule-based reasoning with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.10400, 2024.
[49] NASA, “NASA DYAMON v2 portal.” https://portal.nccs.nasa.gov/
datashare/G5NR/DYAMONDv2/. [Accessed 14-11-2024].
[50] “Estimating the circulation and climate of the ocean (ECCO) | PO.DAAC
/ JPL / NASA.” https://podaac.jpl.nasa.gov/ECCO?sections=data. [Ac-
cessed 14-11-2024].
[51] SciVis Contest 2026 Organizers, “IEEE 2026 SciVis contest: Visualizing
the future of climate science, one dataset at a time,” 2026. Accessed:
March 30, 2025.
[52] The Agulhas current retroflection, pp. 151–207.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006.
[53] josvg,
“meddy.”
https://josvg.home.xs4all.nl/Dundee/meddies/index.
html.
