--- Page 1 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
1
GPR Hierarchical Synergistic Framework for
Multi-Access MPQUIC in SAGINs
Hanjian Liu, Jinsong Gui
Abstract—The deployment of Multipath QUIC (MPQUIC)
in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)-assisted Space-Air-Ground
Integrated Networks (SAGINs) is severely hampered by the
out-of-order (OFO) packet delivery problem. Frequent stream
handovers, high mobility, and massive multi-access contention
in these networks introduce severe transport-layer challenges.
Existing solutions typically isolate multipath scheduling from
congestion control, which leads to suboptimal performance and
transient congestion in highly dynamic environments. To over-
come these limitations, this paper proposes the GPR Hierarchical
Synergistic Framework, representing the first joint optimization
of multipath scheduling and congestion control for multi-access
MPQUIC in SAGINs. Our framework introduces the GradNorm
Probabilistic Self-Predictive (GPASP) module to forecast latent
states and filter task-irrelevant information in high-dimensional,
noisy observation spaces. Furthermore, we develop a Proactive
Handover-Aware Congestion Control (PHACC) algorithm that
leverages neural network-driven decisions to proactively dis-
tinguish handover-induced packet losses from actual network
congestion. To address decision-making lag caused by neural
network inference latency, a Neural-network Preference Esti-
mation (NNPE) algorithm is designed for highly efficient, real-
time scheduling. Extensive ns-3 simulations demonstrate that
the proposed framework significantly outperforms state-of-the-
art baselines, achieving substantial goodput improvements and a
marked reduction in OFO degrees.
Index Terms—Space-Air-Ground Integrated Network (SA-
GIN), Multipath QUIC (MPQUIC), deep reinforcement learning
(DRL), packet scheduling, congestion control, 6G networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the rapid emergence of the sixth-generation (6G)
communication era, the Space-Air-Ground Integrated
Network (SAGIN) has been envisioned as a revolutionary
paradigm to provide ubiquitous, high-capacity, and globally
seamless connectivity [1]. By synergistically combining ter-
restrial infrastructures with Non-Terrestrial Networks (NTNs)
such as Low Earth Orbit satellites (LEO SATs) and Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), SAGINs can significantly expand
coverage to remote and disaster-stricken areas [2]. In this
architecture, UAVs serve as highly agile aerial relays or
base stations, offering line-of-sight (LoS) links and flexible
deployment to support massive User Equipments (UEs) [3].
However, the inherent characteristics of SAGINs—such as
the high mobility of both UAVs and LEO SATs, frequent
handovers, intermittent coverage, and highly heterogeneous
link properties—pose severe challenges to ensuring reliable
and low-latency end-to-end data transmission.
TXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX.
Manuscript received XX XX, XXXXX; revised XX XX, XXXX.
Despite these architectural advantages, the highly dynamic
topology of UAV-assisted SAGINs introduces severe commu-
nication challenges at the transport layer. The continuous,
high-speed movement of both UAVs and LEO SATs results in
fluctuating link qualities, asymmetric path delays, and frequent
handovers [4]. Traditional single-path transport protocols, such
as TCP and QUIC, suffer from severe performance degradation
and connection interruptions in such volatile environments.
Nevertheless, multipath QUIC (MPQUIC) offers a novel solu-
tion to address these challenges. As a user-space extension of
QUIC, MPQUIC inherits features like 0 round-trip time (RTT)
connection establishment, built-in encryption, and connection
migration via Connection IDs (CIDs), while enabling the
simultaneous aggregation of multiple network paths. This
intrinsically positions MPQUIC as a promising candidate for
improving transmission reliability and throughput in mobile
non-terrestrial networks [5].
However, the deployment of MPQUIC in UAV-assisted
SAGINs is severely hampered by the out-of-order (OFO)
packet delivery problem. Due to significant disparities in
bandwidth, latency, and packet loss rate (PLR) among parallel
paths in SAGINs, packets scheduled across different paths
frequently arrive at the receiver out of sequence, causing head-
of-line blocking, buffer overflow, and throughput degradation
[6]. Existing literature primarily addresses the OFO problem
by proposing either novel multipath schedulers to predict
path delays [7] or new congestion control (CC) algorithms
to dynamically adjust sending windows [8]. However, these
solutions are predominantly designed for relatively stable
terrestrial networks or idealized parameter variations [9], [10].
When applied to SAGINs, they struggle to adapt to the extreme
heterogeneity and transient congestion triggered by UAV mo-
bility and SAT-UAV handovers. Furthermore, current studies
tend to focus on either scheduling or congestion control in
isolation, failing to coordinate the intrinsic coupling between
the two. In highly dynamic SAGIN environments, the mis-
match between aggressive congestion control and conservative
scheduling often leads to suboptimal performance and severe
network congestion.
Moreover, existing research predominantly focuses on
single-user multipath transmission scenarios. In dense 6G
networks, however, multiple UEs concurrently compete for the
limited and time-varying bandwidth of UAV relays and SAT
backhauls. Optimizing MPQUIC in such multi-access scenar-
ios introduces a high-dimensional, noisy observation space and
exacerbates the partial observability problem, rendering tradi-
0000–0000/00$00.00 © XXXX IEEE
arXiv:2603.02740v1  [cs.NI]  3 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
2
tional heuristics and standard Reinforcement Learning (RL)
approaches brittle and sample-inefficient [11]. Additionally, in
highly dynamic SAGINs, neural network inference latency can
induce decision-making lag, resulting in ineffective actions or
even system performance degradation.
To dress these challenges, this paper presents the first
study on MPQUIC optimization in UAV-assisted SAGINs.
We perform a joint optimization of multipath scheduling and
congestion control to maximize overall system performance.
Specifically, we propose a novel GPR Hierarchical Synergistic
Framework tailored for multi-access MPQUIC in SAGINs.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
1) Novel Joint Optimization Framework: To our best
knowledge, this is the first study on joint optimization of
multipath scheduling and congestion control for multi-
access MPQUIC in UAV-assisted SAGINs, and we es-
tablish a systematic model quantifying the out-of-order
(OFO) degree and overall throughput.
2) GradNorm Probabilistic Self-Predictive: We design
a GPASP module to tackle the high-dimensional,
noisy observation space and partial observability is-
sues inherent in multi-access SAGINs. Unlike tradi-
tional observation-predictive methods, GPASP utilizes
self-predictive representations to forecast latent states,
thereby filtering task-irrelevant information. Further-
more, an adaptive GradNorm mechanism is integrated
to dynamically balance RL and auxiliary tasks, ensuring
stable convergence and sample efficiency.
3) Proactive Handover-Aware Congestion Control: We
develop a PHACC algorithm that leverages neural
network-driven scheduling decisions to achieve proac-
tive handover awareness. Specifically, we propose an
Exponentially Decaying Boost Slow Start (EDBSS)
mechanism to smooth the congestion window growth,
and a multi-metric packet loss differentiation mechanism
to distinguish handover-induced loss from real con-
gestion. This approach prevents misjudgment-induced
throughput fluctuations and ensures robust congestion
control during frequent SAT-UAV handovers.
4) Real-time Inference and Resilience Enhancement:
To mitigate the decision-making lag caused by neural
network inference latency, we propose a Neural-network
Preference
Estimation
(NNPE)
algorithm.
Drawing
on cognitive psychology, NNPE derives suboptimal
scheduling strategies efficiently without exhaustive real-
time inference. Additionally, a Resilient Hierarchical Re-
ward Monitor (RHRM) is implemented to dynamically
evaluate system performance and trigger hierarchical
recovery logic, ensuring the system’s robustness against
environmental stochasticity and distributional shifts.
5) Comprehensive Performance Evaluation: We extend
the ns-3 simulation platform to support MPQUIC in
SAGIN scenarios. Extensive simulation results demon-
strate that the proposed framework significantly out-
performs state-of-the-art baselines, achieving substantial
improvements in goodput and a marked reduction in
OFO degrees under highly dynamic and heterogeneous
network conditions.
II. RELATED WORK
The deployment of Multipath QUIC (MPQUIC) in Space-
Air-Ground Integrated Networks (SAGINs) lies at the intersec-
tion of non-terrestrial networking, multipath packet schedul-
ing, and intelligent congestion control. In this section, we
review the existing literature surrounding these domains and
highlight the unresolved challenges that motivate our work.
A. Multipath Transport in Non-Terrestrial Networks
To overcome the coverage limitations of terrestrial infras-
tructures and the high volatility of mobile wireless channels,
SAGINs have been widely recognized as a pivotal architecture
for 6G [1]. However, the high mobility of Low Earth Orbit
(LEO) SATs and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) intro-
duces frequent handovers, intermittent coverage, and asym-
metric path delays. To enhance transmission reliability in
such environments, multipath transmission and scheduling
strategies have been extensively studied. For instance, Zhang et
al. proposed a prediction-based MPQUIC scheduler (PBMS)
to support real-time applications over ultra-dense LEO SAT
networks [12]. Broadening the scope to network-level traffic
coordination, Li et al. developed a hierarchical deep rein-
forcement learning (DRL) and Stackelberg game framework to
optimize multipath differential routing and traffic scheduling in
ultra-dense LEO constellations [13]. While these studies con-
firm the potential of multipath mechanisms in Non-Terrestrial
Networks (NTNs), they primarily rely on the predictable
orbital parameters of SATs to model topology variations and
focus predominantly on space-segment optimizations. Conse-
quently, they fail to adequately address the extreme topological
shifts, transient congestion, and severe multi-access contention
introduced by highly agile UAVs in dense, integrated SAGIN
environments.
B. Multipath Scheduling and OFO Mitigation
A significant challenge in multipath transport over hetero-
geneous networks is the Out-of-Order (OFO) packet delivery
problem, which causes head-of-line blocking, buffer overflow,
and severe throughput degradation. Traditional scheduling
algorithms, such as minRTT, ECF, and BLEST, rely on
simplistic heuristics that perform poorly under the dynamic
latency fluctuations typical of mobile networks [14]. Conse-
quently, researchers have increasingly turned to learning-based
solutions. Han et al. introduced MARS, a multi-agent DRL
scheduler that incorporates OFO queue size feedback to adapt
to dynamic environments [15]. Xu et al. proposed DOFMS,
a Double Deep Q-Network (DDQN) framework aimed at
balancing throughput and OFO rates in mobile heterogeneous
networks [16]. Similarly, approaches like LooM [17] and
MAMS [18] attempt to mitigate OFO delivery by predicting
path conditions and introducing blocking delays. Despite these
advancements, existing learning-based schedulers typically
operate independently of the underlying congestion control


--- Page 3 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
3
mechanisms. In highly dynamic SAGINs, this isolation leads
to a critical mismatch between aggressive congestion window
scaling and conservative scheduling, ultimately inducing tran-
sient congestion.
C. Intelligent Congestion Control
Coupled congestion control (CC) algorithms (e.g., LIA,
OLIA, BALIA) synchronize subflows to satisfy fairness con-
straints but are famously sluggish in adapting to rapid path
capacity variations [19], [20]. To address this, Wang et al.
proposed CC-OLIA, which utilizes packet loss classifica-
tion to avoid drastic window reductions during independent
loss events in mobile networks [8]. For SAT environments,
Yang et al. developed a Mobility-Aware Congestion Control
(MACO) algorithm that utilizes a Bandwidth-Delay Prod-
uct (BDP)-inspired quick start [21]. Furthermore, DRL has
been applied to design advanced CC algorithms. Yu et al.
proposed MPLibra, a hybrid framework that bridges classic
MPTCP mechanisms with DRL to ensure TCP-friendliness
and convergence [22], while Wang et al. introduced TransAL-
CC, utilizing Transformer encoders and asynchronous RL
to extract fine-grained temporal dependencies [23]. However,
in the context of UAV-assisted SAGINs, packet losses are
frequently triggered by SAT-UAV handovers rather than actual
buffer overflows. Existing intelligent CC schemes lack proac-
tive handover awareness and multi-metric loss differentiation,
leading to severe throughput fluctuations caused by signal
misjudgments.
D. DRL in Multi-Access SAGINs
DRL is increasingly utilized to solve complex, multi-
objective optimization problems in SAGINs, such as resilient
massive access and power allocation [11] and two-timescale
intelligent task offloading [24]. Nevertheless, scaling DRL to
multi-access MPQUIC scenarios remains challenging. When
multiple User Equipments (UEs) concurrently compete for the
time-varying bandwidth of UAV relays and SAT backhauls,
the state space becomes exceptionally high-dimensional and
noisy. Standard DRL algorithms suffer from severe partial
observability and sample inefficiency under these conditions.
Furthermore, the inherent inference latency of complex neural
networks induces decision-making lag, rendering real-time
packet scheduling ineffective in fast-fading SAGIN channels.
In contrast to the aforementioned works, this paper pro-
poses the first joint optimization of multipath scheduling
and congestion control tailored for multi-access MPQUIC in
SAGINs. By introducing the GPR Hierarchical Synergistic
Framework, filtering task-irrelevant noise via the GPASP mod-
ule, and mitigating inference lag with the NNPE algorithm,
our approach intrinsically resolves the disconnect between
scheduling and congestion control via the PHACC algorithm,
thereby providing resilient, high-throughput, and handover-
aware communications in 6G architectures.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
Fig. 1 illustrates the communication scenario of the Space-
Air-Ground Integrated Network (SAGIN) incorporating Un-
manned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), which comprises randomly
distributed ground User Equipments (UEs), mission-specific
UAVs flying opportunistically over these sensing nodes, and
Low Earth Orbit (LEO) SATs passing periodically above them.
Without loss of generality, assume that the MPQUIC-enabled
UEs have multiple interfaces to connect with accessible UAVs,
L LEO SATs in one orbit take turns to serve the target area,
and the UAVs transmit all collected data packets to the same
closest SATs. The SAT ground station is primarily responsible
for delivering SAT-collected data to remote data centers but
cannot provide high-quality data transmission services for a
large number of UEs. The service period T of each LEO SAT
is equally divided into NT time slots with a slot length of τ,
i.e., T = NT τ. In each time slot, UEs select one UE-UAV-SAT
MPQUIC link to transmit data packets of the current flow.
Fig. 1. MPQUIC in UAV-assisted SAGIN.
The set of GTs, UAVs, and the closest SATs are represented
by N = {1, . . . , n, . . . , N}, M = {1, . . . , m, . . . , M}, and l.
As UAVs serve as relay nodes in UE-UAV-SAT links, each
UAV corresponds to one MPQUIC link from the perspective
of a UE. Thus, for simplicity and intuitiveness, all links of
each UE are directly denoted by {1, . . . , m, . . . , M}. Let
(pn
1, . . . , pn
i , . . . , pn
xn) denote the set of all xn packets from
UE-n to SAT-l, and (xn
1, . . . , xn
i , . . . , xn
xn) denote their arrival
order. Therefore, OFO degree can be defined as:
f(pn
i ) =
(
xn
i −xn
i+1,
xn
i > xn
i+1
0,
xn
i ≤xn
i+1
(1)
F ofo =
 xn
X
i=1
f (pn
i )
!
/xn.
(2)
Accordingly, overall throughput is defined as:
D(t) =
N
X
n=1
xn.
(3)
IV. PROBLEM AND MDP FORMULATION
Our primary objective is to determine a policy π that coordi-
nates the per-slot multipath scheduling of UEs and effectively
performs congestion control, with the aim of maximizing


--- Page 4 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
4
goodput and minimizing the OFO degree during each SAT
service period. This can be formulated as follows:
max
π
ω1DG −ω2F OF O,
s. t. (2), (3),
C1 : qU
n (t) ∈[0, LE]2, ∀n ∈N,
C2 :
N
X
n=1
sm
n (t) ≤Y U, ∀m ∈M,
C3 : dm,l(t) ≤dmax, ∀m ∈M, l ∈L,
(4)
where ω1 and ω2 denote the weights of the objective function.
Constraint C1 ensures that UEs are within the service area of
size LE × LE; constraint C2 limits the number of concurrent
services supported by each UAV; and constraint C3 guarantees
that all UAVs are within the visibility range of the SAT.
V. GPR HIERARCHICAL SYNERGISTIC FRAMEWORK
In this section, GPR Hierarchical Synergistic Framework is
proposed to address the issues of multipath scheduling and
congestion control, as shown in Fig. 2. This module com-
prises three core components: GradNorm Probabilistic Self-
Predictive (GPASP), Proactive Handover-Aware Congestion
Control (PHACC), and Resilient Hierarchical Reward Monitor
(RHRM).
Fig. 2. GPR Hierarchical Synergistic Framework.
A. State Encoder
RL for multi-access multipath transmission in Space-Air-
Ground Integrated Networks (SAGIN) is impeded by high-
dimensional, noisy observations and partial observability, ren-
dering traditional algorithms brittle and sample-inefficient.
In such contexts, given the performance degradation of
observation-predictive methods which directly predict the next
state, we adopt self-predictive representations (ϕL) to forecast
latent states rather than raw observations, thereby filtering
task-irrelevant information and ensuring stability [25]. Build-
ing on this, we propose the GradNorm Probabilistic Self-
Predictive (GPSP), which integrates: a self-attention proba-
bilistic latent transition encoder to capture long-range temporal
correlations and model uncertainty in highly dynamic envi-
ronments (Lines 2–3, Algorithm 1); an adaptive GradNorm
Algorithm 1: GradNorm Probabilistic Self-Predictive
Input: self-attention encoder fϕ and target encoder fϕ,
policy πν and old policy πν, value network Vω,
latent transition model gθ, EMA decay e,
adaptation rate η, initial loss coefficient λ,
learning rate α, smoothing factor β.
Output: updated parameters ϕ, θ, ν, ω.
1 for t = 1 to Nst do
2
zt ←fr(fϕ(ht)), (µt+1, σ2
t+1) ←fϕ(ht+1),
zt+1 ←µt+1;
3
δt ←rt + γVω(zt+1) −Vω(zt);
4
ˆAt ←δt + γλGAE ˆAt+1;
5
ˆVt ←ˆAt + Vω(zt);
6
at ∼πν(·|zt),
rt ←πν(at|zt)
πν(at|zt);
7
Lπ ←−min

rt ˆAt, clip(rt, 1 −ϵ, 1 + ϵ) ˆAt

;
8
LV ←1
2(Vω(zt) −ˆVt)2;
9
LRL ←Lπ + LV −Eat∼πν [log πν (at | zt)];
10
(ˆµt+1, ˆσ2
t+1) ←gθ(zt, at);
11
Laux ←1
2
X
i

log ˆσ2
t+1,i
σ2
t+1,i
+
σ2
t+1,i + (µt+1,i −ˆµt+1,i)2
ˆσ2
t+1,i
−1

;
12
GRL ←∥∇ϕLRL∥2, Gaux ←∥∇ϕLaux∥2;
13
λ ←λ ×

GRL
Gaux+ε
η
,
λ ←clip(λmin, λ, λmax);
14
Ltotal ←LRL + λLaux;
15
[ϕ, ν, ω, θ] ←[ϕ, ν, ω, θ] −α∇Ltotal;
16
[ϕ, ν, ω] ←β[ϕ, ν, ω] + (1 −β)[ϕ, ν, ω];
mechanism to dynamically balance RL and auxiliary tasks
for stable convergence (Lines 13–15, Algorithm 1); and stop-
gradient with exponential moving average (EMA) updates to
prevent representational collapse (Lines 16–17, Algorithm 1).
The multi-head attention encoder fϕ to obtain the parame-
ters (µt, σ2
t ) of a latent Gaussian distribution is:
fϕ(ht) = MLP
 
L
X
i=1
βi
 
||K
k=1
h
W k
OW k
V ht,j
L
X
j=1
softmax
(W k
Qht,i)⊤(W k
Kht,j)
√dk
i!!
,
(5)
where ht ∈RL×dh denotes the input sequence of L histor-
ical feature vectors, and ∥denotes concatenation. For head
k, learnable linear maps (W k
Q, W k
K, W k
V ) ∈Rdk compute
scaled-dot-product attention across positions, with W k
O pro-
jecting each head’s aggregated output. Scalar weights βi =
exp(q⊤ht,i)
PL
r=1 exp(q⊤ht,r) are generated by a learnable query q over
position-wise representations; concatenated and projected head
outputs are pooled via βi, then fed into an MLP to yield latent
mean µt and log-variance log σ2
t .
When the encoder generates a probability distribution over
latent states, sampling directly from this distribution consti-
tutes a stochastic process that hinders the direct backpropa-


--- Page 5 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
5
Algorithm 2: Proactive Handover-Aware Congestion
Control.
Input: window queue Wm
n , available bandwidth
TP m
n (t), predicted bandwidth Cm
n (t −1),
measured RTT τ m
n (t −1), estimated
propagation Dm
n (t −1), scaling factor γ,
standard deviation ∆R, ρ, ∀n ∈N, ∀m ∈M;
Output: cwnd wm
n (t).
1 if wm
n (t −1) < SST then
2
if subflow F m
n is created or reconnected then
3
if Wm
n ̸= ∅then
4
ˆwm
n ←EMA{Wm
n };
5
else if ∃Wn,i ̸= ∅then
6
ˆwm
n ←0, cnt ←0;
7
foreach i ∈M(i ̸= m) do
8
ˆwm
n ←ˆwm
n + EMA{Wn,i};
9
cnt ←cnt + 1;
10
ˆwm
n ←
ˆ
wm
n
cnt ;
11
else
12
ˆwm
n ←4MSS;
13
wm
n (t) ←min {Bm
n , ˆwm
n };
14
else
15
Increase wm
n (t) according to Eqs. (7)-(9);
16 else
17
Con 1 ⇐1{am
n (t) ̸= am
n (t −1) ∨dm
n (t) >
dth ∨dm,l(t) > d′
th};
18
Con 2 ⇐1{TP m
n (t) < Cm
n (t −1)};
19
Con 3 ⇐1{τ m
n (t) > Dm
n (t −1) + ∆R};
20
if packet loss ∧Con 1 then
21
if Con 2 ∧Con 3 then
22
wm
n (t) ←wm
n (t−1)
2
;
23
else
24
wm
n (t) ←γwm
n (t −1);
25
else
26
T m
n (t) ←maxt∈{t0,t1,...,t} τ m
n (t −1);
27
λm
n (t) ←σ SNRm
n
SNRmax + (1 −σ)λm
n (t −1);
28
wm
n (t) ←wm
n (t −1) +
λm
n (t)
3 maxm∈M
 wm
n (t−1)
τm
n (t−1)
2√
T m
n (t)
2τ m
n
P
i∈M
wn,i(t−1)
τn,i(t−1)
 5
2
;
29 return wm
n (t);
gation of gradients. Therefore, the Reparameterization Trick
is employed to separate the stochasticity from the parameters,
rendering the sampling process differentiable. The computa-
tion is illustrated as follows:
fr(µt, σ2
t ) = µt + exp(0.5 log σ2
t ) ⊙ϵ, ϵ ∼N(0, 1).
(6)
B. Decision Maker
By feeding the state information of UEs, UAVs, and Sats,
along with potential noise and interference, into the aforemen-
tioned GPSP module, we obtain all UE multipath scheduling
action denoted as am
n (t), ∀n ∈N, ∀m ∈M. This action
specifies that the data packet of UE-(n) is scheduled to the
m-th transmission path at time slot t.
However, frequent multipath scheduling switches and the
inherent dynamics of links pose severe challenges to MPQUIC
congestion control in the SAGIN architecture. Traditional
algorithms frequently suffer from performance degradation
due to congestion signal misjudgment when addressing packet
loss and topology variations triggered by scheduling and han-
dover. Different from the Mobility-Aware Congestion control
(MACO) algorithm [21] that estimates BDP mainly relying on
physical motion laws, our multipath scheduling and handover
decisions are dominated by neural networks, which endows
the system with a priori handover awareness. In view of
this, we propose the Proactive Handover-Aware Congestion
Control (PHACC) algorithm, which fully leverages scheduling
decision information provided by neural networks, integrates
historical link information and link quality perception, and
implements targeted optimizations in both the slow-start and
congestion avoidance phases.
The PHACC algorithm comprises three mechanisms: 1)
a historical information-driven cross-flow slow start mecha-
nism that aggregates cross-flow historical window information
(Wm
n ) via exponential moving average (EMA) to optimize
the initial window, thereby shortening the slow-start period
(Lines 1–15, Algorithm 2); 2) a packet loss differentiation
mechanism based on multi-metric congestion detection that
combines throughput and delay variations (Con2, Con3) with
DRL scheduling decisions and distance thresholds (Con1)
to distinguish handover-induced loss from real congestion,
applying conservative window reduction (γwm
n ) for the former
and halving for the latter to prevent misjudgment-induced
fluctuations (Lines 17–24, Algorithm 2); and 3) an SNR-aware
adaptive congestion avoidance mechanism that introduces a
dynamic coefficient λ based on SNR and load balancing
degree ρ, replacing the square-root growth function to dynam-
ically adapt to channel quality for efficient capacity conver-
gence (Lines 26–28, Algorithm 2). The calculation methods
for the input parameters TP m
n (t), Cm
n (t −1), τ m
n (t −1), and
Dm
n (t −1) of Algorithm 2 are detailed in [21].
Furthermore, to achieve a smoother and congestion-aware
growth of the congestion window (cwnd) during the slow start
phase, we propose the Exponentially Decaying Boost Slow
Start (EDBSS). This algorithm updates the cwnd at each RTT
in accordance with the following equations:
wm
n (t + 1) = wm
n (t) min

1 + ξ
 wm
n (t)

ζ
 wm
n (t)

, Mmax

,
(7)
ξ(wm
n (t)) =
1
1 + exp

a

wm
n (t)
SST −b
,
(8)
ζ(wm
n (t)) = 1 + γ exp

−wm
n (t)
ϱ

,
(9)
where ξ
 wm
n (t)

is an S-shaped gain (sigmoid) that smooths
the transition from exponential to linear increase, ensuring the
increment rate decreases progressively as cwnd approaches


--- Page 6 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
6
Slow Start Threshold (SST); typical sigmoid parameters are
a = 10 and b = 0.5. γ modulates initial cwnd amplification:
for small cwnd the factor (1 + γ) accelerates early growth
beyond conventional slow-start. Increasing γ improves respon-
siveness but may induce transient congestion if excessive.
ζ
 wm
n (t)

denotes the early-stage exponential boost: for small
cwnd it satisfies boost ≈1 + γ and decays exponentially
with cwnd under control of ϱ. ϱ governs the decay of the
exponential boost with cwnd: larger ϱ prolongs the boost
and delays convergence to the SST, whereas smaller ϱ yields
faster decay and more conservative behaviour. Finally, the
upper bound Mmax (e.g., Mmax = 2) caps the per-RTT
multiplicative increase to preserve stability and avoid buffer
overflow.
This slow-start algorithm incorporates an S-shaped attenu-
ation function and an exponential decay term to achieve pro-
gressively controlled slow start. In the early phase (cwnd ≪
SST), both ξ(wm
n (t)) and ζ(wm
n (t)) approach their maximum
values, enabling accelerated window growth that is comparable
to or slightly faster than conventional slow start. As cwnd
increases, ξ(wm
n (t)) gradually decreases following a logistic
function, while ζ(wm
n (t)) decays exponentially, ensuring a
smooth reduction in the growth rate. When cwnd approaches
SST, the growth rate nears 1, thereby eliminating oscillations
and reducing the risk of overshooting congestion thresholds.
EDBSS thus delivers smooth, stable, and self-regulated cwnd
growth behavior, preserving fast ramp-up in the early stage
while ensuring congestion safety near the transition to con-
gestion avoidance.
C. Reward Monitor
In highly dynamic Space-Air-Ground Integrated Networks
(SAGIN), the inherent inference latency of Neural Network
(NN)-based schedulers often leads to decision staleness, de-
grading real-time multipath scheduling and may induce tran-
sient congestion. To mitigate this, we propose a Neural Net-
work Preference Estimation (NNPE) algorithm for multipath
scheduling, exploiting an empirical insight from cognitive
psychology: human response times are inversely related to
preference strength [26]. Specifically, we model the binary
ACK feedback as the choice variable cn
i
and the packet
transmission delay as the response time ˜tn
i . Then by leveraging
equation (12), NNPE efficiently estimate the preference weight
vector of each UE without requiring exhaustive real-time neu-
ral inference. The details of NNPE are provided subsequently.
Each packet transmission generates a binary feedback signal
cn
i =
(
+1,
if ACK of pn
i is successfully received,
−1,
if pn
i is lost (timeout).
(10)
Let tn
i denote the measured RTT upon successful reception
of the ACK for pn
i , and Tmax represent the predefined timeout
threshold. We define the response time ˜tn
i as
˜tn
i =
(
tn
i ,
if ACK of pn
i is received,
Tmax,
if pn
i is lost (timeout).
(11)
Algorithm 3: Resilient Hierarchical Reward Monitor.
Input: current reward rwd, reward window rwd win,
smoothing factor α0, deviation multiple mul0,
trigger threshold thr0, minimum sample size ˆn,
sliding window size c
W, reference update factor
ˆβ, stability threshold ˆδ, severity threshold ˆλ
1 if rwd win is empty then
2
do initialization: srwd ←rwd, dev ←
0.5rwd, cnt ←0, rwd win ←∅, arwd ←
0, ˆα ←α0, mul ←mul0, thr ←thr0;
3 rwd win ←rwd win ∪{rwd};
4 arwd ←arwd(|rwd win|−1)+rwd
|rwd win|
;
5 dev ←(1 −ˆα)dev + ˆα|rwd −srwd|;
6 if |rwd win| < ˆn then
7
return;
8 if |rwd win| ≥c
W then
9
rwd win ←rwd win.pop();
10 F ←min
  dev
srwd, 1

, ˆα ←α0(1 + F),
mul ←mul0(1 −F), thr ←thr0(1 + F) ;
11 if |arwd−srwd|
srwd
< ˆδ then
12
srwd ←(1 −ˆβ)srwd + ˆβarwd ;
13 if rwd > arwd + mul × dev then
14
if cnt < 0 then
15
cnt ←0;
16
cnt ←cnt + 1;
17 if rwd < arwd −mul × dev then
18
if cnt > 0 then
19
cnt ←0;
20
cnt ←cnt −1;
21 if |cnt| > thr then
22
if F < λ then
23
Update bθn via Eq. (12);
24
else
25
Retrain neural network parameters via
Algorithm (1)
The preference weight vector of UE-n is calculated as
follows:
bθn =
 xn
X
i=1
San,i
n,i (San,i
n,i )T
!−1 xn
X
i=1

San,i
n,i
cn
i
˜tn
i

,
(12)
where San,i
n,i
denotes the feature vector of the corresponding
link when UE-n transmits packet pn
i by executing action an,i.
The operator (·)T eliminates sample-distribution bias. The ra-
tio cn
i /˜tn
i measures the preference-strength rate: large positive
values indicate strong preference, large negative values indi-
cate strong aversion, and values near zero denote inconsistent
(weak) preference. Finally, the optimal multipath scheduling
strategy for UE-n is obtained via arg maxm∈M Sm
n,ibθn.
By considering the link characteristics of communication
networks and the decision-making rules of neural networks
comprehensively, this method enables the derivation of sub-


--- Page 7 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
7
optimal multipath scheduling strategies that maximize multi-
path scheduling efficiency while strictly guaranteeing trans-
mission reliability.
During the inference phase, deployed DRL agents are
susceptible to environmental stochasticity and distributional
shifts, rendering static policy parameters suboptimal [27]. To
address this, we implement a Resilient Hierarchical Reward
Monitor mechanism (Algorithm 3) to dynamically evaluate
system performance and trigger necessary adaptations. Specifi-
cally, this mechanism integrates: adaptive threshold adjustment
driven by a fluctuation factor F to calibrate sensitivity based
on real-time reward volatility (Lines 8–10, Algorithm 3); a
cumulative counter strategy to distinguish sustained perfor-
mance drifts from transient noise (Lines 13–20, Algorithm 3);
and a hierarchical recovery logic where mild deviations in-
voke lightweight parameter updates to compensate for gradual
environmental drift, while severe persistent anomalies trigger
full PPO policy retraining to restore optimality under large
distribution shifts. (Lines 21–25, Algorithm 3).
VI. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
The work in [28] extended the ns-3 QUIC module [29] to
MPQUIC in accordance with the IETF draft [30]. Building
upon the publicly available implementation [31], we aligned
the project with the latest ns-3 CMake architecture and em-
ployed cppyy to bind the MPQUIC C++ source code into a
Python module. This facilitates a Python-centric experimental
environment, enabling seamless integration with advanced
DRL algorithms.
A. Simulation Setting
In the simulation scenario, nine UEs are randomly dis-
tributed within a 1 km × 1 km area, while four UAVs execute
area patrol and target detection missions along pre-planned
trajectories. Consistent with Starlink specifications [32], we
simulate a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) constellation at an altitude
of 550 km.
Given that our approach enhances system transmission
performance through both multipath scheduling and conges-
tion control, we categorize the comparative schemes into
two groups. For multipath scheduling, we evaluate the ran-
dom scheduling baseline, the widely used MinRTT and
Round Robin (RR), the novel contextual multi-armed bandit
(CMAB)-based Peekaboo [33], the recently proposed QoS-
driven Contextual MAB (QC-MAB) [34], and our proposed
GPASP. For congestion control, we compare our proposed
PHACC against, ablation scheme PHACC w/o GPASP, the
widely adopted MPQUIC algorithm OLIA [35], and the novel
MACO [21], which is tailored for mobile scenarios. Mean-
while, to ensure a fair comparison and verify the effectiveness
of our scheme by controlling variables, all path scheduling
algorithms utilize our PHACC for congestion control, while
all congestion control algorithms employ our GPASP for path
scheduling.
B. Multipath Scheduling Performance
1) Network capacity comparison: Fig.3(a) illustrates the
average throughput convergence over 1000 training episodes.
Traditional heuristic algorithms (RR, MinRTT) exhibit consis-
tently low throughput (< 3 Mbps and < 5 Mbps, respectively),
as static heuristics fail to capture high-dimensional spatio-
temporal dependencies and rapidly fluctuating link charac-
teristics in UAV-assisted SAGINs, lacking mechanisms to
anticipate transient link quality variations from UAV mobil-
ity and SAT handovers, leading to mismatched scheduling.
Learning-based schedulers (Peekaboo, QC-MAB) improve
performance via contextual feedback and adaptive exploration
but plateau early (≃6 Mbps and ≃8 Mbps, respectively),
due to partial observability and high noise in SAGINs de-
grading context abstraction and arm selection effectiveness.
In contrast, the proposed GPASP framework achieves the
highest throughput, stabilizing at approximately 12 Mbps.
This superior performance arises from its probabilistic self-
predictive latent encoder—which filters task-irrelevant noise
and preserves long-range temporal correlations to improve
state predictability—and its adaptive GradNorm mechanism,
which balances RL and auxiliary tasks, mitigates gradient con-
flicts, and accelerates convergence. These designs collectively
enable stable utilization of transient high-capacity UAV-SAT
paths.
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
0
3
6
9
1 2
1 5
1 8
E p i s o d e
 G P A S P
 Q C - M
A B
 P e e k a b o o
 M
i n R T T
 R R
 R a n d o m
T h r o u g h p u t  ( M
b p s )
(a) Throughput convergence
Q C - M
A B
G P A S P
P e e k a b o o
M
i n R T T
R R
R a n d o m
4 0
8 0
1 2 0
1 6 0
2 0 0
2 4 0
0
4
8
1 2
1 6
2 0
D e l a y  ( m s )
J i t t e r  ( m
s )
8 6
9 0
9 4
9 8
P D R  %
B e t t e r
(b) Delay-Jitter trade-off with PDR
2 . 0 7
2 . 4 7
4 . 2 8
5 . 8 3
1 4 . 4
8 . 0 2
7 . 7 8
1 0 . 3
1 3 . 3
1 8 . 2
4 2 . 4
2 4 . 5
G P A S P
Q C - M
A B
P e e k a b o o
M
i n R T T
R R
r a n d o m
0
3
6
9
1 2
1 5
1 8
O F O  R a t e  ( %
)
 P L R
 O F O  R a t e
0
1 0
2 0
3 0
4 0
5 0
P L R  ( %
)
(c) PLR and OFO rate
G P A S P
Q C - M
A B
P e e k a b o o
M
i n R T T
R R
R a n d o m
0 . 0
0 . 8
1 . 6
2 . 4
3 . 2
4 . 0
 2 5 %
~ 7 5 %
 1 . 5  I Q R
 M
e d i a n
 M
e a n
         
O F O  D e g r e e
(d) OFO degree distribution
Fig. 3. Multipath scheduling performance comparison of different schemes.
2) Transmission efficiency comparison: Fig.3(b) depicts the
delay-jitter-packet delivery ratio (PDR) trade-off. GPASP and
QC-MAB cluster in the bottom-left region with the largest
bubbles, indicating comparable low latency, bounded jitter,
and high reliability. Despite distinct internal mechanisms,
QC-MAB and GPASP converge to similar delay-jitter-PDR
performance via functionally aligned decision principles: QC-
MAB explicitly embeds delay/reliability constraints into arm
selection (biasing toward low-risk paths), while GPASP infer
optimal decisions via ACK timing/response latency. Thus,
GPASP reduces packet waiting time and scheduling-induced


--- Page 8 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
8
jitter, achieving QoS comparable to QC-MAB in this metric.
However, GPASP outperforms QC-MAB in global perfor-
mance (evidenced by throughput, PLR, and OFO results)
via enhanced long-term prediction and tighter scheduler-
congestion control coupling—features not explicitly addressed
by QC-MAB.
3) Network stability comparison: Fig.3(c) compares PLR
and Out-of-Order (OFO) rate across schedulers. RR and Min-
RTT have high PLRs (14.4% and 5.83%, respectively) due to
rigid rules routing traffic to congested/degrading links, espe-
cially during UAV–SAT handovers. Peekaboo and QC-MAB
improve reliability (PLRs: 4.28% and 2.47%), while GPASP
achieves the lowest PLR (2.07%) via probabilistic latent transi-
tion modeling that captures long-range temporal dependencies
and anticipates link degradation, reallocating traffic proactively
to mitigate queue overflow and packet drops—critical in
SAGINs where loss is dominated by mobility-induced link
dynamics.
4) OFO degree comparison: Fig.3(d) presents OFO de-
gree distribution. RR performs worst (highest median, largest
variance) by neglecting path heterogeneity. MinRTT moder-
ately reduces OFO degree but is vulnerable to outdated RTT
estimates that fail to track rapid channel fluctuations.QC-
MAB and Peekaboo alleviate packet reordering but still have
broader interquartile ranges and higher OFO rates than GPASP.
Notably, GPASP achieves the lowest median OFO degree,
tightest interquartile range, and minimum absolute OFO rate
(7.78%), enabled by two synergistic mechanisms: the proba-
bilistic latent encoder forecasts path delays to minimize cross-
path delivery variance, and NNPE mitigates inference lag
to synchronize packet dispatching with dynamic link states,
reducing reordering/buffer blocking for stable in-order delivery
in SAGINs.
Notably, RR exhibits inferior overall performance to Ran-
dom, primarily because it uses a rigid, deterministic heuristic
that distributes packets blindly across all paths regardless
of substantial differences in bandwidth, latency, and packet
loss. In contrast, while also non-adaptive, random scheduling
prevents the systematic synchronization of packets to poor-
quality paths caused by strict rotation.
C. Congestion Control Performance
1) Network capacity comparison: Fig.4(a) presents through-
put convergence over training/evaluation runs. OLIA achieves
the lowest average throughput (≈8–9 Mbps) owing to con-
servative subflow synchronization and slow probing; MACO
improves to ≈10.5 Mbps via mobility-informed BDP esti-
mates, enabling faster probing in most cases. PHACC attains
the highest steady throughput (≈12 Mbps), while its ablation
(PHACC w/o GPASP) yields lower throughput. Mechanisti-
cally, PHACC’s advantage stems from two complementary
design choices: (1) Exponentially Decaying Boost Slow Start
(EDBSS) uses an S-shaped gain and exponential decay term
to balance aggressive early cwnd growth—amplifying prob-
ing when cwnd ≪SST while attenuating growth near the
estimated SST to reduce overshoot; (2) PHACC leverages
scheduler-provided priors (GPASP) and historical cross-flow
0
2 0 0
4 0 0
6 0 0
8 0 0
1 0 0 0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
1 4
1 6
T h r o u g h p u t  ( M
b p s )
E p i s o d e
 P H A C C
 M
A C O
 O L I A
 P H A C C  w / o  G P A S P
(a) Throughput convergence
P H A C C
M
A C O
O L I A
P H A C C  w / o  G P A S P
6 0
7 0
8 0
9 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
2 . 5
3 . 0
3 . 5
4 . 0
4 . 5
5 . 0
D e l a y  ( m s )
9 2
9 4
9 6
9 8
P D R  %
B e t t e r
J i t t e r  ( m
s )
(b) Delay-Jitter trade-off with PDR
2 . 0 7
8 . 4 7
3 . 0 8
3 . 7 2
7 . 8
1 8 . 8
1 0 . 6
1 2 . 3
P H A C C
M
A C O
O L I A P H A C C  w / o  G P A S P
0
2
4
6
8
1 0
1 2
O F O  R a t e  ( %
)
 P L R
 O F O  R a t e
0
4
8
1 2
1 6
2 0
2 4
P L R  ( %
)
(c) PLR and OFO rate
P H A C C
M
A C O
O L I A P H A C C  w / o  G P A S P
0 . 3
0 . 6
0 . 9
1 . 2
1 . 5
1 . 8
O F O  D e g r e e
 2 5 %
~ 7 5 %
 1 . 5  I Q R
 M
e d i a n
 M
e a n
         
(d) OFO degree distribution
Fig. 4. Congestion control performance comparison of different schemes.
window statistics (EMA of W m
n ) to set safer initial windows
and adjust probing aggressiveness for handover anticipation. In
contrast, MACO relies on physics-based BDP estimation and
AKF correction, which is less effective under heavy multi-
access contention and non-access bottlenecks. The ablation
confirms scheduler–CC coupling enhances capacity utilization:
without GPASP’s noise-filtered latent predictions, PHACC’s
priors are less reliable, leading to more conservative or oscil-
latory cwnd control depending on the scenario.
2) Transmission efficiency comparison: Fig.4(b) plots delay
(x), jitter (y), and PDR (bubble size). PHACC clusters in the
desirable bottom-left (low delay/low jitter) with the largest
bubbles (highest PDR), while OLIA and MACO locate in
higher-delay regions. This arises from PHACC’s multi-metric
loss differentiation (Con1–Con3 in Algorithm 2): when packet
loss aligns with handover indicators (e.g., sudden throughput
drop, RTT deviation, scheduling switch), PHACC adopts con-
servative cwnd reduction (factor γ) instead of aggressive halv-
ing for confirmed congestion. This selective response reduces
abrupt transmission stalls and queuing-induced delay spikes,
tightening jitter and improving PDR. Ablation results show
these benefits are amplified when the congestion controller
receives reliable, anticipatory scheduling signals from GPASP.
3) Network stability comparison: Fig.4(c) compares PLR
and OFO rates. OLIA and PHACC w/o GPASP show moderate
PLRs (3.08% and 3.72%), while PHACC reduces PLR to
2.07%. PHACC’s lower PLR stems not from being “less ag-
gressive” but from accurately distinguishing mobility-induced
losses from congestion via short-term throughput/RTT mea-
surements, scheduling-derived handover signals, and SNR-
aware weighting in congestion-avoidance. This enables tar-
geted cwnd reductions to avoid unnecessary post-handover
rate drops while responding firmly to genuine congestion. The
result (lower PLR with high throughput) reflects PHACC’s
ability to probe capacity aggressively when safe and back
off gently for mobility-related losses. MACO’s mobility-aware


--- Page 9 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
9
BDP estimation and square-root CA excel in access-dominated
cases, but in dense multi-UE scenarios, ACK-based CN es-
timates and AKF corrections are biased by cross-UE con-
tention or non-access bottlenecks. Controller misattribution of
transient measurements leads to quick-start decisions causing
buffer blooms on slower paths and higher PLR/OFO. PHACC
mitigates this by fusing physical estimation with GPASP’s la-
tent cross-flow knowledge and per-subflow historical windows,
making its quick-start aggressive. Therefore, it exhibits poor
performance in terms of PLR and OFO rate.
4) OFO degree comparison: Fig.4(d) presents OFO degree
distributions: PHACC achieves the lowest median and tightest
Interquartile Range (IQR), while MACO exhibits the largest
variance and highest OFO rate (≃18.8%). Ablation shows
removing GPASP significantly increases OFO rate and OFO
degree, confirming accurate scheduler priors help CC avoid
window-driven reordering. This is because aggressive yet
uninformed cwnd increases (e.g., quick-start) push packets
to temporarily faster paths, with later arrivals on slower
paths causing severe receiver reordering. PHACC avoids this
via EDBSS-tempered early growth, SNR/load-aware pacing
adaptation across subflows, and window-scheduler prediction
synchronization to steer bulk transfers away from degrading
paths, reducing OFO degree and rate.
D. NNPE performance verification
We validate the NNPE) designed to mitigate inference-
induced decision staleness and deliver low-latency, suboptimal
scheduling recommendations when full NN inference is com-
putationally prohibitive. Experiments compare the full GPASP
agent (with NNPE enabled) against a NNPE-disabled config-
uration (“w/o NNPE”), with all other components unchanged.
Key evaluation metrics include throughput convergence, de-
lay/jitter/PDR, and decision latency (CPU and wall-clock per
decision).
7
8
9
1 0
1 1
6 4 6 5 6 6 6 7 6 8
2 . 8 2 . 9 3 . 0 3 . 1 3 . 2
0 . 0 6
0 . 0 8
0 . 1 0
0 . 2
0 . 4
0 . 6
0 . 8
1 . 0
0 . 0 1
0 . 0 2
O F O  D e g r e e
O F O  R a t e  ( %
)
J i t t e r  ( m
s )
D e l a y  ( m
s )
T h r o u g h p u t  ( M
b p s )
 w /  N N P E
 w / o  N N P E
P L R  ( %
)
(a) Comprehensive performance
0
3 0 0
6 0 0
9 0 0
1 2 0 0
1 5 0 0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
3 0 0
6 0 0
9 0 0
1 2 0 0
1 5 0 0
           
  	    
 w /  N N P E  C P U  
 w /  N N P E  W
a l l
 w / o  N N P E  C P U  
 w / o  N N P E  W
a l l
C P U  T i m
e  ( n s )
T e s t  C a s e  ( s e e d  n u m
b e r )
(b) Runtime Efficiency
Fig. 5. Comparison of NNPE ablation.
Fig.5(a) and Fig.5(b) show that NNPE preserves throughput
and QoS relative to the full-online-inference baseline. This
is because NNPE ensures decisions meet the required con-
trol frequency: while suboptimal to the full policy in quasi-
static environments, NNPE outperforms in highly time-varying
regimes by avoiding losses from stale decisions, embodying
a timeliness-vs.-optimality trade-off favoring timeliness in
SAGIN operations. Fig. 2(b) further compares per-test-case
CPU and wall-clock for runs with/without NNPE, demon-
strating that NNPE significantly improves computational infer-
ence performance by approximately 100%. This improvement
decreases decision staleness in fast-changing slots, thereby
lowering inference-induced mis-schedules.
Instead of executing a full deep policy forward pass at
each scheduling slot, NNPE computes a linearized preference-
weight vector ˆθn from lightweight statistics (ACK success/loss
cn
i and response times ˜tn
i via the closed-form estimator in (12).
This replaces costly nonlinear inference with a lightweight
linear algebra update (e.g., recursive least-squares or low-
dimensional incremental solvers) implementable incremen-
tally, substantially reducing per-decision wall-clock time while
generating actionable scheduling hints.
NNPE relies on recent ACK statistics, requiring minimal
samples to generate a stable ˆθn, yet may be biased under
sparse ACKs (very low sending rate) or highly bursty losses
(e.g., sustained deep fades). To address this, we: (i) smooth
ˆθn via exponential moving average (EMA); (ii) revert to
conservative scheduling heuristics when sample counts drop
below a threshold; and (iii) employ the Resilient Hierarchical
Reward Monitor (RHRM) to detect persistent NNPE degra-
dation, triggering lightweight parameter updates or full policy
retraining as needed. These safeguards are integrated into the
evaluation, preventing NNPE from destabilizing the system
under pathological conditions.
NNPE yields maximal benefits under three conditions:
(i) the environment has short-term predictability (rendering
preference estimates meaningful); (ii) full policy inference
latency is non-negligible relative to control slot length; and (iii)
computational resources are constrained (e.g., edge devices,
UAV on-board controllers). Full policy inference may be
preferable for deployments with abundant compute and slowly
varying environments; otherwise, NNPE serves as a pragmatic,
low-latency alternative.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we conducted the first systematic investigation
into the optimization of MPQUIC tailored for multi-access
UAV-assisted SAGINs. Recognizing the intrinsic coupling and
frequent mismatch between aggressive congestion control and
conservative scheduling, we developed the GPR Hierarchical
Synergistic Framework to maximize overall system throughput
while minimizing OFO degrees. By integrating the GPASP
module, our design successfully navigates the partial ob-
servability and high-dimensional noise inherent in multi-user
environments. The introduction of the PHACC algorithm ad-
dresses severe throughput fluctuations by granting the system
a priori handover awareness and enabling proactive window
adjustments through multi-metric loss differentiation. More-
over, the NNPE algorithm effectively mitigates neural network
inference latency to ensure synchronized packet dispatching ,
while the RHRM mechanism guarantees long-term robustness
against environmental stochasticity and distributional shifts.
Comprehensive evaluations on the extended ns-3 platform val-
idate that our joint optimization framework achieves state-of-
the-art transmission capacity, exceptional delay-jitter tradeoffs,
and highly stable network performance. For future work, we
will extend this synergistic framework to complex multi-orbit


--- Page 10 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. XX, NO. X, XX XXXX
10
SAT architectures, refine the optimization model to integrate
UAV energy constraints and matched topological rules, and
further generalize the framework for wide-ranging 6G deploy-
ments.
REFERENCES
[1] Zifan Lang, Guixia Liu, Geng Sun, Jiahui Li, Jiacheng Wang, Weijie
Yuan, Dusit Niyato, and Dong In Kim. Joint AoI and handover opti-
mization in space-air-ground integrated network. IEEE Trans. Mobile
Comput., pages 1–18, 2026.
[2] Yanbo Fan, Yuanguo Bi, Xingyu Ji, Dusit Niyato, Enchao Zhang,
Liang Zhao, and Qiang He. Cooperative hap-uav optimization for iort
data collection: A green transmission strategy for maximizing energy
efficiency. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., pages 1–18, 2026.
[3] Zhilong Liu, Jiayi Zhang, Yong Zeng, and Bo Ai. Energy-efficient multi-
agent reinforcement learning for uav trajectory optimization in cell-free
massive mimo networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 24(7):5917–
5930, 2025.
[4] Chong Huang, Xuyang Chen, Gaojie Chen, Pei Xiao, Geoffrey Ye Li,
and Wei Huang. Deep reinforcement learning-based resource allocation
for hybrid bit and generative semantic communications in space-air-
ground integrated networks. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 43(12):3942–
3954, 2025.
[5] Bruno Kimura, Simone Ferlin, Thomas Paiva, Toktam Mahmoodi, Anna
Brunstrom, and Ozgu Alay. Evaluating adaptive video streaming over
multipath quic with shared bottleneck detection. ACM Trans. Multimedia
Comput. Commun. Appl., 21(9), SEP 2025.
[6] Zhilong Liu, Jiayi Zhang, Yong Zeng, and Bo Ai. Energy-efficient multi-
agent reinforcement learning for uav trajectory optimization in cell-free
massive mimo networks. IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., 24(7):5917–
5930, 2025.
[7] Jianan Huang, Weiwei Liu, Guangjie Liu, Bo Gao, and Fengyuan
Nie.
Quiccourier: Leveraging the dynamics of quic- based website
browsing behaviors through proxy for covert communication.
IEEE
Trans. Dependable Secure Comput., 22(5):4516–4533, SEP 2025.
[8] Haoyu Wang, Yang Liu, Zijun Li, Yu Zhang, Wenjing Gong, Tao
Jiang, Ting Bi, and Jiaxi Zhou. Cc-olia: A dynamic congestion control
algorithm for multipath quic in mobile networks. Digit. Commun. Netw.,
11(4), AUG 2025.
[9] Liangxin Qian, Peiyuan Si, Jun Zhao, and Kwok-Yan Lam. Parameter
training efficiency aware resource allocation for aigc in space-air-ground
integrated networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., pages 1–18, 2026.
[10] Danladi Suleman, Rania Shibl, Mingzhong Wang, and Keyvan Ansari.
A simulated study of iot alps over legacy tcp/udp versus quic and sctp
for v2i communications. IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., 27(2):2040–
2055, FEB 2026.
[11] Chaowei Wang, Mingliang Pang, Tong Wu, Feifei Gao, Lingli Zhao,
Jiabin Chen, Wenyuan Wang, Dongming Wang, Zhi Zhang, and Ping
Zhang.
Resilient massive access for sagin: A deep reinforcement
learning approach. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 43(1):297–313, 2025.
[12] Mengyang Zhang, Zitian Zhang, Xiaoyu Liu, Lei Deng, Li Zhang,
Qiangzhou Gao, and Haibo Zhou.
Supporting real-time transmission
in ultradense leo satellite networks: A prediction-based multipath quic
scheduler. IEEE Internet Things J., 13(3):3691–3704, 2026.
[13] Shuyang Li, Qiang Wu, Ran Wang, Long Chen, and Hongke Zhang.
Efficient multipath differential routing and traffic scheduling in ultra-
dense leo satellite networks: A drl with stackelberg game approach.
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., 24(11):12424–12440, 2025.
[14] Yitao Xing, Kaiping Xue, Yuan Zhang, Jiangping Han, Jian Li, David
S. L. Wei, Ruidong Li, Qibin Sun, and Jun Lu. A stream-aware mpquic
scheduler for http traffic in mobile networks.
IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., 22(4):2775–2788, 2023.
[15] Xueqiang Han, Biao Han, Jinrong Li, and Congxi Song. Multi-agent
drl-based multipath scheduling for video streaming with quic.
ACM
Trans. Multimedia Comput. Commun. Appl., 20(7, SI), JUL 2024.
[16] Ziheng Xu, Wei Quan, Mingyuan Liu, Nan Cheng, Xue Zhang, Yan
Luo, Deyun Gao, and Hongke Zhang. Dofms: Drl-based out-of-order
friendly multipath scheduling in mobile heterogeneous networks. IEEE
Trans. Mobile Comput., 23(8):8274–8288, 2024.
[17] Yan Luo, Yuming Zhang, Mingyuan Liu, Jinhua Peng, Feilong Wang,
Nan Cheng, and Wei Quan. Loom: Learning-based multipath scheduling
for out-of-order mitigation in mobile networks. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Commun. (ICC), pages 1–6, 2025.
[18] Wenjun Yang, Lin Cai, Shengjie Shu, Jianping Pan, and Amir Sepahi.
Mams: Mobility-aware multipath scheduler for mpquic.
IEEE/ACM
Trans. Netw., 32(4):3237–3252, 2024.
[19] Kang Liu, Wei Quan, Yuming Zhang, Nan Cheng, Chengxiao Yu,
Mingyuan Liu, Xiaoting Ma, Qimiao Zeng, Hongke Zhang, and Weihua
Zhuang. Incc: In-network congestion control with proactive bottleneck
awareness. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 33(6):3424–3439, DEC 2025.
[20] Jing Xu, Guojun Yuan, Yachao Zhang, Zhan Wang, Ninghui Sun, and
Guangming Tan. Afcc: Ack-based fast congestion control in lossless
networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 34:355–369, 2026.
[21] Wenjun Yang, Lin Cai, Shengjie Shu, and Jianping Pan. Mobility-aware
congestion control for multipath quic in integrated terrestrial satellite
networks. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput., 23(12):11620–11634, 2024.
[22] Hebin Yu, Jiaqi Zheng, Zhuoxuan Du, Yu Liu, Bing Quan, Tao Chen,
and Guihai Chen. When classic meets intelligence: A hybrid multipath
congestion control framework. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 32(4):3575–
3590, 2024.
[23] Chunxin Wang, Wenyu Qu, Yefeng Zhang, Ying Zou, and Luyun
Zhang. Transal-cc: An asynchronous reinforcement learning approach
for multipath transmission congestion control in power iot. IEEE Trans.
Netw. Sci. Eng., 13:2998–3016, 2026.
[24] Ruijin Sun, Ge Qi, Lei Huang, Nan Cheng, Xiucheng Wang, and Meng
Qin.
Knowledge-driven two-timescale intelligent task offloading in
sagin-based vehicular networks. IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw.,
12:4986–5000, 2026.
[25] Tianwei Ni, Benjamin Eysenbach, Erfan Seyedsalehi, Michel Ma,
Clement Gehring, Aditya Mahajan, and Pierre-Luc Bacon.
Bridging
state and history representations: Understanding self-predictive rl. In
B. Kim, Y. Yue, S. Chaudhuri, K. Fragkiadaki, M. Khan, and Y. Sun,
editors, Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), volume 2024, pages
23555–23569, 2024.
[26] Shen Li, Yuyang Zhang, Zhaolin Ren, Claire Liang, Na Li, and Julie A.
Shah. Enhancing preference-based linear bandits via human response
time. In A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet,
J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang, editors, Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst.
(NeurIPS), volume 37, pages 16852–16893. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2024.
[27] Yitao Xing, Kaiping Xue, Yuan Zhang, Jiangping Han, Jian Li, and
David S. L. WeiMember. An online learning assisted packet scheduler
for mptcp in mobile networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 31(5):2297–
2312, 2023.
[28] Shengjie Shu, Wenjun Yang, Jianping Pan, and Lin Cai. A multipath
extension to the quic module for ns-3. In Proc. Workshop ns-3, pages
86–93, 2023.
[29] quic-ns-3.
https://github.com/signetlabdei/quic-ns-3, 2019.
Online;
accessed [current-date].
[30] Y. Liu, Y. Ma, Q. D. Coninck, O. Bonaventure, C. Huitema, and
M. K¨uhlewind.
Multipath extension for quic.
Internet-Draft draft-
ietf-quic-multipath-03, Internet Engineering Task Force, 2022.
Work
in Progress.
[31] Mpquic-ns3. https://github.com/ssjShirley/mpquic-ns3, 2023. Accessed:
Apr. 20, 2023.
[32] Astronomy.com.
Starlink
satellite
streaks:
How
big
of
a
problem
are
they?
https://www.astronomy.com/space-exploration/
starlink-satellite-streaks-how-big-of-a-problem-are-they/,
2023.
Online; accessed 2024-01-15.
[33] Hongjia Wu, Ozgu Alay, Anna Brunstrom, Simone Ferlin, and Giuseppe
Caso. Peekaboo: Learning-based multipath scheduling for dynamic het-
erogeneous environments. IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., 38(10):2295–
2310, OCT 2020.
[34] Wenjun Yang, Lin Cai, Shengjie Shu, Amir Sepahi, Zhiming Huang,
and Jianping Pan. Qos-driven contextual mab for mpquic supporting
video streaming in mobile networks.
IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput.,
24(4):3274–3287, 2025.
[35] Ramin
Khalili,
Nicolas
Gast,
Miroslav
Popovic,
and
Jean-Yves
Le Boudec.
Mptcp is not pareto-optimal: Performance issues and a
possible solution. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., 21(5):1651–1665, 2013.
