--- Page 1 ---
KERNELFOUNDRY: HARDWARE-AWARE EVOLUTIONARY GPU
KERNEL OPTIMIZATION
Nina Wiedemann∗, Quentin Leboutet∗, Michael Paulitsch, Diana Wofk, Benjamin Ummenhofer
Intel Corporation
{first_name}.{last_name}@intel.com
ABSTRACT
Optimizing GPU kernels presents a significantly greater challenge for large language models (LLMs)
than standard code generation tasks, as it requires understanding hardware architecture, parallel
optimization strategies, and performance profiling outputs. Most existing LLM-based approaches to
kernel generation rely on simple prompting and feedback loops, incorporating hardware awareness
only indirectly through profiling feedback. We introduce KernelFoundry, an evolutionary framework
that efficiently explores the GPU kernel design space through three key mechanisms: (1) MAP-Elites
quality-diversity search with kernel-specific behavioral dimensions to sustain exploration across
diverse optimization strategies; (2) meta-prompt evolution, which co-evolves prompts with kernels to
uncover task-specific optimization strategies, and (3) template-based parameter optimization to tune
kernels to inputs and hardware. We evaluate this framework on KernelBench, robust-kbench, and
custom tasks, generating SYCL kernels as a cross-platform GPU programming model and CUDA
kernels for comparison to prior work. Our approach consistently outperforms the baseline methods,
achieving an average speedup of 2.3× on KernelBench for SYCL. Moreover, KernelFoundry is
implemented as a distributed framework with remote access to diverse hardware, enabling rapid
benchmarking and featuring a flexible user input layer that supports kernel generation for a wide
range of real-world use cases beyond benchmarking.
Keywords kernel generation · evolutionary algorithms · code generation · GPU programming · LLM
1
Introduction
Writing high-performance GPU kernels requires deep expertise in hardware architectures, memory hierarchies, and
parallel programming paradigms: knowledge that remains scarce even among experienced engineers [Li et al., 2025c].
Yet efficient GPU implementations are often decisive for a method’s success and adoption, as illustrated by FlashAt-
tention [Dao et al., 2022], which was instrumental to the practical scalability of Transformers. Following the release
of KernelBench [Ouyang et al., 2025b], a growing body of work has explored the automation of GPU kernel devel-
opment using LLMs. With few exceptions based on model fine-tuning [Li et al., 2025c, Baronio et al., 2025], most
approaches rely on an iterative generate→verify→measure loop: kernels proposed by an LLM are compiled, validated,
benchmarked, and the resulting feedback is used to steer subsequent generations. Variants of this paradigm have been
demonstrated across CUDA [Chen et al., 2025b, Zhang et al., 2025, Lange et al., 2025b], Triton [Wang et al., 2025, Li
et al., 2025a], and Metal [Sereda et al., 2025], often augmented with profiling tools [Zhang et al., 2025, Chen et al.,
2025b, Lange et al., 2025b, Sereda et al., 2025], multi-agent architectures [Wei et al., 2025, Zhang et al., 2025, Lei
et al., 2025], or evolutionary search techniques [Liao et al., 2025, Lange et al., 2025a, Yan et al., 2026]. Despite known
shortcomings in KernelBench that require careful interpretation of reported speedups Lange et al. [2025b], these studies
collectively demonstrate that LLMs can produce correct and performant kernels when guided by execution feedback.
However, existing approaches rely on general code-generation strategies that do not address the unique challenges of
kernel optimization. Unlike standard programming tasks, kernel generation demands (1) knowledge of memory access
patterns and an understanding of how parallelism maps to specific architectures and (2) a systematic exploration of
∗Equal contribution
arXiv:2603.12440v1  [cs.DC]  12 Mar 2026


--- Page 2 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
optimization strategies. Furthermore, iterative prompting and kernel validation loops suffer from mode collapse, in
which iterative searches prematurely converge because LLMs repeatedly propose variants close to recent successes, and
context degradation, in which failed attempts dominate the prompt context as optimization histories grow.
To overcome these limitations, we propose KernelFoundry, an evolutionary framework that maintains a diverse
archive of kernel implementations and systematically explores optimization techniques. To counteract mode collapse,
KernelFoundry adapts a MAP-Elites evolutionary strategy [Mouret and Clune, 2015]. Rather than defining generic
behavioral descriptors such as code length [Lehman et al., 2023], kernel implementations are indexed along well-defined,
domain-specific dimensions addressing hardware system architecture such as memory access patterns or parallelism
strategies. To mitigate context degradation, we leverage meta-prompt evolution, allowing prompts to co-evolve with
kernels and uncover task-specific optimization strategies. Finally, we propose to repurpose templated kernels to allow
the LLM to tune hardware-dependent values like tile and block sizes.
We evaluate KernelFoundry on KernelBench, robust-kbench and custom benchmark suites spanning single-kernel
operators, fusion patterns, and full model architectures. Unlike prior work that targets NVIDIA’s proprietary ecosystem
almost exclusively, we additionally use SYCL, an open-standard C++ abstraction that is vendor-agnostic and more
expressive than other cross-platform GPU programming frameworks such as Triton. Furthermore, our framework is not
limited to standardized tasks or benchmarks. We introduce a custom input format that allows users to optimize kernels
based on arbitrary instructions (not restricted to PyTorch code) and to employ complex test frameworks, provided they
are compatible with pytest. As a case study, we showcase the optimization of a specific operation within a LLama3
model, illustrating the practical utility of our pipeline for real-world, model-level tasks.
2
Related Work
Traditional Kernel Optimization.
High-performance computing has long relied on separating algorithm specification
from optimization schedules, as exemplified in Halide [Ragan-Kelley et al., 2013] or TVM [Chen et al., 2018a], whereas
lower-level models like CUDA and SYCL require both to be handled together in code. Triton [Tillet et al., 2019] offers
a middle ground with a Python-based DSL that simplifies custom GPU kernel development but still exposes scheduling
control. Vendor libraries (cuDNN [Chetlur et al., 2014], CUTLASS [NVIDIA Corporation, 2017], oneDNN [Intel
Corporation, 2016]) deliver peak performance but lack flexibility for novel operators. Classical autotuners like
ATLAS [Whaley et al., 2001] and FFTW [Frigo and Johnson, 1998] demonstrate that systematic search can match
hand-tuned code. To avoid exhaustively evaluating every schedule, systems like AutoTVM [Chen et al., 2018b],
AnsorAnsor [Zheng et al., 2020], and Ithemal [Mendis et al., 2019] use learned cost models to predict performance, but
these require extensive training data and struggle to generalize across hardware. Despite these tools, algorithmic kernel
development remained a highly manual and expertise-driven process.
LLM-Based Kernel Generation.
Large language models have sparked intense interest in automated kernel synthesis,
yet generating correct GPU code remains challenging, and generating fast code is harder still. Early studies [Valero-
Lara et al., 2023, Godoy et al., 2023] evaluated Llama-2 and Codex on generating HPC kernels. The introduction
of KernelBench [Ouyang et al., 2025b] established the de facto benchmark, comprising 250 tasks spanning single
operators, fusion patterns, and complete architectures. Results showed that even frontier models achieve correctness
on merely ∼20% of problems with substantial gaps to cuBLAS/cuDNN baselines. Recent work has also highlighted
validation challenges: spurious speedups of up to 50x can arise from incorrect kernels that pass test cases [Lange et al.,
2025b, Zhu et al., 2025b], motivating more rigorous evaluation protocols. Despite these challenges, KernelBench has
inspired a plethora of follow-up approaches (see Table 5 for a comprehensive overview). The dominant paradigm is
prompting with validation loop: correctness and profiling outputs guide successive refinements of CUDA [Chen et al.,
2025b, Zhang et al., 2025, Lange et al., 2025b], Triton [Liao et al., 2025, Li et al., 2025a], and Metal [Sereda et al., 2025]
kernels. PEAK [Tariq et al., 2025] expresses optimization strategies as natural language transformations, achieving
up to 95% of cuBLAS performance on MatMul across CUDA, HIP, and HLSL. Multi-agent architectures decompose
the task into specialized roles: Astra [Wei et al., 2025] separates planning, coding, testing, and profiling agents;
STARK [Dong et al., 2025] uses plan-code-debug agents; QiMeng [Zhu et al., 2025a] employs macro/micro coding
agents; and PRAGMA [Lei et al., 2025] coordinates coder, verifier, and conductor roles. SwizzlePerf [Tschand et al.,
2025] stands out by injecting detailed microarchitecture knowledge (bank conflicts, warp operations, coalescing) into
prompts, demonstrating the value of hardware awareness. Despite their sophistication, these approaches share a common
limitation: they explore the kernel design space implicitly through generic code generation, without mechanisms to
preserve diversity across optimization trajectories.
An orthogonal direction is finetuning LLMs for kernel generation. CUDA-L1 [Li et al., 2025c] combines supervised
finetuning (SFT) with “contrastive RL”; CUDA-L2 [Su et al., 2025] adds NCU profiler metrics and multi-stage RL,
exceeding cuBLASLt by 11% on HGEMM, TritonRL [Woo et al., 2025] presents good results with SFT and GRPO
2


--- Page 3 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
User Input
Prompt
Constructor
Inference:
Large Language Model
Evaluation
Engine
Meta-Prompt
Evolution
MAP-Elites Archive
Selection & Evolution
Figure 1: The KernelFoundry pipeline: evolutionary kernel optimization with multi-level feedback and meta-prompt
co-evolution.
for Triton, and Kevin [Baronio et al., 2025] uses multi-turn RL to refine kernels across dialogue turns. These methods
achieve promising results but often cannot match the performance of the latest closed-source LLMs.
Existing LLM kernel work targets CUDA almost exclusively. MultiKernelBench [Wen et al., 2025] addresses this with
benchmarks spanning NVIDIA GPUs, Huawei NPUs, and Google TPUs, and NPUEval [Kalade and Schelle, 2025]
provides AMD NPU benchmarks. Translation systems like BabelTower [Wen et al., 2022] and CodeRosetta [Tehrani
et al., 2024] convert between CUDA and HIP/OpenCL but preserve rather than optimize performance. Our work
contributes to this direction by targeting SYCL [Keryell et al., 2015] and hence enabling portability across Intel,
NVIDIA, and AMD accelerators.
LLM-Guided Evolutionary Search.
Evolutionary algorithms have a rich history in program synthesis [Koza, 1992].
Quality-diversity (QD) methods [Pugh et al., 2016] shift from single-objective optimization to maintaining diverse
collections of high-performing solutions: a property particularly relevant for kernel optimization, where multiple valid
implementation strategies exist. MAP-Elites [Mouret and Clune, 2015] partitions the solution space by behavioral
descriptors, CMA-ME [Fontaine et al., 2020] adds continuous optimization, and PGA-MAP-Elites [Fontaine and Niko-
laidis, 2021] integrates policy gradients. Recent work combines LLMs with evolutionary search: FunSearch [Romera-
Paredes et al., 2024] discovers mathematical programs beyond human baselines, AlphaEvolve [Novikov et al., 2025]
adds multi-objective optimization, and CodeEvolve [Team, 2024] evolves prompts rather than code directly. PACE-
volve [Yan et al., 2026] characterizes three failure modes in LLM-assisted evolution: context pollution from accumulated
failures, mode collapse from poor exploration-exploitation balance, and weak collaboration in multi-island settings.
While PACEvolve addresses these through hierarchical context management for general search, kernel optimization
presents a structured space where domain-specific dimensions can be directly exploited. Our approach leverages
this structure: kernel-specific behavioral coordinates (memory patterns, parallelism strategies) inherently partition
the solution space, preventing mode collapse by construction, while meta-prompt evolution [Agrawal et al., 2025]
counteracts context degradation by enabling prompts to specialize for different optimization regions.
3
Method
3.1
System Architecture
We present KernelFoundry, an evolutionary framework for LLM-driven GPU kernel optimization. Figure 1 illustrates
the architecture, which comprises five tightly-coupled components. The process begins with a task specification
layer that accepts kernel generation problems in a flexible format supporting PyTorch reference implementations,
high-level natural language descriptions, or existing kernels requiring optimization. The system natively supports
KernelBench [Ouyang et al., 2025b] tasks as well as custom workloads with user-defined test frameworks. A prompt
construction engine then assembles context-aware prompts by combining the task specification with hardware-specific
optimization guidance, sampled parent programs and inspirations from the archive, gradient-derived mutation hints,
and dynamically evolved prompt components (§3.5). The resulting prompt is served to an LLM inference backend,
which provides a unified interface to both API-based models (OpenAI, Anthropic) and locally-hosted models via vLLM,
and generates multiple candidate kernels. Candidates are processed by a compilation & evaluation pipeline that
compiles to the target backend (SYCL via Intel DPC++, CUDA via nvcc, or Triton), validates numerical correctness
against reference implementations, measures execution time, and optionally collects profiling data via Intel unitrace or
NVIDIA Nsight. Finally, an evolutionary archive implements MAP-Elites [Mouret and Clune, 2015] by organizing
kernels according to behavioral coordinates in an optimization feature space (§3.2). It retains the best-performing
kernel (elite) for each occupied cell, thereby preserving diversity across qualitatively different optimization strategies.
In similar spirit, we evolve sections of the prompt with meta-prompt evolution which maintains a separate archive
with successful guidance examples.
3


--- Page 4 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Elite
Selection
Meta-Prompt
Evolution
Prompt
Constructor
Inference LLM
Compile
Execute &
Profile
Behavioral
Classifier
record
Archive Update
Transition
Tracker
Gradient
Estimator
Sampling weights
Compile error
0
1
Fitness
Figure 2: Gradient-informed MAP-Elites for kernel optimization. The archive partitions kernels by behavioral
coordinates (dmem, dalgo, dsync). Elites are shown in yellow. A Transition Tracker records parent→child transitions with
behavioral coordinates and fitness deltas. The Gradient Estimator combines fitness gradients (∇F), improvement-rate
gradients (∇R), and exploration gradients (∇E) to produce sampling weights and natural-language mutation hints that
guide subsequent generations.
The evolutionary loop proceeds as follows. At each iteration, parent programs are sampled from the archive using
selection strategies informed by fitness, exploration potential, and gradient estimates. The prompt constructor assembles
a generation prompt incorporating parent code, feedback from prior evaluations, and optimization guidance. The
LLM generates candidate kernels, which undergo compilation, correctness testing, and performance measurement.
Candidates that run correctly are assigned behavioral coordinates via static code analysis; those improving upon existing
elites are inserted into the archive. Feedback from all outcomes (including failures) informs subsequent iterations
through the gradient estimator and meta-prompter.
3.2
Quality-Diversity Search with MAP-Elites
Standard evolutionary approaches optimize a single objective (e.g., runtime), risking convergence to local optima
without exploring alternative solution strategies. Quality-Diversity (QD) algorithms [Pugh et al., 2016] address this
limitation by maintaining diverse collections of high-performing solutions in independent behavioral cells, enabling
discovery of stepping-stone solutions that facilitate escape from local optima.
MAP-Elites Algorithm.
MAP-Elites [Mouret and Clune, 2015] partitions the solution space into a discrete grid based
on behavioral descriptors which are low-dimensional features characterizing solution behavior independent of fitness.
Each cell maintains the highest-fitness solution discovered for that behavioral region. The algorithm iterates in four
phases (selection, variation, evaluation, and insertion). During selection, the system samples parent kernel(s) from
the archive using a configurable strategy (uniform, fitness-proportionate, curiosity-driven, or island-based). During
variation, it produces offspring via LLM-based code modification guided by the parent kernel, optimization hints, and
meta-evolved prompt content. During evaluation, the offspring is compiled, validated for correctness, benchmarked for
performance, and assigned behavioral coordinates via static code analysis. During insertion, the offspring replaces
the incumbent elite if it improves upon the existing elite (or if the target cell is empty); otherwise it is discarded. This
mechanism maintains diversity by construction: the archive cannot collapse because each cell evolves independently.
Kernel-Specific Behavioral Descriptors.
Adapting the MAP-Elites algorithm to kernel optimization requires defining
behavioral descriptors that capture meaningful optimization characteristics. With KernelFoundry, we propose a three-
dimensional optimization feature space with discrete levels reflecting increasingly sophisticated optimization patterns.
These coordinates are computed deterministically from generated code via static pattern matching on SYCL and CUDA
constructs, ensuring reproducibility and reducing execution-time variability.
1. Memory Access Pattern (dmem ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}):
0: Scalar, strided, or uncoalesced access
1: Coalesced/vectorized (vec4, aligned loads)
2: Shared/local memory with explicit tiling
3: Multi-level hierarchy (SLM + reg. blocking + prefetch)
4


--- Page 5 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
2. Algorithmic Structure (dalgo ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}):
0: Direct PyTorch translation
1: Fused operations (single-pass over data)
2: Reformulated algorithm (online norm., flash pattern)
3: Novel/asymptotically improved algorithm
3. Parallelism Coordination (dsync ∈{0, 1, 2, 3}):
0: No synchronization (embarrassingly parallel)
1: Work-group barriers (group::barrier)
2: Sub-group primitives (shuffles, reductions, broadc.)
3: Global coordination (atomics, multi-pass with sync)
This three-dimensional grid yields 43 = 64 behavioral cells. The classifier employs weighted pattern matching with
category-specific patterns to avoid double-counting related constructs (e.g., a kernel using group_barrier for SLM
synchronization receives credit in dmem for SLM usage, not additionally in dsync for the same barrier).
Fitness Function.
The fitness function prioritizes correctness while rewarding performance:
f(k) =



0
if compilation fails,
0.1
if compiles but incorrect,
0.5 + 0.5 · snorm
if correct,
where snorm = min(1, speedup/target) is the normalized speedup relative to a configurable target (default: 2× over
PyTorch baseline). This design ensures that correctness is a prerequisite for high fitness while providing a continuous
gradient for performance optimization.
Selection Strategies.
We implement four parent selection strategies, with configurable mixing ratios:
• Uniform selection samples randomly from occupied cells to maximize behavioral diversity.
• Fitness-proportionate selection weights sampling by elite fitness to exploit high-performing regions.
• Curiosity-driven selection prioritizes cells with high estimated improvement potential as inferred from the gradient
signal.
• Island-based selection maintains K independent sub-populations with periodic migration every M generations,
balancing isolated exploration with cross-pollination.
3.3
Gradient-Informed Evolution
While the archive structure prevents global mode collapse, individual cells may stagnate if the LLM repeatedly produces
similar variants. Inspired by CMA-ME [Fontaine et al., 2020] and PGA-MAP-Elites [Fontaine and Nikolaidis, 2021],
we augment MAP-Elites with gradient-like signals derived from evolutionary transition history. These gradients provide
a soft steering mechanism that complements the archive’s structural diversity guarantees.
Transition Tracking and gradient estimation.
We maintain a circular buffer of recent parent→child transitions.
Each transition record stores the parent and child behavioral coordinates (bp, bc), the fitness delta ∆f = fc −fp, the
transition outcome (improvement when the child becomes an elite or discovers a new cell, neutral when it is competitive
but does not update the archive, or regression when fitness decreases), as well as a timestamp and iteration number for
temporal weighting.
From the accumulated transitions, we compute three gradient components for each occupied cell b. The Fitness gradient
∇bF estimates which directions in behavioral space improve fitness. For each dimension d, we aggregate transitions
weighted by fitness delta and direction:
∇dF ≈
1
|T |
X
t∈T
∆ft · sign(b(d)
c
−b(d)
p ) · w(t)
(1)
where T is the set of transitions originating from cell b, and w(t) applies exponential time decay to prioritize
recent experience. Improvement-rate gradient ∇bR estimates which directions yield higher improvement probability,
independent of improvement magnitude:
∇dR ≈P(imp. | ∆bd > 0) −P(imp. | ∆bd < 0)
(2)
5


--- Page 6 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Exploration gradient ∇bE points to empty or low-quality cells, weighted by inverse distance and improvement
potential:
∇bE ∝
X
c∈E
(fmax −fc)
∥c −b∥1
·
c −b
∥c −b∥1
(3)
where E is the set of empty cells and low-quality occupied cells. The combined gradient is a weighted average,
∇b = α∇F + β∇R + γ∇E, with(α, β, γ) = (0.4, 0.4, 0.2).
(4)
Gradient-to-Prompt Translation.
Gradients inform the optimization process at two levels. For parent selection, cells
with strong positive gradient magnitudes receive higher sampling probability, directing computational effort toward
productive regions. For prompt construction, gradient directions are translated into natural-language mutation hints.
For example, a positive gradient in dmem yields hints such as “consider adding shared memory tiling” or “implement
register blocking for data reuse.” These hints are injected into the generation prompt, providing actionable guidance
grounded in empirical transition success.
3.4
Templated Kernels for Parameter Tuning
Beyond algorithmic transformations, kernel performance depends critically on hardware-specific parameters such as
work-group dimensions, tile sizes, and unroll factors. Rather than requiring the LLM to guess optimal values, we
enable explicit parameter exploration through templated kernel generation. The prompt instructs the LLM to optionally
produce a templated kernel with configurable parameters alongside a dispatch function enumerating valid parameter
combinations. Our evaluation pipeline detects templated kernels, extracts parameter configurations, and evaluates each
instantiation independently. The best-performing configuration determines the kernel’s fitness, while all results are
logged to enable the LLM to refine parameter choices in subsequent iterations. This approach separates algorithmic
optimization from parameter tuning, allowing the evolutionary search to explore both dimensions efficiently.
3.5
Meta-Prompting Against Context Degradation
As evolutionary search progresses, accumulated experiment histories can degrade generation quality as failed attempts
dominate the context: a phenomenon termed context pollution [Yan et al., 2026]. Inspired by CodeEvolve [Team, 2024]
and GEPA [Agrawal et al., 2025], we introduce meta-prompt evolution: prompts are mutable and co-evolve with
kernels, enabling successful optimization strategies to propagate while unsuccessful guidance is pruned.
Evolvable Prompt Regions.
The kernel generation prompt contains four evolvable sections, delimited by special
markers. Specifically, we evolve (1) optimization philosophy, which encodes high-level principles that shape priorities
(e.g., “prioritize memory bandwidth utilization before compute optimization”), (2) optimization strategies, which
enumerate concrete techniques organized by category (memory, compute, parallelism) together with canonical code
patterns and short explanations, (3) common pitfalls, which list anti-patterns and frequent mistakes to avoid (e.g.,
“avoid bank conflicts by adding padding to shared memory arrays”), and (4) analysis guidance, which provides a
pre-coding reasoning scaffold that prompts the LLM to identify likely bottlenecks before generating code.
Meta-Prompter LLM.
This dedicated LLM (distinct from the kernel generator) analyzes generation outcomes and
proposes prompt modifications. Given the current evolvable prompt sections together with the generated kernel code
and evaluation metrics (correctness, speedup, and error messages), the meta-prompter first diagnoses which guidance
was missing, misleading, or insufficiently specific for the observed outcome. It then prescribes targeted updates as
SEARCH/REPLACE diffs restricted to the evolvable regions. This two-LLM architecture separates analysis from
generation, allowing the meta-prompter to specialize in prompt refinement without conflating it with kernel synthesis.
Prompt Archive and Co-Evolution.
Evolved prompts are maintained in their own archive, with fitness defined by
the best kernel performance achieved using each prompt variant. Kernels and prompts co-evolve in an interleaved
schedule: every N kernel generations (default N = 10), the meta-prompter proposes prompt updates based on recent
outcomes. This co-evolutionary dynamic enables the system to discover task-specific optimization strategies that would
be difficult to engineer manually.
3.6
Distributed Execution Framework for Scalability
Scalability is essential in adoption of kernel generation in practice. To support efficient parallel evaluation across
heterogeneous hardware, KernelFoundry employs a distributed architecture with four worker types (see Appendix C
6


--- Page 7 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Figure 4 for a graphical overview): (1) LLM server, (2) compilation worker, (3) execution workers and (4) database
server. While parallelization for (1) is common, separation and distribution of (2) and (3) makes KernelFoundry truly
scale. The evaluation loop scales with flexible hardware allocation as only execution workers require GPUs, and users
can target different backends (Intel, NVIDIA) by routing jobs to appropriate workers. Additionally, multiple workers
with identical hardware can be used to speed up the pipeline to compile and evaluate kernels in parallel.
4
Experimental setup
The field of kernel generation faces challenges in making fair comparisons, because results depend heavily on the
hardware used, the programming approach, and the abilities of the LLM. To address this, we carefully control these
factors and conduct experiments across several benchmarks, using different hardware types and programming languages.
Programming paradigm and hardware.
KernelFoundry supports CUDA, SYCL, and Triton. Our primary focus is
on SYCL for Intel hardware. SYCL offers several advantages: (1) it is an open industry standard (Khronos Group)
rather than a proprietary language; (2) it provides C++ abstractions that are more amenable to LLM generation than
low-level intrinsics; (3) it enables true cross-platform portability with a single codebase. The experiments are conducted
on an integrated Intel Arc 140V GPU and a discrete Intel Battlemage B580 GPU, as well as an NVIDIA RTX A6000
GPU with Ampere architecture (for CUDA comparisons). We implement a rigorous kernel performance benchmarking
with several improvements over prior work (see Appendix B).
Benchmarks.
We evaluate on KernelBench [Ouyang et al., 2025b] as the de-facto standard for LLM kernel gen-
eration, comprising 250 tasks across three levels (L1: single operators, L2: fusion patterns, L3: full architectures).
Following Lange et al. [2025b] and METR [2025], we filter out flawed tasks prone to reward hacking or with inefficient
baselines, resulting in a filtered set of 111 tasks (80 L1, 31 L2). For most experiments, we use a representative subset of
40 tasks (20 L1, 20 L2), that is selected based on related work (see Appendix D). Secondly, we utilize 12 tasks from
Robust-kbench [Lange et al., 2025b]. They provide 19 tasks including forward-backward operations; however, they
published their results (i.e., the best generated kernel, required for comparison) only for 12 of those.
Baselines.
Unfortunately, most related works only publish aggregated numbers such as the average speedup per level,
usually across all KernelBench problems, and not the generated kernels themselves. Since some KernelBench tasks are
flawed and allow reward hacking, and the performance is highly hardware dependent, comparability to these results is
inhibited. We thus compare to prior work that publish their best-performing kernels: robust_kbench Lange et al. [2025b],
the AI CUDA Engineer Lange et al. [2025a] and Kernelsseum Ouyang et al. [2025a,b]. Due to model deprecation
and access restrictions, we are limited to using only the available subset of the LLMs used in the baselines, which
presents additional challenges for our method. For comparison with robust-kbench, we utilize GPT-{o3,o4-mini,4.1},
excluding Sonnet 3.7 used in their method. For comparing to the AI CUDA engineer we could only use o3-mini
(excluding DeepSeek-{v3,R1}, GPT-{o1-preview,o1-high}, and Sonnet 3.5). Further hyperparameter settings are given
in Appendix B.
Metrics.
Following prior work, we report the correctness rate (fraction of tasks with a kernel that compiles and
yields numerically correct outputs) and the fastp metric, defined as the proportion of tasks with a speedup greater than
p:
1
N
PN
i=1 1[speedupi > p] where N is the number of tasks, and the speedup is the baseline time (pytorch eager
execution if not denoted otherwise) divided by the kernel execution time. For correctness, we apply stricter criteria than
prior work since we noticed that the precision used by KernelBench is very low, in particular the absolute precision of
10−2, allowing erroneous kernels to pass in cases of small output values which commonly appear with AI operations.
We thus rely on the relative precision ν = |y−ˆy|
|y|+ϵ , where y is the expected output, ˆy is the kernel output, and ϵ is a small
value preventing division by zero. However, due to hardware imprecision, errors should be allowed in a small fraction
of cases. Thus, we define a kernel as correct if ν < 0.01 in 99% of the output values. As a second measure for kernel
correctness, we propose the cosine similarity of the flattened output tensors as a measure of their angular divergence.
5
Results
We first evaluate KernelFoundry’s ability to generate CUDA kernels in comparison to prior work, and then demonstrate
its versatility by generating SYCL kernels. Furthermore, we showcase its adaptability to custom tasks and analyze
hardware-specific aspects.
7


--- Page 8 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
5.1
Baseline comparison
Table 1 compares our method to the kernels published by “AI CUDA Engineer” and the robust-kbench method on the
respective task set for which the baseline kernels were available. We reproduce the speedup of these kernels on our
NVIDIA hardware for fair comparison; original results are listed for reference but are not directly comparable due to
hardware-specific PyTorch execution times. We further include the results originally published within KernelBench
(“Kernelsseum”). Table 1 shows that the kernels generated with our approach consistently outperform the baselines,
despite using only a subset of the LLMs. Specifically, our approach leads to an average speedup of 1.24 on the
KernelBench subset L1 and 2.1 on L2, compared to 1.01 and 1.61 for the kernels published by Lange et al. [2025a].
On the 12 robust-kbench tasks which include backward operations, our approach also results in a 36% higher speedup
compared to the best kernels published by Lange et al. [2025b]. While for many tasks the general evolutionary selection
procedure already finds the suitable parameters (e.g. tile size), our parameter optimization, applied only for 2 iterations
(best@8), can push the performance in some cases, leading to a notable improvement. For results on a per-task level,
see Appendix F.
Task set
n = count
Method
LLMs
Correct
rate
fast1
fast2
Avg.
speedup
Geom.
speedup
KernelBench
repr. set L1
n = 20
Kernelsseum*
GPT-{o1,4o}, DeepSeek-Coder, Sonnet-3.5, LLama-3.1-405B
0.65
15 %
0 %
0.765
0.600
AI CUDA Engineer original†
DeepSeek-{v3,R1}, GPT-{o1-preview,o1-high,o3-mini}, Sonnet-3.5
1.0
70 %
20 %
1.422
1.222
AI CUDA Engineer re-eval
DeepSeek-{v3,R1}, GPT-{o1-preview,o1-high,o3-mini}, Sonnet-3.5
1.0
40 %
50 %
1.005
0.909
Ours
o3-mini
1.0
55 %
10 %
1.204
1.092
Ours + parameter optim.
o3-mini
1.0
55 %
15 %
1.241
1.124
KernelBench
repr. set L2
n = 20
Kernelsseum*
GPT-{o1,4o}, DeepSeek-Coder, Sonnet-3.5
0.65
10 %
0 %
0.874
0.854
AI CUDA Engineer original†
DeepSeek-{v3,R1}, GPT-{o1-preview,o1-high,o3-mini}, Sonnet-3.5
1.0
100%
10 %
1.589
1.524
AI CUDA Engineer re-eval
DeepSeek-{v3,R1}, GPT-{o1-preview,o1-high,o3-mini}, Sonnet-3.5
1.0
85 %
25 %
1.606
1.515
Ours
o3-mini
1.0
90 %
40 %
2.051
1.680
Ours + parameter optim.
o3-mini
1.0
90 %
45 %
2.104
1.730
Robust-
kbench
n = 12
Robust-kbench original†
GPT-{o3,o4-mini,4.1}, Sonnet-3.7
1.0
92 %
50 %
15.622
2.591
Robust-kbench re-eval
GPT-{o3,o4-mini,4.1}, Sonnet-3.7
1.0
92 %
58 %
8.865
3.499
Ours
GPT-{o3,o4-mini,4.1}
1.0
100 %
67 %
12.107
5.295
Ours + parameter optim.
GPT-{o3,o4-mini,4.1}
1.0
100 %
67 %
12.081
5.225
Table 1: Comparison to baselines on CUDA kernel optimization. Best results per task set in bold. *Kernelsseum
evaluated on Nvidia L40S. †AI CUDA Engineer original and Robust-kbench original both evaluated on Nvidia H100.
All others evaluated on Nvidia A6000.
Task set
n = count
Method
Language
LLMs
Correct
rate
fast1
fast2
Avg.
speedup
Geom.
speedup
KernelBench filtered
n = 111
Ours
SYCL
GPT-{4.1, 5-mini}, Sonnet-4.5
0.97
71 %
42 %
2.32
1.38
Robust-kbench
CUDA
GPT-{o3, o4-mini, 4.1}, Sonnet-3.7
-
-
-
1.49
-
KernelBench
repr. set L2
n = 20
OpenEvolve (40 iters)
SYCL
GPT-{4.1, 5-mini}, Sonnet-4.5
1.0
70 %
40 %
2.535
1.775
Ours (40 iters + param. optim.)
SYCL
GPT-{4.1, 5-mini}, Sonnet-4.5
1.0
80 %
45 %
2.732
2.119
OpenEvolve (10 iters)
SYCL
GPT-{4.1, 5-mini}, Sonnet-4.5
1.0
70 %
20 %
1.483
1.202
Ours (10 iters)
SYCL
GPT-{4.1, 5-mini}, Sonnet-4.5
1.0
80 %
35 %
2.059
1.661
Table 2: Evaluating KernelFoundry on SYCL kernel generation.
5.2
Evaluation on SYCL kernel generation
Table 2 presents our results for SYCL kernel generation. For comparison, we include robust-kbench CUDA performance
on the filtered KernelBench tasks, as reported in Lange et al. [2025b]. Although SYCL is less commonly used and less
familiar to LLMs than CUDA, our method finds correct kernels in 97% of cases and achieves an average speedup of 2.32.
We further compare to OpenEvolve, the open-source implementation of AlphaEvolve Novikov et al. [2025], which uses
an evolutionary algorithm but lacks kernel-specific optimization strategies, meta-prompting, and parameter optimization.
While OpenEvolve achieves a comparable speedup to our method after 40 iterations, it requires substantially more
iterations to reach this level, as indicated by the notable performance gap after 10 iterations (see Table 2). Figure 3
illustrates how KernelFoundry progressively improves kernel performance. For reproducibility, we provide results
obtained with GPT-OSS in Appendix G.
5.3
Validating hardware awareness
To analyze whether our method produces hardware-aware kernels, we propose a crossover experiment: We run
KernelFoundry on two distinctly different GPUs, here Intel Arc B580 and an integrated Intel Arc 140V GPU (LNL),
8


--- Page 9 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Figure 3: Improvement over iterations (cumulative best)
and then benchmark the performance of the best generated kernels on the respective other GPU. If KernelFoundry is
successful in generating hardware-aware kernels, we expect scenarios where the top-performing kernel of the LNL-run
outperforms the best kernel optimized on B580 when both are benchmarked on LNL, and vice versa. To quantify this,
we introduce the hardware-speedup metric hws, defined as the speedup of a kernel kA optimized on GPU A over a
kernel kB optimized on GPU B: hws(kA) = tA(kB)
tA(kA), where tA is the runtime of a kernel on GPU A. hwsp is the
percentage of kernels for which hws > p. We again use the representative subset of KernelBench L2 (20 tasks) and
report average hws for all kernels and hwsp for p equal to 1.0 and 1.5, i.e. the relative amount of kernels being quicker
and 1.5 times quicker, respectively.
Kernels
hws1
hws1.5
avg. hws
geom. hws
LNL-optimized kLNL
70 %
20 %
1.537
1.297
BMG-optimized kB580
70 %
15 %
1.109
1.038
Table 3: Evaluating hardware awareness. Kernels optimized for the target GPU outperform kernels optimized on
another GPU.
As shown in Table 3, 70% of kernels are faster than their counterpart optimized on another GPU, with average speed-up
of 1.537 for LNL-optimized kernels and 1.109 for BMG-optimized kernels. See Appendix F.4 for per-task results.
5.4
Beyond Pytorch Eager - comparison to oneDNN
KernelBench and follow-ups usually just use Pytorch Eager and torch.compile as baselines, which is a good common
ground but adds additional factors, like CPU overhead for routing to specific kernels of a backend library or the
effectiveness of the compiled graph. To eliminate these factors and demonstrate the flexibility of our framework beyond
the KernelBench format, we directly compare to the high performance kernel library oneDNN. We benchmark our
framework on the operations shown in Table 4 implementing them with the C++ API of oneDNN and use operator
fusion where possible. For the concat(x, layernorm(x)) operation we use an initial implementation as starting point
using our framework for kernel optimization. For the softmax operation we provide additional high level user guidance
to implement an optimization idea that reduces the load on special function units inspired by Flash Attention 4. Table 4
shows that although the kernels in oneDNN are highly optimized, oftentimes implemented directly in assembly language,
the generated SYCL kernels are competitive and provide a speedup in three cases.
5.5
Case study: Accelerating an operation of Llama 3
A common use case for kernel optimization is accelerating LMs on given hardware, often by allowing reduced precision
as long as model performance is unaffected. As a case study, we target an operation in the Llama 3.2 1B model, the
rotary positional embedding function, which presents a bottleneck on Intel hardware. We define a custom task (see
Appendix C) with the PyTorch implementation (apply_rotary_pos_emb, combining unsqueeze + rotate-half) as the
reference. Correctness is tested by comparing our kernel’s output to the reference output, and by verifying that a full
Llama3 model pass with our kernel yields identical results on a simple query. KernelFoundry discovers a correct kernel
9


--- Page 10 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Operation
Initial impl.
User instructions
Speedup
concat(x, layer_norm(x))
X
1.79
Matmul with relu post-op
0.35
MaxPool + Linear
0.72
Sum Reduction
1.10
Softmax
X
1.70
Table 4: Speedup compared to the oneDNN C++ implementation
in just two iterations and achieves a 7.9× speedup within ten iterations. This accelerates the rotary embedding operation,
resulting in an 8% reduction in total forward pass time (from 0.413 s to 0.38 s) on a B580 Intel GPU.
6
Conclusion
We presented KernelFoundry, an evolutionary framework for GPU kernel optimization with LLMs. We combine kernel-
specific quality-diversity search, meta-prompting and parameter optimization to generate high-performing CUDA
and SYCL kernels, demonstrating cross-platform applicability and outperforming SOTA methods. Our experiments
highlight the need for open, reproducible benchmarks and kernel databases to advance the field.
Future work includes templated kernel generation for speedups across input ranges and tensor shapes, improved formal
verification to eliminate reward hacking, and deeper hardware specialization. Despite the success of prompting-based
frameworks, it remains a promising avenue to finetune models, in particular through RL with verifiable rewards. As
LLMs and hardware evolve, frameworks like KernelFoundry will be essential for automated, robust kernel optimization
– enabling rapid deployment of new language models and fast adaptation of kernels to new hardware platforms.
References
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi,
Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica,
Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement
learning, 2025.
Carlo Baronio, Pietro Marsella, Ben Pan, Simon Guo, and Silas Alberti. Kevin: Multi-turn RL for generating CUDA
kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.11948, 2025.
Jinwu Chen, Qidie Wu, Bin Li, Lin Ma, Xin Si, Yang Hu, Shouyi Yin, and Jun Yang. cuPilot: A strategy-coordinated
multi-agent framework for CUDA kernel evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.16465, 2025a.
Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang,
Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, et al. {TVM}: An automated {End-to-End} optimizing compiler for deep learning. In 13th
USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18), pages 578–594, 2018a.
Tianqi Chen, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Ziheng Jiang, Thierry Moreau, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind
Krishnamurthy. Learning to optimize tensor programs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 31,
2018b.
Wentao Chen, Jiace Zhu, Qi Fan, Yehan Ma, and An Zou. CUDA-LLM: LLMs can write efficient CUDA kernels.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09092, 2025b.
Sharan Chetlur, Cliff Woolley, Philippe Vandermersch, Jonathan Cohen, John Tran, Bryan Catanzaro, and Evan
Shelhamer. cudnn: Efficient primitives for deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1410.0759, 2014.
CodeLion.
OpenEvolve: Open-source framework for evolutionary code generation.
https://github.com/
codelion/openevolve, 2025.
Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient exact
attention with IO-awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:16344–16359, 2022.
Juncheng Dong, Yang Yang, Tao Liu, Yang Wang, Feng Qi, Vahid Tarokh, Kaushik Rangadurai, and Shuang Yang.
STARK: Strategic team of agents for refining kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16996, 2025.
Jinye Du, Quan Yuan, Zuyao Zhang, Yanzhi Yi, Jiahui Hu, Wangyi Chen, Yiyang Zhu, Qishui Zheng, Wenxiang Zou,
Xiangyu Chang, et al. AKG kernel agent: A multi-agent framework for cross-platform kernel synthesis. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2512.23424, 2025.
10


--- Page 11 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Matthew C. Fontaine and Stefanos Nikolaidis. Differentiable quality diversity. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 34, 2021.
Matthew C. Fontaine, Julian Togelius, Stefanos Nikolaidis, and Amy K. Hoover. Covariance matrix adaptation for
the rapid illumination of behavior space. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference,
pages 94–102. ACM, 2020.
Matteo Frigo and Steven G Johnson. Fftw: An adaptive software architecture for the fft. In Proceedings of the 1998
IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, ICASSP’98 (Cat. No. 98CH36181),
volume 3, pages 1381–1384. IEEE, 1998.
William Godoy, Pedro Valero-Lara, Keita Teranishi, Prasanna Balaprakash, and Jeffrey Vetter. Evaluation of OpenAI
Codex for HPC parallel programming models kernel generation. In Proceedings of the 52nd International Conference
on Parallel Processing Workshops, pages 136–144, 2023.
Intel Corporation. oneAPI deep neural network library (oneDNN). https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneDNN,
2016.
Sarunas Kalade and Graham Schelle. NPUEval: Optimizing NPU kernels with LLMs and open source compilers. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.14403, 2025.
Ronan Keryell, Ruyman Reyes, and Lee Howes. Khronos sycl for opencl: a tutorial. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Workshop on OpenCL, pages 1–1, 2015.
John R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection. MIT Press,
1992.
Robert Tjarko Lange, Aaditya Prasad, Qi Sun, Maxence Faldor, Yujin Tang, and David Ha. The ai cuda engineer:
Agentic cuda kernel discovery, optimization and composition. Technical report, Technical report, Sakana AI, 02
2025, 2025a.
Robert Tjarko Lange, Qi Sun, Aaditya Prasad, Maxence Faldor, Yujin Tang, and David Ha. Towards robust agentic
CUDA kernel benchmarking, verification, and optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.14279, 2025b.
Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh, and Kenneth O Stanley. Evolution through
large models. In Handbook of evolutionary machine learning, pages 331–366. Springer, 2023.
Kelun Lei, Hailong Yang, Huaitao Zhang, Xin You, Kaige Zhang, Zhongzhi Luan, Yi Liu, and Depei Qian. PRAGMA:
A profiling-reasoned multi-agent framework for automatic kernel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.06345,
2025.
Haonan Li, Keyu Man, Partha Kanuparthy, Hanning Chen, Wei Sun, Sreen Tallam, Chenguang Zhu, Kevin Zhu, and
Zhiyun Qian. TritonForge: Profiling-guided framework for automated triton kernel optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.09196, 2025a.
Jianling Li, Shangzhan Li, Zhenye Gao, Qi Shi, Yuxuan Li, Zefan Wang, Jiacheng Huang, Haojie Wang, Jianrong
Wang, Xu Han, et al. TritonBench: Benchmarking large language model capabilities for generating triton operators.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages 23053–23066, 2025b.
Xiaoya Li, Xiaofei Sun, Albert Wang, Jiwei Li, and Chris Shum. CUDA-L1: Improving CUDA optimization via
contrastive reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.14111, 2025c.
Gang Liao, Hongsen Qin, Ying Wang, Alicia Golden, Michael Kuchnik, Yavuz Yetim, Jia Jiunn Ang, Chunli Fu, Yihan
He, Samuel Hsia, et al. KernelEvolve: Scaling agentic kernel coding for heterogeneous AI accelerators at meta.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23236, 2025.
Charith Mendis, Alex Renda, Saman Amarasinghe, and Michael Carbin. Ithemal: Accurate, portable and fast basic
block throughput estimation using deep neural networks. In International Conference on machine learning, pages
4505–4515. PMLR, 2019.
METR.
Measuring
automated
kernel
engineering,
2025.
URL
https://metr.org/blog/
2025-02-14-measuring-automated-kernel-engineering/.
Jean-Baptiste Mouret and Jeff Clune. Illuminating search spaces by mapping elites. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.04909,
2015.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey
Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco JR Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for
scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
NVIDIA Corporation. CUTLASS: CUDA templates for linear algebra subroutines. https://github.com/NVIDIA/
cutlass, 2017.
11


--- Page 12 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L Zhang, William Hu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini.
Kernelsseum, 2025a. URL https://scalingintelligence.stanford.edu/KernelBenchLeaderboard/.
Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L Zhang, William Hu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini.
Kernelbench: Can llms write efficient gpu kernels? arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.10517, 2025b.
Justin K Pugh, Lisa B Soros, and Kenneth O Stanley. Quality diversity: A new frontier for evolutionary computation.
Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 3:40, 2016.
Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Frédo Durand, and Saman Amarasinghe.
Halide: a language and compiler for optimizing parallelism, locality, and recomputation in image processing pipelines.
Acm Sigplan Notices, 48(6):519–530, 2013.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M Pawan Kumar, Emilien
Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from
program search with large language models. Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024.
Taras Sereda, Natalie Serrino, and Zain Asgar. Speeding up PyTorch inference on Apple devices with AI-generated
Metal kernels, 2025. URL https://gimletlabs.ai/blog/ai-generated-metal-kernels.
Songqiao Su, Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Albert Wang, Jiwei Li, and Chris Shum. Cuda-l2: Surpassing cublas performance
for matrix multiplication through reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02551, 2025.
Muhammad Usman Tariq, Abhinav Jangda, Angelica Moreira, Madan Musuvathi, and Tyler Sorensen. Peak: A
performance engineering ai-assistant for gpu kernels powered by natural language transformations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.19018, 2025.
Science AI Team. CodeEvolve: Meta-prompting for evolutionary code generation, 2024. Meta-prompting for holistic
prompt evolution in code generation.
Ali Tehrani, Arijit Bhattacharjee, Le Chen, Nesreen K Ahmed, Amir Yazdanbakhsh, and Ali Jannesari. CodeRosetta:
Pushing the boundaries of unsupervised code translation for parallel programming. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 37:100965–100999, 2024.
Philippe Tillet, Hsiang-Tsung Kung, and David Cox. Triton: an intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural
network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and
Programming Languages, pages 10–19, 2019.
Arya Tschand, Muhammad Awad, Ryan Swann, Kesavan Ramakrishnan, Jeffrey Ma, Keith Lowery, Ganesh Dasika,
and Vijay Janapa Reddi. SwizzlePerf: Hardware-aware LLMs for GPU kernel performance optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.20258, 2025.
Pedro Valero-Lara, Alexis Huante, Mustafa Al Lail, William F Godoy, Keita Teranishi, Prasanna Balaprakash, and
Jeffrey S Vetter. Comparing Llama-2 and GPT-3 LLMs for HPC kernels generation. In International Workshop on
Languages and Compilers for Parallel Computing, pages 20–32. Springer, 2023.
Jianghui Wang, Vinay Joshi, Saptarshi Majumder, Xu Chao, Bin Ding, Ziqiong Liu, Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma, Dong
Li, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. GEAK: Introducing triton kernel AI agent & evaluation benchmarks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.23194, 2025.
Laura Wang. KernelFalcon: Autonomous GPU kernel generation via deep agents, 2025. URL https://pytorch.
org/blog/kernelfalcon-autonomous-gpu-kernel-generation-via-deep-agents/.
Anjiang Wei, Tianran Sun, Yogesh Seenichamy, Hang Song, Anne Ouyang, Azalia Mirhoseini, Ke Wang, and Alex
Aiken. Astra: A multi-agent system for GPU kernel performance optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.07506,
2025.
Yuanbo Wen, Qi Guo, Qiang Fu, Xiaqing Li, Jianxing Xu, Yanlin Tang, Yongwei Zhao, Xing Hu, Zidong Du, Ling
Li, et al. BabelTower: Learning to auto-parallelized program translation. In International Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 23685–23700. PMLR, 2022.
Zhongzhen Wen, Yinghui Zhang, Zhong Li, Zhongxin Liu, Linna Xie, and Tian Zhang. MultiKernelBench: A
multi-platform benchmark for kernel generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.17773, 2025.
R Clint Whaley, Antoine Petitet, and Jack J Dongarra. Automated empirical optimizations of software and the atlas
project. Parallel computing, 27(1-2):3–35, 2001.
Jiin Woo, Shaowei Zhu, Allen Nie, Zhen Jia, Yida Wang, and Youngsuk Park. TritonRL: Training LLMs to think and
code triton without cheating. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.17891, 2025.
Minghao Yan, Bo Peng, Benjamin Coleman, Ziqi Chen, Zhouhang Xie, Zhankui He, Noveen Sachdeva, Isabella Ye,
Weili Wang, Chi Wang, et al. Pacevolve: Enabling long-horizon progress-aware consistent evolution. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.10657, 2026.
12


--- Page 13 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Mohammad Zaeed, Tanzima Z Islam, and Vladimir Indi´c. Opal: A modular framework for optimizing performance
using analytics and LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00932, 2025.
Zijian Zhang, Rong Wang, Shiyang Li, Yuebo Luo, Mingyi Hong, and Caiwen Ding. CudaForge: An agent framework
with hardware feedback for CUDA kernel optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01884, 2025.
Lianmin Zheng, Chengfan Jia, Minmin Sun, Zhao Wu, Cody Hao Yu, Ameer Haj-Ali, Yida Wang, Jun Yang, Danyang
Zhuo, Koushik Sen, et al. Ansor: Generating {High-Performance} tensor programs for deep learning. In 14th
USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 20), pages 863–879, 2020.
Xinguo Zhu, Shaohui Peng, Jiaming Guo, Yunji Chen, Qi Guo, Yuanbo Wen, Hang Qin, Ruizhi Chen, Qirui Zhou,
Ke Gao, et al. QiMeng-Kernel: Macro-thinking micro-coding paradigm for LLM-based high-performance GPU
kernel generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.20100, 2025a.
Yuxuan Zhu, Tengjun Jin, Yada Pruksachatkun, Andy Zhang, Shu Liu, Sasha Cui, Sayash Kapoor, Shayne Longpre,
Kevin Meng, Rebecca Weiss, et al. Establishing best practices for building rigorous agentic benchmarks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2507.02825, 2025b.
13


--- Page 14 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
A
Summary of the Related Works
Table 5: Overview of related work on LLM-based kernel generation and optimization. Methods are grouped by
approach: benchmarks, prompting-validation loops, multi-agent, and finetuning. Hardware is GPU unless denoted
otherwise.
Reference
Language
Hardware
Benchmark [Count]
Method
Key Features
Benchmarks
KernelBench [Ouyang et al., 2025b]
CUDA / Triton
NVIDIA
KernelBench [250]
Repeated prompting
De-facto standard
MultiKernelBench [Wen et al., 2025]
CUDA / Pallas / AscendC
NVIDIA / TPU / NPU
KernelBench revised [285]
Prompting
Multi-platform
TritonBench [Li et al., 2025b]
Triton
NVIDIA
TritonBench [184]
Prompting
Triton-specific
NPUEval [Kalade and Schelle, 2025]
C++ AIE
AMD NPU
Custom [102]
Prompting + RAG
NPU focus
Approaches based on inference-validation loops
Robust-kbench [Lange et al., 2025b]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench + Custom [269]
Evolve
Robustness focus
cuPilot [Chen et al., 2025a]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench L1 [100]
Evolve
Strategy coordination
KernelFalcon [Wang, 2025]
Triton
NVIDIA
KernelBench [250]
Repeated prompting
100% correctness
Opal [Zaeed et al., 2025]
CUDA / HIP
NVIDIA / AMD
Custom [8]
Prompting + 3 profilers
Modular profiling
SwizzlePerf [Tschand et al., 2025]
HIP
AMD
Custom [10]
HW-aware prompting
Microarch knowledge
TritonForge [Li et al., 2025a]
Triton
NVIDIA
TritonBench [185]
Profiling-guided
Automated profiling
KernelEvolve [Liao et al., 2025]
Triton / CuTE
NVIDIA / AMD
KernelBench [250]
Tree search
Meta scaling
Geak [Wang et al., 2025]
Triton
AMD
TritonBench-revised
Prompting + Reflection
AI agent
PEAK [Tariq et al., 2025]
CUDA / HIP / HLSL
NVIDIA / AMD / Qualcomm
MatMul
Natural transformations
Iterative + Modular
Multi-Agent Approaches
Astra [Wei et al., 2025]
CUDA
NVIDIA
Custom [3]
Multi-agent
Plan/Code/Test/Profile
CudaForge [Zhang et al., 2025]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench [25]
Coder + Judge
Hardware feedback
STARK [Dong et al., 2025]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench [250]
Plan + Code + Debug
Strategic agents
QiMeng [Zhu et al., 2025a]
Triton
NVIDIA
KernelBench + TritonBench
Macro/Micro coding
Two-stage thinking
PRAGMA [Lei et al., 2025]
Triton / C++
NVIDIA / Intel CPU
KernelBench
Coder + Verifier + Conductor
Profiling-reasoned
AKG Agent [Du et al., 2025]
Triton
NVIDIA / Ascend NPU
KernelBench L1 [100]
Coder + Designer
Cross-platform
Finetuning Approaches
Kevin [Baronio et al., 2025]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench [100]
Multi-turn RL
Turn-level rewards
CUDA-L1 [Li et al., 2025c]
CUDA
NVIDIA
KernelBench [250]
Contrastive RL
3.12× speedup
CUDA-L2 [Su et al., 2025]
CUDA
NVIDIA (A100)
HGEMM [1000]
Multi-stage RL + NCU
Beats cuBLAS (+11%)
TritonRL [Woo et al., 2025]
Triton
NVIDIA
KernelBench [200]
SFT + GRPO
No reward hacking
KernelFoundry (Ours)
SYCL / CUDA / Triton
Intel / NVIDIA
KernelBench + robust-kbench
MAP-Elites + Meta-prompt
QD + Parameter optim.
B
Implementation Details
B.1
System Configuration
KernelFoundry is implemented in Python with the following core dependencies:
• LLM inference: OpenAI API, Anthropic API, vLLM for local models
• Compilation: Intel oneAPI DPC++ 2025.2, NVIDIA CUDA Toolkit 12.8, Triton 3.5
• Profiling: Profiling Tools Interfaces for GPU (unitrace 2.3) for SYCL, NVIDIA Nsight Compute 2025.3.0.0
for CUDA
• Testing: PyTorch 2.9
B.2
Benchmarking kernel runtime
In contrast to prior work, we implement several improvements in the kernel benchmarking to reduce the variance
of runtime measurements. Our implementation proceeds as follows: First, we run a fixed number of initial trials to
determine the rough runtime of the kernel. This initial measurement informs the number of warmup trials and main
trials, which are set based on a minimal total time rather than a fixed amount of trials (if the kernel is slow, less warmup
trials and main trials are required). Furthermore, we noticed that for very fast kernels, the torch.cuda.synchronize
or torch.xpu.synchronize operation has a significant overhead. We reduce this overhead by running an inner loop
within the main trials, such that multiple trials are executed before each synchronize.
For all experiments, we set the minimum warmup time to 1 second, the mininum warmup iterations to 10, the inner-loop
minimum time to 0.01 seconds, the minimum number of main iterations to 10 and the minimum runtime of the main
performance measurement to 1s. This ensures that measured durations are comfortably larger than the timer precision
and synchronization overhead while guaranteeing enough measurements to compute runtime statistics.
Furthermore, we noticed that the runtime measurement of backward operations in robust-kbench has a significant
overhead due to using torch.autograd, rather than measuring the kernel execution time directly. We found a way to
measure the isolated runtime of the kernel which is more stable. However, for the reference we still need to measure
torch.autograd.grad. This leads to high speedups for backward operations as can be seen in Table 7; however, this
appeared as a minor drawback to us compared to an incorrect kernel runtime measurement.
14


--- Page 15 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
B.3
Profiler Feedback
For correct kernels, optional profiling provides performance insights. We collect and provide the following information:
• Execution time: Wall-clock runtime
• Memory bandwidth: Achieved vs. theoretical peak (via unitrace or Nsight Compute)
• Compute utilization: ALU occupancy, instruction throughput
• Bottleneck identification: Memory-bound vs. compute-bound classification
Profiler feedback is structured into natural language summaries (e.g., “Kernel is memory-bound at 45% of peak
bandwidth. Consider shared memory tiling to improve data reuse.”).
B.4
Hyperparameters
Table 6 lists the default hyperparameters used in our experiments. The number of iterations depends on the experiment:
For our experiment on SYCL kernel generation and comparison to OpenEvolve, we use 40 iterations with 8 generations
each. This is aligned with Robust-kbench Lange et al. [2025b] who also sample 8 suggestions from the LLM in each
iteration and show the results over 40 iterations. For a fair comparison to The AI CUDA Engineer Lange et al. [2025a],
we set the number of iterations to 40 and the population size to 4 to align with their experimental setup.
As explained in section 4, we also align the LLMs to the ones in the baseline papers. For the SYCL experiment, we
chose to prompt a powerful language model (Claude Sonnet 4.5) in the first iteration to avoid getting trapped in a local
minimum at the beginning. After the first iteration, we use an ensemble of GPT 5 mini and GPT 4.1 (equal weights).
After the 40 iterations, we run 2 iterations of parameter optimization.
Parameter
Value
Evolution
Max generations
40 (*)
Population per generation
8 (*)
Selection strategy
Curiosity-driven
Archive dimensions
4
Bins per dimension
4
Evaluation
Warmup iterations
10
Timing iterations
100
Target speedup
2.0×
Meta-prompting
Prompt update frequency
Every 10 generations
Max prompt mutations
3 per update
Prompt archive size
16
LLM
Temperature
0.3
Max tokens
8000
Top-p
1
Table 6: Hyperparameters for KernelFoundry. (*) number of operations, population size, and LLM model vary
dependent on the experiment.
C
Distributed System & Custom Task Input
Infrastructure As shown in Figure 4, the KernelFoundry pipeline utilizes a lightweight main thread that interacts with
four servers. The server processes can run on a single machine or on multiple remote machines in the same network.
1. LLM Server: Hosts the generation model (Cloud services with REST-API or local vLLM instances).
2. Compilation Workers: Executes compiler toolchains (DPC++, nvcc). Does not need a GPU.
3. Execution Workers: Run correctness tests and benchmarks on GPU nodes. Connected via a task queue
ensuring single-task-per-GPU isolation.
15


--- Page 16 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Test.py
* Reference code
* Pytest tests
* Performance
measurement
kernel.sycl
<Model Code>
// EVOLE START
// EVOLVE END
<Further model
code>
config.yaml
language: SYCL
gpu_arch: bmg
Kernels
Database server
Compile worker
Execution worker
Intel BMG 2
NVIDIA H100
NVIDIA A100
Parallel execution
on selected hardware
e.g. BMG
LLM server
Main thread
Tasks
Custom
task
RAG
Write
prompt
Intel BMG 3
Intel BMG 1
Write
Proposed 
kernels
Figure 4: Overview of the KernelFoundry infrastructure and the custom task format
4. Database Server: Stores all generated kernels, evaluation results, and evolutionary state for reproducibility
and analysis.
The LLM server, compile worker, and execution worker are connected via a load balancer and queue system and allows
to scale the number of workers and increase parallelism.
Custom task Tasks are defined by a set of files with special markers, making them highly customizable and easy to
integrate into existing projects. A task is defined by a config file in YAML format containing hyperparameters; a python
module with a build function and correctness and performance tests defined in the pytest framework; and a language
specific file for the generated code. Special markers are used to define sections for the reference code, optional user
instructions, and optional initial kernel implementations passed to the model.
D
KernelBench task filtering
We follow Lange et al. [2025b] and METR [2025] and filter out KernelBench tasks that are flawed. Lange et al. [2025b]
propose 5 criteria: (1) small output value range, (2) small output StD, (3) small output StD across any axis, (4) small
impact of inputs on the output, (5) baseline inefficiencies. For our experiments, we select the same task set as Lange
et al. [2025b] to ensure full consistency.
However, it is worth noting that we generally believe that criterion (3) is too strict, as we did not observe issues with the
kernels generated for such tasks, and e.g. for outputs with shape 2 along one axis the StD can naturally be low. Tasks
with baseline inefficiencies (5) do not necessarily need to be removed either, as the comparison is still fair. Lange et al.
[2025b] used an LLM to identify these tasks which sometimes gave wrong responses on closer inspection. Filtering
according to criteria (1), (2) and (4) would retain 223 tasks across level 1, 2 and 3.
The set of representative tasks (20 L1, 20 L2, see Section 4) was selected based on the following criteria:
1. Diversity: 20 tasks from level 1, 20 from level 2, covering all kind of operations (matmul, conv, conv transpose,
activation functions, etc.)
2. Uncompromised: We only select tasks that comply with criteria (1)-(5) by Lange et al. [2025b], i.e. tasks that
are not listed as “compromised tasks” in Lange et al. [2025b] Appendix A.2 and A.3.
3. Availability of correct baseline kernels: For a fair comparison to Lange et al. [2025a], we select only tasks for
which they publish a kernel as part of their Huggingface dataset, and filtering only for the ones where their
fastest kernel (per task) passes our correctness tests. Since our tests are more strict than the test used in Lange
et al. [2025a], 53 out of the 229 kernels failed our tests.
16


--- Page 17 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
E
Prompts
E.1
Main prompt
You are a <language> programming expert specializing in GPU kernel optimization. Given a reference <reference-
language> implementation, your objective is to create a performant kernel with identical functionality. The code
you generate will be pasted into an existing project. Make sure to follow the existing code structure and function
signatures. The <language> code you generate will be saved in < kernel.cpp / kernel.cu > and loaded using
torch.utils.cpp_extension.load():
‘‘‘load(name=task_name, sources=[<kernel.cpp / kernel.cu>]‘‘‘
Later, the function will be called via load(name=task_name, ...).forward and thoroughly tested.
Examples:
Here is an example of a correct <language> kernel for a given <reference-language> reference:
<example-reference-code>
<example-kernel-code>
Reference code / Task:
This is the reference <reference-language> implementation:
<reference-code>
Top performing kernel:
This is the best kernel tested so far (Runtime: <top-kernel-runtime>):
<top-kernel-code>
Last tested kernel:
Here is the last kernel we tested (Runtime: <last-kernel-runtime>):
<last-kernel-code>
Console output from running this kernel:
<last-kernel-log>
Hardware specification:
Your code will run on the following hardware:
<hardware-specs>
Please consider the hardware specifications when improving the code.
Main Instructions:
1. Provide a functional kernel that matches the reference implementation.
2. Use constructs to efficiently run the code on GPU.
3. Provide the complete code in a code block.
Optimization strategies:
<evolvable-optimization-strategies>
Critical Requirements:
1. The kernel must exactly match the reference’s functionality.
2. The code must compile and run properly on the GPU.
3. Do not cache or reuse previous results; ensure the code executes fully on each run.
Response Format:
Please structure your response as follows:
1. Analysis: Summarize the issues found in the previous kernel and log. Explain your proposed changes and
optimizations.
2. Code: Provide the complete, improved <language> code in code blocks:
‘‘‘
Your code here
‘‘‘
E.2
Templated kernels for parameter optimization
To guide the model towards converting parameters to template parameters which can then be tuned with our pipeline,
we use the following prompt and code example:
17


--- Page 18 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
You are a <language> programming expert specializing in GPU kernel optimization. Your task is to optimize a
given <language> kernel.
Given kernel:
Here is the <language> kernel that we tested:
<Code of best generated kernel>
To optimize this kernel for specific hardware, please propose a templated kernel with some template parameters
that can be tuned. To do so, you need to write an extension for PyTorch that implements a templated <language>
kernel and a forward function for dispatching. Select suitable parameter options by adding them as dispatch-options
in the forward function.
Requirements:
• The kernel should be templated on suitable parameters, e.g., block size, etc.
• The forward_templated function should launch the kernel with the given parameter values.
• The forward function should have standard arguments corresponding to the template parameters of
forward_templated, and should select the correct instantiation based on the input values.
• The code must match the given kernel in functionality.
• The code should include a Pybind11 interface exposing forward.
Here is an example of a templated kernel in the correct format:
Listing 1: Example SYCL kernel with parameter dispatch
1 #include <sycl/sycl.hpp >
2 #include <torch/extension.h>
3 #include <c10/xpu/XPUStream.h>
4
5 // Kernel
name
struct at namespace
scope
6 template <int BX , int BY >
7 struct
ElementwiseMulKernel
{};
8
9 template <int BLOCK_X , int BLOCK_Y >
10 void
elementwise_mul_sycl_kernel (
11
torch :: Tensor A,
12
torch :: Tensor B,
13
torch :: Tensor C,
14
int N,
15
int M
16 ) {
17
auto
a_data = A.data_ptr <float >();
18
auto
b_data = B.data_ptr <float >();
19
auto
c_data = C.data_ptr <float >();
20
21
sycl :: queue& q = c10::xpu:: getCurrentXPUStream ().queue ();
22
23
sycl ::range <2> global_range(
24
((N + BLOCK_Y - 1) / BLOCK_Y) * BLOCK_Y ,
25
((M + BLOCK_X - 1) / BLOCK_X) * BLOCK_X
26
);
27
sycl ::range <2> local_range(BLOCK_Y , BLOCK_X);
28
29
q.submit ([&]( sycl :: handler& cgh) {
30
cgh.parallel_for <ElementwiseMulKernel <BLOCK_X , BLOCK_Y >>(
31
sycl :: nd_range <2>( global_range , local_range),
32
[=]( sycl :: nd_item <2> item) {
33
int row = item.get_global_id (0);
34
int col = item.get_global_id (1);
35
if (row < N && col < M) {
36
int idx = row * M + col;
37
c_data[idx] = a_data[idx] * b_data[idx];
38
}
39
}
40
);
18


--- Page 19 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
41
}).wait ();
42 }
43
44 // 2. Templated
forward
function
45 template <int BLOCK_X , int BLOCK_Y >
46 torch :: Tensor
forward_templated (torch :: Tensor A, torch :: Tensor B) {
47
int N = A.size (0);
48
int M = A.size (1);
49
auto C = torch :: empty ({N, M}, A.options ());
50
elementwise_mul_sycl_kernel <BLOCK_X , BLOCK_Y >(A, B, C, N, M);
51
return C;
52 }
53
54 // 3. Dispatcher - must have
arguments
corresponding to the
template
parameters of
forward_templated
55 torch :: Tensor
forward(torch :: Tensor A, torch :: Tensor B, int block_x , int
block_y)
{
56
TORCH_CHECK(A.scalar_type () == torch ::kFloat , "Only
float32
supported in this
example");
57
TORCH_CHECK(A.dim() == 2 && B.dim() == 2, "Only 2D tensors
supported");
58
TORCH_CHECK(A.sizes () == B.sizes (), "Input
sizes
must
match");
59
60
if (block_x == 16 && block_y == 16) {
61
return
forward_templated <16, 16>(A, B);
62
} else if (block_x == 32 && block_y == 8) {
63
return
forward_templated <32, 8>(A, B);
64
} else if (block_x == 8 && block_y == 32) {
65
return
forward_templated <8, 32>(A, B);
66
} else {
67
TORCH_CHECK(false , "Unsupported
block
size
combination");
68
}
69 }
70
71 // 4. Pybind11
interface
72 PYBIND11_MODULE (TORCH_EXTENSION_NAME , m) {
73
m.def("forward", &forward , "Elementwise
multiplication
with
block
size
dispatch");
74 }
F
Per-task results
F.1
Robust-kbench comparison
Robust-kbench original
Robust-kbench re-evaluated
Ours
Ours + parameter optim.
Operation
layernorm_forward
165.678
55.116
55.625
55.625
llama_ffw
1.011
1.010
1.014
1.012
llama_rmsnorm_forward
3.920
2.911
3.529
3.517
mnist_conv_relu_pool_forward
2.790
3.947
5.068
5.007
mnist_cross_entropy_backward
0.958
10.388
23.905
23.905
mnist_cross_entropy_forward
1.933
0.400
1.434
1.389
mnist_linear_backward
1.200
9.700
22.000
22.000
mnist_linear_forward
2.517
1.558
1.669
1.520
mnist_linear_relu_backward
1.226
15.446
22.233
22.233
mnist_linear_relu_forward
2.494
1.345
2.726
2.675
mnist_pool_backward
1.116
3.354
4.761
4.761
resnet_block
2.625
1.205
1.325
1.328
Average
15.622
8.865
12.107
12.081
Table 7: Comparison on robust-kbench by task
F.2
Comparison to AI CUDA Engineer
19


--- Page 20 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Level
AI CUDA Engineer original
AI CUDA Engineer re-evaluated
Ours
Ours + parameter optim.
Operation
20_LeakyReLU
1
1.134
0.621
0.910
0.955
21_Sigmoid
1
1.109
0.554
0.805
0.805
25_Swish
1
1.562
1.016
1.349
1.402
30_Softsign
1
2.474
1.724
2.895
2.895
33_BatchNorm
1
0.619
0.975
1.017
1.017
44_Average_Pooling_1D
1
1.238
0.643
0.769
0.824
48_Mean_reduction_over_a_dimension
1
1.760
0.567
0.887
0.887
4_Matrix_vector_multiplication_
1
0.939
0.897
0.985
0.990
53_Min_reduction_over_a_dimension
1
2.187
0.981
1.317
1.317
5_Matrix_scalar_multiplication
1
0.999
0.999
1.003
1.008
64_conv_transposed_1D
1
1.021
0.578
1.017
1.213
67_conv_standard_1D
1
1.411
1.199
1.566
1.576
72_ConvTranspose3d_BatchNorm_AvgPool_AvgPool
1
1.047
1.030
0.315
0.319
76_conv_standard_1D_dilated_strided__
1
1.883
1.209
1.325
1.325
7_Matmul_with_small_K_dimension_
1
0.670
0.612
1.095
1.135
82_conv_depthwise_2D_square_input_square_kernel
1
1.239
1.530
0.794
0.794
86_conv_depthwise_separable_2D
1
0.808
0.574
0.940
0.961
87_conv_pointwise_2D
1
0.249
0.499
1.000
1.000
89_cumsum
1
2.214
1.319
1.824
2.127
99_TripletMarginLoss
1
3.873
2.570
2.278
2.278
Average
1.422
1.005
1.204
1.241
16_ConvTranspose2d_Mish_Add_Hardtanh_Scaling
2
1.689
1.684
0.466
0.469
17_Conv2d_InstanceNorm_Divide
2
1.786
2.036
1.920
2.022
1_Conv2D_ReLU_BiasAdd
2
1.170
1.626
3.322
3.444
21_Conv2d_Add_Scale_Sigmoid_GroupNorm
2
1.786
1.982
2.891
2.834
24_Conv3d_Min_Softmax
2
1.001
1.026
1.013
1.013
32_Conv2d_Scaling_Min
2
1.767
1.537
2.398
2.655
35_Conv2d_Subtract_HardSwish_MaxPool_Mish
2
1.932
2.331
1.624
1.669
37_Matmul_Swish_Sum_GroupNorm
2
1.499
1.804
1.256
1.443
46_Conv2d_Subtract_Tanh_Subtract_AvgPool
2
1.393
2.333
5.560
5.622
47_Conv3d_Mish_Tanh
2
1.086
1.192
1.361
1.379
50_ConvTranspose3d_Scaling_AvgPool_BiasAdd_Scaling
2
1.000
1.019
3.039
3.099
59_Matmul_Swish_Scaling
2
1.911
0.954
1.412
1.408
5_ConvTranspose2d_Subtract_Tanh
2
1.092
1.153
0.199
0.200
67_Conv2d_GELU_GlobalAvgPool
2
1.634
2.000
1.464
1.526
70_Gemm_Sigmoid_Scaling_ResidualAdd
2
1.713
0.781
1.592
1.881
73_Conv2d_BatchNorm_Scaling
2
1.024
0.924
1.739
1.741
82_Conv2d_Tanh_Scaling_BiasAdd_Max
2
1.999
2.712
3.883
3.744
85_Conv2d_GroupNorm_Scale_MaxPool_Clamp
2
1.241
1.322
2.037
2.077
97_Matmul_BatchNorm_BiasAdd_Divide_Swish
2
2.277
1.688
1.662
1.726
99_Matmul_GELU_Softmax
2
2.778
2.020
2.183
2.124
Average
1.589
1.606
2.051
2.104
Table 8: Comparison of speedup to the AI CUDA Engineer Lange et al. [2025a], by KernelBench task
F.3
Comparison to OpenEvolve
20


--- Page 21 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
Speedup over torch eager
Ours
OpenEvolve
Operation
16_ConvTranspose2d_Mish_Add_Hardtanh_Scaling
1.786
1.792
17_Conv2d_InstanceNorm_Divide
3.550
1.851
1_Conv2D_ReLU_BiasAdd
2.917
3.295
21_Conv2d_Add_Scale_Sigmoid_GroupNorm
3.045
6.612
24_Conv3d_Min_Softmax
1.207
1.211
32_Conv2d_Scaling_Min
7.871
10.296
35_Conv2d_Subtract_HardSwish_MaxPool_Mish
1.972
1.985
37_Matmul_Swish_Sum_GroupNorm
1.928
0.520
46_Conv2d_Subtract_Tanh_Subtract_AvgPool
5.005
3.446
47_Conv3d_Mish_Tanh
0.834
0.747
50_ConvTranspose3d_Scaling_AvgPool_BiasAdd_Scaling
1.667
1.684
59_Matmul_Swish_Scaling
0.913
0.674
5_ConvTranspose2d_Subtract_Tanh
1.262
1.237
67_Conv2d_GELU_GlobalAvgPool
2.498
4.061
70_Gemm_Sigmoid_Scaling_ResidualAdd
0.615
0.767
73_Conv2d_BatchNorm_Scaling
0.904
0.748
82_Conv2d_Tanh_Scaling_BiasAdd_Max
7.955
2.023
85_Conv2d_GroupNorm_Scale_MaxPool_Clamp
3.031
3.043
97_Matmul_BatchNorm_BiasAdd_Divide_Swish
1.441
0.471
99_Matmul_GELU_Softmax
4.234
4.239
Average
2.732
2.535
Table 9: Comparison to OpenEvolve CodeLion [2025] by KernelBench task
F.4
Evaluation of hardware-awareness
Runtime [ms] on LNL
Runtime [ms] on B580
Operation
Optimized on LNL
Optimized on B580
hws
Optimized on LNL
Optimized on B580
hws
16_ConvTranspose2d_Mish_Add_Hardtanh_Scaling
3.130
3.140
1.003
0.850
0.866
0.982
17_Conv2d_InstanceNorm_Divide
0.269
0.401
1.491
0.090
0.071
1.268
1_Conv2D_ReLU_BiasAdd
0.253
0.214
0.846
0.055
0.025
2.228
21_Conv2d_Add_Scale_Sigmoid_GroupNorm
0.532
0.525
0.987
0.073
0.050
1.474
24_Conv3d_Min_Softmax
6.130
6.150
1.003
1.820
1.840
0.989
32_Conv2d_Scaling_Min
0.088
0.454
5.142
0.041
0.040
1.010
35_Conv2d_Subtract_HardSwish_MaxPool_Mish
0.465
0.476
1.024
0.053
0.048
1.109
37_Matmul_Swish_Sum_GroupNorm
0.075
0.110
1.473
0.033
0.055
0.608
46_Conv2d_Subtract_Tanh_Subtract_AvgPool
0.199
0.527
2.648
0.076
0.071
1.075
47_Conv3d_Mish_Tanh
1.630
1.160
0.712
0.420
0.263
1.597
50_ConvTranspose3d_Scaling_AvgPool_BiasAdd_Scaling
50.500
36.700
0.727
16.100
10.400
1.548
59_Matmul_Swish_Scaling
0.127
0.128
1.008
0.051
0.044
1.155
5_ConvTranspose2d_Subtract_Tanh
0.959
0.977
1.019
0.199
0.196
1.015
67_Conv2d_GELU_GlobalAvgPool
0.265
0.211
0.796
0.090
0.085
1.056
70_Gemm_Sigmoid_Scaling_ResidualAdd
0.182
0.180
0.989
0.056
0.055
1.013
73_Conv2d_BatchNorm_Scaling
0.960
1.200
1.250
0.537
0.473
1.135
82_Conv2d_Tanh_Scaling_BiasAdd_Max
0.132
0.530
4.015
0.048
0.094
0.510
85_Conv2d_GroupNorm_Scale_MaxPool_Clamp
0.485
0.652
1.344
0.055
0.141
0.391
97_Matmul_BatchNorm_BiasAdd_Divide_Swish
0.102
0.126
1.235
0.055
0.057
0.974
99_Matmul_GELU_Softmax
0.009
0.018
2.027
0.009
0.009
1.038
Average
3.325
2.694
1.537
1.036
0.744
1.109
Table 10: Crossover-experiment: Kernels are optimized in two separate runs on an Intel B580 and Intel LNl GPU, and
then benchmarked on the respective other hardware as well. The hardware-speedup hws is the ratio of both runtimes.
In most cases, the kernel optimized for the target GPU outperforms the kernel that was optimized on the other GPU
(lower runtime on the target GPU, hws > 1)
21


--- Page 22 ---
KernelFoundry: Hardware-Aware Evolutionary GPU Kernel Optimization
G
Results for open-source model (GPT-OSS 20B)
For the sake of reproducibility, we provide results of running KernelFoundry with GPT-OSS 20B in Table 11. We
use the representative subset of 20 kernels of KernelBench level 2 and prompt the model to generate SYCL kernels.
Unfortunately, the model’s lower capabilities led to failure in generating correct kernels in 7 out of 20 cases, even after
40 iterations and using a population of 4 per generation. However, in the successful cases, the kernels were optimized,
achieving, for instance, a speedup of 1.775 for operation 16 on an Intel LNL GPU.
Operation
Speedup
16_ConvTranspose2d_Mish_Add_Hardtanh_Scaling.py
1.775
17_Conv2d_InstanceNorm_Divide.py
-
1_Conv2D_ReLU_BiasAdd.py
1.708
21_Conv2d_Add_Scale_Sigmoid_GroupNorm.py
-
24_Conv3d_Min_Softmax.py
0.989
32_Conv2d_Scaling_Min.py
2.106
35_Conv2d_Subtract_HardSwish_MaxPool_Mish.py
0.865
37_Matmul_Swish_Sum_GroupNorm.py
0.043
46_Conv2d_Subtract_Tanh_Subtract_AvgPool.py
1.576
47_Conv3d_Mish_Tanh.py
0.304
50_ConvTranspose3d_Scaling_AvgPool_BiasAdd_Scaling.py
-
5_ConvTranspose2d_Subtract_Tanh.py
1.223
59_Matmul_Swish_Scaling.py
-
67_Conv2d_GELU_GlobalAvgPool.py
0.714
70_Gemm_Sigmoid_Scaling_ResidualAdd.py
-
73_Conv2d_BatchNorm_Scaling.py
0.031
82_Conv2d_Tanh_Scaling_BiasAdd_Max.py
1.085
85_Conv2d_GroupNorm_Scale_MaxPool_Clamp.py
-
97_Matmul_BatchNorm_BiasAdd_Divide_Swish.py
0.069
99_Matmul_GELU_Softmax.py
-
Table 11: Results for GPT-OSS for reproducibility.
22
