--- Page 1 ---
Generative Augmented Inference
Cheng Lu
Olin Business School, Washington University in St. Louis, USA, cheng.lu@wustl.edu
Mengxin Wang
Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas, USA, mengxin.wang@utdallas.edu
Dennis J. Zhang
Olin Business School, Washington University in St. Louis, USA, denniszhang@wustl.edu
Heng Zhang
W. P. Carey School of Business, Arizona State University, USA, hengzhang24@asu.edu
Data-driven operations management often relies on parameters estimated from costly human-generated
labels, such as purchase decisions, expert annotations, or survey responses. Recent advances in large language
models (LLMs) and other AI systems offer inexpensive auxiliary data, but introduce a new challenge: AI
outputs are not direct observations of the target outcomes, but could involve high-dimensional representations
with complex and unknown relationships to human labels. Conventional methods leverage AI predictions
as direct proxies for true labels, which can be inefficient or unreliable when this relationship is weak or
misspecified. We propose Generative Augmented Inference (GAI), a general framework that incorporates
AI-generated outputs as informative features for estimating models of human-labeled outcomes. GAI uses
an orthogonal moment construction that enables consistent estimation and valid inference with flexible,
nonparametric relationship between LLM-generated outputs and human labels. We establish asymptotic
normality and show a “safe default” property: relative to human-data-only estimators, GAI weakly improves
estimation efficiency under arbitrary auxiliary signals and yields strict gains whenever the auxiliary information
is predictive. Empirically, GAI performs strongly across diverse settings, outperforming benchmark estimators.
In conjoint analysis with weak auxiliary signals, GAI reduces estimation error by approximately 50% and
lowers human labeling requirements by more than 75%. In retail pricing, where all methods have access to
the same auxiliary inputs, GAI consistently outperforms alternative estimators, highlighting the value of its
construction rather than differences in information. In health insurance choice, it cuts labeling requirements
by over 90% while maintaining decision accuracy. Across applications, GAI improves confidence interval
coverage without inflating width. Overall, GAI provides a principled and scalable approach to integrating
AI-generated information into decision-making pipelines.
Key words : Large Language Model, Data Augmentation, Causal Inference
1.
Introduction
Operations management research across virtually every subfield relies on human-generated data
that is expensive, time-consuming, or difficult to collect at scale. Estimating consumer preferences
requires conjoint surveys costing $5–20 per respondent (Green and Srinivasan 1990); calibrating
demand and choice models depends on transaction records that capture only realized—not latent—
1
arXiv:2604.14575v1  [cs.LG]  16 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
2
demand (Vulcano et al. 2012, Kok and Fisher 2007); learning heterogeneous price sensitivities
requires costly price experiments that sacrifice revenue during exploration (Ban and Keskin 2021);
and measuring treatment effects demands carefully designed field experiments (Gao et al. 2023).
Beyond these core areas, supply chain management requires on-site audits by trained inspectors to
verify supplier compliance with social and environmental standards (Zhang et al. 2022, Kalkanci
and Plambeck 2020); healthcare operations depend on clinical trial endpoints that cost tens of
thousands of dollars per patient to collect (Anderer et al. 2022) or inherently limited observational
data, as in organ allocation (Agarwal et al. 2021); and platform operations rely on expert human
judgment to identify fraudulent reviews and content (Luca and Zervas 2016). In each case, the cost of
obtaining reliable human-generated labels fundamentally constrains sample sizes and, consequently,
the precision of parameter estimates that inform operational decisions.
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) and AI-based generation systems offers a
potential solution to this data scarcity problem (Brown et al. 2020, OpenAI 2023). AI systems
can generate annotations, simulate survey responses, and produce predictions at costs orders
of magnitude lower than human labeling—often $0.01–0.10 per observation. The “digital twin”
paradigm, which uses LLM-based simulations of individual decision-makers to generate synthetic
behavioral data, exemplifies this opportunity (Toubia et al. 2025). Huang et al. (2025) develop
ORLM that trains open-source LLMs to automate optimization modeling and solving with a
data synthesis framework, demonstrating the potential for AI systems to augment traditional
operations research methodologies. If AI-generated data could reliably augment scarce human labels,
researchers could achieve the statistical precision of large samples while collecting only a fraction of
the human-labeled observations.
However, realizing these efficiency gains while maintaining valid statistical inference presents a
fundamental challenge for two reasons. First, when AI outputs are intended as noisy substitutes of
human labels, they can differ systematically from human judgments in complex, context-dependent
ways. In our retail pricing application, LLM-based digital twins (Toubia et al. 2025) predict
purchases at a 30% rate when the true rate is 44%—a substantial and systematic bias. In our
vaccine conjoint study, LLM-generated choice predictions agree with human responses only 54%
of the time, barely better than random guessing. Naively pooling such AI-generated data with
human labels would introduce bias that could overwhelm any efficiency gains, leading to misleading
parameter estimates and invalid confidence intervals. Second, and more importantly, AI outputs
can often be structured auxiliary representations rather than just noisy labels—they may include
reasoning traces, confidence scores, persona descriptions, or high-dimensional embeddings that are
categorically different from the outcome of interest. This distinction fundamentally changes the


--- Page 3 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
3
0/1
0.83
[0.12, -0.45, …, 0.79]
discrete
labels
continuous
labels
embeddings
images
texts
𝒛
𝑿
𝒚
ෝ𝒈(𝑿, 𝒛)
cross-fitting
𝑤
Ƹ𝑒(𝑿, 𝒛)
𝜓≔𝑿𝑇[∇𝑏𝑿𝛽−𝒈𝑿, 𝒛
+
𝑤
𝑒𝑿, 𝒛
𝒈𝑿, 𝒛−𝒚]
If either 𝒈(∙) or 𝑒(∙) is estimated
accurately, the estimation error of
the other one vanishes.
෠𝛽recovers parameters in human
DGP with
𝑛-consistency.
human
labels
observed
or not
Abundant AI-Generated
Representations
Feature-Augmented
Nuisance Estimation
Target Parameter Estimation
via Orthogonal Score
features
AI
represen-
tations
Figure 1
GAI incorporates AI outputs as auxiliary features rather than surrogate labels. In contrast to PPI, which
applies corrections at the loss-function level and relies on AI predictions approximating the outcome, GAI embeds
auxiliary signals within a Neyman-orthogonal score function. This construction allows the estimator to leverage
auxiliary data for bias correction and efficiency gains, even when AI representations are biased, or weakly
informative.
statistical formulation of the problem: rather than a bias-correction problem (correcting inaccurate
predictions), it becomes a problem of efficiently leveraging auxiliary information for inference.
Therefore, the core methodological question is: How can AI-generated signals be incorporated
into statistical estimation without requiring them to serve as accurate surrogates for the outcome?
Existing approaches to AI-augmented inference, most notably Prediction-Powered Inference (PPI;
Angelopoulos et al. 2023a,b), utilizes AI predicted labels as noisy proxies of the true outcome.
Unlike the “proxy” view, modern generative AI systems can produce outputs that are categorically
different from the outcomes researchers seek to estimate. This highlight the need for an inferential
framework that does not require AI outputs to function as surrogate labels.
We propose Generative Augmented Inference (GAI), a framework that resolves this tension
through a conceptual shift: rather than treating AI outputs as proxies for outcomes, we treat
them as informative features that help predict outcomes (Figure 1). This distinction is subtle but
consequential. Under the proxy view, AI outputs must approximate human labels to be useful; under
the feature view, AI outputs need only be informative of human labels to contribute information.
To illustrate, consider an LLM asked to predict whether a consumer will purchase a product.
Under the proxy view, the LLM’s binary yes/no prediction would serve as a stand-in for the true
purchase outcome. If the LLM systematically underpredicts purchases (e.g., 30% predicted vs.
44% actual), this bias must be corrected. Under the feature view, we instead ask: does the LLM’s
representation—including prediction and any additional outputs such as its reasoning, confidence
scores, or persona characteristics—help predict the actual purchase? Even a biased prediction
can be highly informative: knowing that the LLM predicts “no” may shift the expected purchase


--- Page 4 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
4
probability downwards, while “yes” shifts it upwards. GAI exploits the representations as features
rather than requiring the predictions to be accurate proxies of human labels.
Concretely, consider estimating the parameters of a generalized linear model (GLM) from a
dataset where human labels are observed for only a subset of observations, but AI-generated
auxiliary information is available for all observations. The auxiliary information may be an LLM’s
binary purchase prediction, a vector of persona characteristics, a high-dimensional embedding,
unstructured texts, or any other AI-generated signal—its structure is left deliberately unrestricted.
GAI proceeds in two steps:
1. Estimate nuisance functions. Using the labeled subset, we estimate two functions: (i) the
outcome prediction function—the best prediction of human labels given both covariates and AI
outputs, capturing whatever predictive information the AI signal contains about the outcome;
and (ii) the propensity score—the probability that an observation receives a human label, which
may depend on covariates and AI outputs. These nuisance functions can be estimated using
flexible machine learning methods such as random forests, neural networks, or gradient boosting.
2. Construct a bias-corrected estimator. We combine the estimated nuisance functions into a
Neyman-orthogonal score function that integrates information from both labeled and unlabeled
observations. The Neyman orthogonality property (Chernozhukov et al. 2018) ensures that
estimation error in the nuisance functions affects the final parameter estimates only at second
order. This robustness allows researchers to use flexible, data-adaptive methods for nuisance
estimation without compromising the validity of inference on the target parameters.
1.1.
Contribution
This paper makes three main contributions to the operations management literature:
1. Problem Formulation and Methodology. We identify that AI-assisted labeling creates a
fundamentally new statistical regime: AI outputs are not noisy surrogates for human labels,
but structured auxiliary representations that can be leveraged as informative features. This
distinction leads to a different problem formulation from prediction-replacement approaches, in
which AI outputs augment the covariate space rather than substitute for missing outcomes.
Building on this insight, we develop GAI, a unified framework for AI-augmented estimation
in GLMs, where we allow model misspecification. The method exploits a natural orthogonal
moment structure, yielding a principled estimator that supports valid statistical inference while
accommodating the full diversity of modern AI outputs, including discrete predictions, continuous
scores, and high-dimensional or unstructured representations such as text embeddings. In this
way, GAI provides a general statistical framework for integrating AI-generated signals into
classical estimation problems.


--- Page 5 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
5
2. Theoretical Guarantees. We establish that the GAI estimator is asymptotically normal,
√n-consistent, and admits a closed-form variance expression (Theorem 1). Beyond these standard
asymptotic guarantees, we prove a key “safe default” property: under random selection into
labeling, where the probability of receiving a human label does not depend on covariates or
AI outputs, GAI is guaranteed to weakly improve upon primary-only estimation in asymptotic
efficiency, and strictly improves whenever the AI outputs are informative (Corollary 1). Thus,
under random labeling, incorporating AI outputs can never worsen performance relative to
ignoring auxiliary AI data entirely, regardless of how biased or inaccurate those outputs may be.
We further show that the efficiency gains from GAI admit an interpretable variance decom-
position (Corollary 2). Specifically, variance reduction can arise from three distinct sources:
(i) sample expansion, where auxiliary observations effectively enlarge the sample available for
estimation; (ii) representational power of AI, where AI outputs provide richer transformations of
the covariates and help approximate complex conditional expectations even when they contain
no information beyond X; and (iii) extra predictive information from AI, where AI outputs
contain signal about human labels beyond the observed covariates. This decomposition provides
a unified explanation for when and why AI augmentation improves statistical efficiency.
3. Empirical Evidence Across Three Auxiliary Data Regimes. We evaluate GAI across
three real-world business applications that progressively shift the landscape in favor of existing
methods, yet GAI delivers strong and consistent gains throughout. Across all settings, GAI
substantially improves point estimation accuracy, maintains confidence interval coverage at or
above the nominal level without inflating interval width, and reduces required human labels
by 67–90%. The consistency of these results across diverse auxiliary data formats, information
structures, and prediction quality levels demonstrates the broad applicability of the framework.
Our lead application, vaccine conjoint analysis, presents the most demanding test. We estimate
a multinomial logit model using two types of auxiliary information derived from LLM chain-
of-thought (CoT) reasoning: high-dimensional text embeddings (z ∈R3072) and discrete choice
labels (z ∈{−1,0,1}). The LLM’s discrete predictions achieve only 54% accuracy—barely better
than a coin flip—and the LLM observes only the same vaccine attributes as the outcome model,
so the AI output contains no additional predictive information beyond features in the linear
model. This is precisely the type of auxiliary data that PPI-based methods struggle to utilize
effectively. Nevertheless, both GAI variants reduce MAPE from 19–32% to 16–17% by extracting
signal from the AI’s outputs, whereas PPI-based methods fail to improve over primary-only
estimation. GAI with just 50 labels outperforms primary-only estimation with 200 labels—more
than a 75% reduction in required human annotations—and lowers decision error rates from 6.9%
to 2.6%. Comparing the two representations, embeddings achieve smaller MAPE and better


--- Page 6 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
6
coverage while labels produce narrower confidence intervals, demonstrating that both forms of
AI output can be effectively leveraged.
Our second application, retail pricing with digital twins (Toubia et al. 2025), places all methods
on a level playing field by restricting every estimator to the same binary AI prediction. The digital
twin’s purchase predictions are systematically biased (30% vs. 44% actual), but carry extra
predictive information from persona features beyond the price covariate. Even with identical
auxiliary inputs, GAI reduces MAPE from 10–22% obtained from PPI++, the most competent
benchmark, to 7–12% and achieves valid CI coverage (96–100%) with near-zero decision errors.
GAI with 100 labels matches the precision that primary-only estimation requires 300 labels to
attain—a 67% reduction. This controlled comparison isolates the source of GAI’s advantage: it
is the feature-based methodology, not access to richer data.
Our final application, health insurance coverage analysis using U.S. Census data, tests GAI on
PPI’s home turf: well-calibrated ML predictions with 85% accuracy trained on features beyond
the income covariate, using the dataset and AI representations constructed by the PPI authors
themselves. Even in this favorable regime, GAI achieves MAPE of 140–160% versus 290–980%
for primary-only estimation, and GAI with 100 labels surpasses primary-only estimation with
1,000 labels—a more than 90% reduction. GAI attains 99–100% CI coverage and zero decision
errors, whereas PPI++ undercovers (83–93%) and incurs 4.2% decision errors.
2.
Literature Review
AI and Machine Learning in Operations. The operations management (OM) literature has
increasingly embraced data-driven and AI-based methods. Miˇsi´c and Perakis (2020) provide a
comprehensive review of data analytics applications across supply chain management, revenue
management, and healthcare operations. More recently, Davis et al. (2024) discuss how machine
learning and behavioral science can complement each other in operations research, and Qi et al. (2023)
develop end-to-end deep learning frameworks for inventory management. LLMs are also increasingly
applied to operational contexts. Chen et al. (2025b) examine whether ChatGPT exhibits human-like
behavioral biases in OM decisions. The “digital twin” paradigm—using LLM-based simulations
of individual decision-makers—has emerged as a promising approach for generating synthetic
behavioral data (Toubia et al. 2025). However, such AI-generated data may exhibit systematic biases
that differ from human behavior. Our work contributes to this literature by providing a principled
framework for combining scarce human-labeled data with abundant AI-generated representations
while remaining robust to systematic AI errors.
Transfer Learning. Classical semi-supervised methods (Nigam et al. 2000, Zhu and Goldberg
2009, Lee et al. 2013, Chakrabortty and Cai 2018) use unlabeled features to improve prediction,


--- Page 7 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
7
while transfer learning (Pan and Yang 2009, Weiss et al. 2016) addresses distribution shift between
source and target domains, such as leveraging data from existing operations to improve decisions in
new settings (Chen et al. 2025a) or learning policies robust to environment shifts between training
and deployment (Si et al. 2023). Similar challenges arise in operations: simulation and optimization
models are widely used for inventory management, demand forecasting, and workforce incentive
design, but calibrating these models requires real-world data that may be scarce, expensive, censored,
or missing (Bertsimas and Thiele 2006, Besbes and Muharremoglu 2013, Levi et al. 2015, Kaynar
and Siddiq 2023, Xiong and Pelger 2023, Singhvi et al. 2024, Tang et al. 2025). The AI-augmented
estimator (AAE) framework (Wang et al. 2024) addresses the analogous challenge of combining
AI and human data through parametric debiasing. Our setting is distinct: we have AI-generated
representations (not just labels) for auxiliary data, and utilize them as features in semi-parametric
estimations. GAI can be viewed as addressing the sim-to-real problem in inference: how to leverage
abundant simulated or AI-generated data flexibly while maintaining valid inference grounded in
limited real observations.
Prediction-Powered Inference. Angelopoulos et al. (2023a,b) introduced PPI and PPI++ for
constructing valid confidence intervals by leveraging ML predictions on unlabeled data. Our approach
differs from PPI-based methods in two fundamental ways: PPI uses labeled data to estimate and
correct for the bias in predictions, yielding valid inference when predictions are reasonably accurate
proxies for outcomes. First, PPI requires AI outputs as surrogate labels, so it cannot handle settings
where AI outputs differ fundamentally from the true outcomes—precisely the setting that motivates
our framework, as discussed in the introduction. Second, PPI’s confidence-interval construction and
statistical guarantees require AI outputs to be a deterministic function based solely on observable
features. However, AI-generated data differs in two key ways: (i) AI outputs may be inherently
stochastic due to the internal randomization of AI models; and more fundamentally,(ii) AI outputs
may depend on predictive information beyond observable features, such as in digital twin-based
data generations(see Example 1 for details). In such cases, the PPI-based methods do not apply
and might only inflate variance relative to using human labels alone (Appendix A), whereas GAI,
by Corollary 1, is guaranteed to weakly dominate the human data-only estimator by capturing the
extra unobservable information. More broadly, GAI highlights the distinction between “AI-based
generation” and “machine learning-based prediction”: the representational power of AI models
creates the possibility of recovering unobservable information that govern the true DGP. Readers
can refer to Section 5.1 for a more in-depth comparison.
Neyman Orthogonality and Doubly Robust Estimation. The AI-assisted labeling problem
induces a specific data structure: outcomes are partially missing, but for all observations we
observe structured AI-generated representations that may be high-dimensional, unstructured, or


--- Page 8 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
8
categorically different from the outcome. This structure is richer than the classical missing-data
setting (Rubin 1976, Little and Rubin 2019), where the researcher observes only covariates for units
with missing outcomes. In our setting, the auxiliary signal encodes predictive information about
the latent response that goes beyond what standard covariates provide.
This problem structure naturally admits an orthogonal moment representation. Semiparametric
methods developed for missing outcomes provide useful conceptual tools. In particular, augmented
inverse probability weighted (AIPW) estimators (Robins et al. 1994, Robins and Rotnitzky 1995)
combine inverse probability weighting with an outcome model to obtain doubly robust estimators
for linear regression problems, and later work studied their efficiency properties (Hirano et al.
2003, Bang and Robins 2005). While the resulting GAI score function shares the algebraic form
of AIPW estimators, the role of each component differs substantively. First, the augmentation
term leverages AI-generated representations—which may include reasoning traces, embeddings,
or persona descriptions—that encode high-dimensional predictive information about the latent
response, rather than correcting for missing outcomes using observed covariates alone. Second, our
analysis is developed within the double machine learning framework (Chernozhukov et al. 2018) that
has been adopted and extended in recent econometrics and ML research (Kallus et al. 2024). We
provide a clean set of conditions—most notably the explicit construction of Neyman orthogonality
and rate requirements for nuisance parameter estimation—together with practical implementation
tools such as cross-fitting—that allow our estimator to achieve valid inference across a broad class of
generalized linear models. Our contribution is thus not a new semiparametric principle, but rather
the recognition that AI-generated representations create a new estimation regime that is well-suited
to orthogonal moment methods, together with the formal analysis of the resulting estimator’s
properties in this context.
An earlier, preliminary version of this work was submitted to a machine learning conference
(Anonymous 2026). The present manuscript substantially extends that version by developing
a variance-decomposition result that captures the sources of efficiency gains, strengthening the
comparison with baseline approaches, providing additional implementation guidance for model
selection in nuisance estimation, and adding a new application that extends the experiment to
richer AI data regimes.
3.
Problem Formulation
In this section, we formulate the problem within a misspecified GLM framework and describe the
corresponding data-generating and data-collection processes.


--- Page 9 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
9
3.1.
A Misspecified Generalized Linear Model Framework and Applications
We consider the following estimation framework: We let y ∈Rk denote a human label of interest,
associated with a random feature matrix X ∈X ⊂Rk×d. y |X follows an unknown ground truth
distribution. We aim to recover a target parameter β∗∈B ⊂Rd , which solves:
β∗∈arg min
β∈B E[ℓ(X,y;β)],
(1)
where ℓ(X,y;β) := b(Xβ) −y⊤Xβ denote a loss function and b(·) : Θ →R is a known twice-
continuously differentiable convex function on an open convex Θ ⊂Rk. We assume that B is an
open convex set such that, for some compact set ˘
X with X ⊂˘
X, it holds that Xβ ∈Θ whenever
X ∈˘
X and β ∈B. Under these conditions, one can verify that β∗satisfies the first-order condition:
E[∇βℓ(X,y;β∗)] = E

X⊤(∇b(Xβ∗) −y)

= 0.
(2)
An important special case of our framework is the class of canonical GLMs, which impose a struc-
tured functional form on the conditional distribution of y | X. In particular, canonical GLMs assume
that y | X belongs to the exponential family, with density f(y |X;b,β∗) ∝exp

b(Xβ∗) −y⊤Xβ∗	
.
Under this specification, (1) corresponds to the expected log-likelihood minimization estimator
and X⊤(∇b(Xβ∗) −y) in (2) is the canonical score function. Consequently, our framework covers
canonical GLMs that are widely used in applied modeling pipelines across industry and scientific
research, including:
• Linear regression: k = 1, b(θ) = 1
2θ2. This corresponds to squared-loss estimation for continuous
outcomes and is the workhorse model in empirical studies, including treatment-effect estimation,
forecasting, and policy evaluation. Note that linear regression, viewed as a special case of GLMs,
requires normal densities conditional on X.
• Logistic Regression and MNL: for k non-baseline classes, b(θ) = log
 1+Pk
j=1 exp(θj)

. This is the
standard model for discrete choice among multiple alternatives, which is widely used for multiclass
classification applications, such as text classification, image recognition, and recommendation
systems, where predicted utilities determine selection probabilities among competing options.
When k = 1, this reduces to logistic regression.
• Poisson regression: k = 1, b(θ) = exp(θ). This models count outcomes and event rates, with
applications such as demand incidence, click/conversion counts, and arrival processes in computer
systems. Poisson GLMs are standard for modeling event rates in systems monitoring, reliability,
and online experimentation.
While canonical GLMs posit a specific exponential-family form for the conditional distribution
of y | X, real-world data-generating processes rarely conform exactly to these assumptions. Our


--- Page 10 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
10
framework explicitly accommodates such deviations by relaxing the exponential-family requirement.
In particular, we impose no restrictions on the true conditional distribution of y | X and allow
for an arbitrary, unknown ground-truth relationship. As a result, our approach permits model
misspecification and interprets the target parameter as the best approximation within a selected
GLM class: With a b(·) function from GLM family, (1) seeks a GLM density closest to the ground
truth density in the conditional Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, i.e.,
β∗∈arg min
β∈B EX

Ey|X

log
f(y | X;b,β∗)
f ∗(y | X)

,
where f ∗(y | X) corresponds to the true, unknown conditional density. Therefore, we broadly view
(1) as a best-in-class estimator, which can be regarded as the best generalized linear representation
of the relationship between y and X.
3.2.
Data Generation and Collection
To estimate the best-in-class parameter β∗, we rely on observed data and an appropriate estimation
procedure. In this section, we describe the available data, the underlying data-generating process,
and the mechanism by which observations are collected.
Consider a dataset D = {Ξi = (Xi,yi,wi,zi)}n
i=1 with partially observable human labels. Each
data sample is i.i.d. In each sample, Xi represent the feature matrix, yi denote the human label
of interest. Due to the substantial cost of human labeling, not all human labels are observed.
We let wi ∈{0,1} indicate whether the human label yi is observed. While obtaining human
annotations is expensive, AI-generated labels are comparatively low-cost. Therefore, for each sample
we additionally observe zi, which denotes AI-generated auxiliary information, whose structure is
left deliberately unrestricted. z may be structured (e.g., categorical labels, probability scores, or
continuous values), high-dimensional vectors (e.g., embeddings), or unstructured objects (e.g., texts,
images). Given D, we define the primary (human-labeled) and auxiliary (AI-only) subsamples
DP = {Ξi ∈D : wi = 1}, DA = {Ξi ∈D : wi = 0} and let nP = |DP|, nA = |DA|.
3.2.1.
Human Annotation Mechanism We assume human labels are unobserved at random
conditional on features and AI representations, i.e., w ⊥y | X,z. This assumption is natural when
primary data collection is carefully designed (e.g., random sampling of human annotations). We
define e∗(X,z) = E[w |X,z] > κ for some κ > 0. In particular, e∗(X,z) represents the probability
that the actual human label is observed given X and z. Such a data collection mechanism is common
in practice, as the decision to collect real human labels can be based on observed feature information
and AI-generated signals. For example, practitioners may prioritize human annotation for samples
with specific covariate profiles, for cases where AI-generated predictions exhibit high uncertainty.


--- Page 11 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
11
3.2.2.
AI Generation Mechanism The core idea of our method is simple: we utilize z to
extrapolate y on DA using a principled approach. Given AI-generated auxiliary information z, we
define g∗(X,z) = E[y |X,z], which serves as a key object that we estimate using machine learning
methods in an intermediate step of our method (see Section 4.2). The benefit of introducing z is
twofold. First, the AI signal z may contain predictive information about y beyond what is captured
by X. This can occur when AI outputs are generated using auxiliary information not included
in X, making z informative about y even after conditioning on X. Second, even when y ⊥z | X,
querying a powerful AI system can produce representations z that summarize complex patterns
in X relevant for predicting y. Learning g∗(X,z) using machine learning methods is often easier
compared with learning E[y | X] in practice. For these two reasons, we can use the estimate of
g∗(X,z) to effectively extrapolate y on DA and the convergence requirement in Assumption 2 is
likely to be satisfied. Then, instead of using only a small data sample DP, we can utilize the entire
sample D to estimate the GLM with provably strong empirical performance. We illustrate with
concrete examples below.
Example 1 (y ̸⊥z | X: Digital Twin Generation). We tailor this example to the retail
pricing experiment in Section 6.2. Each observation corresponds to an individual–product–price
query. For simplicity, we let X ∈Rn×2 denote the primary covariates used in the demand model (an
intercept and price). In practice, there can be other features included in X. Let U ∈Rp denote a
vector of individual-level persona and demographic features (e.g., psychometrics and demographics).
In the digital-twin setting, the agent is trained on each individual’s persona information, so the
(unobserved) purchase outcome depends on both price and U. Concretely, suppose the ground-truth
data-generating process is
P(y = 1 | X,U) = σ(η∗
0 + η∗
1 price + h(U)),
(3)
where σ(t) = 1/(1 + e−t) and h(U) is an unknown (possibly high-dimensional) function capturing
heterogeneous baseline propensity to purchase across persona types. The parameter of interest for
the pricing study is the population effect of X in a model that conditions only on X (rather than on
U). For instance, the analyst may wish to report price sensitivity under counterfactual population
compositions of persona/demographic groups.
Now suppose we also observe an AI-generated digital-twin label z ∈{0,1}. Because the digital
twin is constructed using U, its prediction is also a function of (X,U). For instance, we can model
the twin output as
P(z = 1 | X,U) = σ

γ0 + γ1 price + ˜h(U)

,
(4)


--- Page 12 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
12
where ˜h(U) reflects the twin’s learned representation of persona-driven purchase propensity. Under
(3)–(4), both y and z depend on the latent persona vector U. Clearly, after conditioning on X, the
variables remain correlated since U is a common driver of both the true purchase decision and the
twin’s prediction. In this sense, y ̸⊥z | X and z provides additional information beyond X about y
by acting as a proxy for latent heterogeneity encoded in U.
■
Crucially, we note that the notation g∗(X,z) does not presume that y must be correlated with
z conditional on X. In fact, our approach allows y and z to be conditionally independent given
X, which is also a common scenario in AI data-generation schemes. In such cases, g∗(X,z) =
E[y |X,z] = E[y |X]. When g∗(X,z) = E[y |X], including z as an argument in g∗simply reflects
that AI-generated information may serve as a useful representation for the unknown ground-truth
conditional expectation function E[y | X], as illustrated in Example 2 in Online Appendix B.
Together, Examples 1 and 2 illustrate two typical AI data-generation schemes in which y ̸⊥z | X
and y ⊥z | X. Regardless of whether such conditional correlation holds, our proposed GAI approach
achieves variance reduction whenever z contains meaningful information for predicting y. We
analyze the mechanisms in these two examples formally in Section 5 and theoretically justify the
resulting efficiency gains. We conduct empirical experiments corresponding to these two examples.
Section 6.2 represents the digital twin generation setting described in Example 1, whereas Section 6.1
represents the off-the-shelf LLM generation setting described in Example 2. Both experiments yield
statistically significant improvements consistent with our theoretical results.
4.
Methodology
In this section, we present our proposed methodology, GAI. We first discuss the key challenges in
using both primary and auxiliary data to estimate β∗(Section 4.1). We formally introduce GAI
in Section 4.2 and discuss practical guidance for empirical implementation in Section 4.3. Unless
noted otherwise, we let ∥·∥denote the ℓ2-norm for a matrix or a vector. Also, ∥·∥F and ∥·∥∞are the
Frobenius norm or the ℓ∞-norm of an appropriate object. Furthermore, given a multi-dimensional
function f, we write ∥f∥P,2 = (E[∥f∥2])
1/2 . We use λmin(·) to denote the minimum eigenvalue of a
matrix.
4.1.
The Challenges
Here we formalize the challenges and discuss alternative methods. The canonical score X⊤(∇b(Xβ)−
y) in (2) requires observing y, so it cannot be evaluated on auxiliary observations with w = 0.
Using only the primary sample DP = {Ξi = (Xi,yi,zi,wi) : wi = 1}, the standard estimator bβ P is
the solution to the empirical score equation based on the canonical GLM score:
1
nP
X
i:wi=1
X⊤
i {∇b(Xiβ) −yi} = 0.
(5)


--- Page 13 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
13
We denote by bβ P the primary-only estimator. By construction, this estimator relies exclusively
on the primary sample and is therefore fundamentally constrained by the primary sample size,
which is often small due to the high cost of human data collection. The primary difficulty with this
approach is that it ignores the auxiliary sample completely. We also remark that when e(X,z) is
not a constant and the model is indeed misspecified, it is not difficult to construct examples where
this estimator does not have the desired statistical properties, such as consistency.
An alternative approach that utilizes the entire dataset is to na¨ıvely pool the primary (human-
labeled) and auxiliary (AI-generated) observations and directly plug them into the empirical score
equation as if all labels were equally reliable. Specifically, the naive estimator bβNaive is the solution
to the following empirical score equation:
1
nP + nA
( X
i:wi=1
X⊤
i {∇b(Xiβ) −yi} +
X
i:wi=0
X⊤
i {∇b(Xiβ) −zi}
)
= 0.
(6)
While this procedure leverages a larger effective sample size, it generally yields biased estimates
when the AI-generated labels do not coincide with the true human outcomes. Additionally, when
the auxiliary signal z takes forms beyond a direct label surrogate, the naive pooling formulation is
no longer applicable.
4.2.
Generative Augmented Inference
To address these challenges, we propose the following score function:
ψ(Ξ;e,g;β) := X⊤

∇b(Xβ) −g(X,z) +
w
e(X,z)(g(X,z) −y)

.
(7)
This proposed score can be viewed as an orthogonalized version of the complete-data score: it
replaces the missing label y by the regression function g(X,z) and corrects the residual using IPW
through e(X,z). This construction allows auxiliary data (with w = 0) to contribute information
through g(X,z), even though y is unobserved. For brevity, we sometimes suppress the dependency
on X and z in e(·) and g(·) when clear from the context.
We now propose the GAI algorithm used to estimate the target parameters β∗. Algorithm 1
summarizes the full procedure. GAI implements a cross-fitted estimation procedure that integrates
human-labeled and AI-augmented data. We begin by partitioning all data D into K folds. For each
fold k, the algorithm proceeds in two steps. In step 1, we estimate the nuisance functions via flexible
machine learning methods: the labeling propensity be(k)(X,z) is estimated using all observations not
in fold Ik, while the conditional expectation bg(k)(X,z) is estimated using only primary observations
not in fold Ik (since estimating g requires observing y). We then compute out-of-sample predictions
for observations in fold Ik. In step 2, we aggregate the score functions across all folds and obtain


--- Page 14 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
14
Algorithm 1 Generative Augmented Inference
Input: Data D = DP ∪DA, number of folds K
1: Randomly partition all data D into K folds I1,...,IK
2: for k = 1,...,K do
3:
Nuisance estimation:
4:
Estimate be(k)(X,z) using all observations in D \ Ik
5:
Estimate bg(k)(X,z) using primary observations in D \ Ik
6:
Compute out-of-sample predictions be(k)
i
, bg(k)
i
for each i ∈Ik
7: end for
8: Target estimation:
9:
Obtain bβ by minimizing the norm of the average score across folds:

1
n
K
X
k=1
X
i∈Ik
ψi(be(k), bg(k); bβ)
 ⩽inf
β∈B

1
n
K
X
k=1
X
i∈Ik
ψi(be(k), bg(k);β)
 + oP(n−1/2)
10: Variance estimation:
11:
Compute b
ψi = ψi(be(k), bg(k); bβ) for each i ∈Ik, and estimate:
bJ = 1
n
K
X
k=1
X
i∈Ik
X⊤
i ∇2b(Xi bβ)Xi,
bΣ = bJ−1
 
1
n
K
X
k=1
X
i∈Ik
b
ψi b
ψ⊤
i
!
bJ−1
12:
where b
ψi = ψi(be(k), bg(k); bβ)
13: return
bβ, bΣ
bβ by minimizing the norm of this aggregated score. Finally, we estimate the asymptotic variance
using the sandwich formula from Theorem 1.
GAI enables valid inference under flexible AI-generated data. In Section 5, we provide theoretical
support for GAI and formally analyze how it addresses the aforementioned challenges. Section
6 presents empirical validations of its practical performance. We now turn to implementation
considerations, offering practical guidance for applying GAI in real-world settings.
4.3.
Hyperparameter Selection for Nuisance Estimation
Because GAI’s score function satisfies Neyman orthogonality, first-order errors in estimating the
nuisance functions g(X,z) and e(X,z) do not affect the asymptotic distribution of bβ (Chernozhukov
et al. 2018). Model selection for the nuisance estimators is therefore not central to the method’s
validity—a reasonable fixed specification (e.g., ridge-regularized logistic regression) is sufficient in
most applications.
When abundant data are available, however, practitioners may still wish to tune hyperparameters
to improve finite-sample performance. We propose a nested cross-validation procedure that preserves
the independence structure required for valid inference: within each outer fold k of the cross-fitting


--- Page 15 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
15
procedure, an inner cross-validation loop selects the best model configuration using only data from
the remaining K −1 folds, evaluating prediction loss on primary observations in the inner validation
set. This ensures that model selection does not contaminate the out-of-fold predictions used for final
inference. We demonstrate this procedure in the retail pricing experiment (Section 6.2), searching
over 8 configurations spanning three model classes.
5.
Theoretical Guarantees
Here we present the theoretical guarantees of GAI: we establish its asymptotic normality and strong
dominance over primary-only estimators, and then analyze the sources of its efficiency improvement.
5.1.
Asymptotic Normality and Strong Dominance
The theoretical properties we discuss here are built upon the following assumptions:
Assumption 1 (Regularity). (i) X ∈X is bounded; (ii) b(·) is twice continuously differentiable
with ∇2b(θ) ≻0 on Θ; (iii) E[X⊤X] is positive definite; (iv) ∥Cov(y |X,z)∥⩽˜σ2.
Assumption 2 (ML Convergence Rate). There exists α(n) ↓0 and r1 + r2 ⩾1/2 such that:
∥be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)∥P,2 ⩽α(n)/nr1
(8)
∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z)∥P,2 ⩽α(n)/nr2
(9)
and supX,z |be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)| →P 0.
The product rate condition r1 + r2 ⩾1/2 is a standard requirement in semiparametric estimation
with machine-learned nuisance functions. Analogous conditions appear in policy learning (Athey and
Wager 2021) and causal inference with random forests (Wager and Athey 2018, Athey et al. 2019).
The condition is easily satisfied when both nuisance estimators converge at rate n−1/4 or faster.
This mild requirement is met by a wide range of modern ML methods under standard smoothness
or sparsity conditions: Lasso and its variants achieve n−1/4 rates in sparse high-dimensional models
(Bickel et al. 2009, B¨uhlmann and van de Geer 2011); random forests and kernel methods attain
these rates under mild regularity conditions (Wager and Athey 2018); neural networks achieve them
when the target function admits a suitable compositional structure (Farrell et al. 2021); and boosting
methods reach comparable rates under appropriate complexity constraints (Luo and Spindler 2016).
We refer to Chernozhukov et al. (2018) for a thorough discussion. Under these assumptions, our
estimator has the following properties. Define the information matrix J := E[X⊤∇2b(Xβ∗)X].
Theorem 1 (Asymptotic Normality). Under Assumptions 1–2,
√n( bβ −β∗) ⇝N(0,ΣGAI)
(10)
where ΣGAI = J−1E[ψ
 Ξ;e∗,g∗;β∗
ψ
 Ξi;e∗,g∗;β∗⊤]J−1.


--- Page 16 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
16
The proof (Online Appendix C.1) proceeds by: (1) establishing score validity and Neyman
orthogonality (Lemma 1 and Lemma 2); (2) proving consistency via convexity arguments (Lemma 3);
(3) deriving the asymptotic expansion using Donsker theory.
In typical applications where human labels are collected via random sampling—such as randomly
selecting respondents for annotation, randomly assigning observations to human review, or randomly
subsampling from a larger dataset—we have e(X,z) = ρ ⩽1 (constant) and w is independent of
(X,y,z). Under these conditions, we prove the following result showing that GAI strictly dominates
the benchmark estimator that uses only primary data whenever the AI outputs are informative,
either by providing a better representation of X or by containing extra information beyond X.
Corollary 1 (Dominance over Primary-Only). Let bβP be estimator obtained through
using only human data only, i.e., a solution to P
i∈DP ∇βℓ(X,y;β) = 0. If e(X,z) = ρ
and w is independent of (X,y,z), it holds that √n

bβP −β∗
⇝N (0, ΣP), where ΣP =
1
ρJ−1E[∇βℓ(X,y;β∗)∇βℓ(X,y;β∗)⊤]J−1 and ΣP ⪰ΣGAI. Also, ΣP ≻ΣGAI as long as ρ < 1 and
E

X⊤ ∇b
 Xβ∗
−E[y |X,z]

·
 ∇b
 Xβ∗
−E[y |X,z]
⊤X

≻0.
It is well-known that estimators based on Neyman-orthogonal score functions are semi-parametric
efficient in many settings, for example, when the loss function model is correctly specified as the
log-likelihood (Van der Vaart 2000, Chernozhukov et al. 2018). However, this is not necessarily true
in our setting due to model misspecification, so the dominance result given above is remarkable.
Corollary 1 establishes a “safe default” property: under random labeling, adopting GAI can never
degrade performance relative to ignoring the AI data entirely, and will strictly improve performance
whenever the AI outputs carry any predictive information. This guarantee is operationally valuable
because it eliminates the risk of “doing worse by trying to use AI data,” which is a real concern
with methods whose performance depends on prediction quality.
The random selection condition (e(X,z) = ρ constant) is essential for the dominance guarantee.
In Online Appendix D, we provide a constructive example showing that dominance can fail when
the labeling probability e(X,z) depends non-trivially on covariates or AI outputs. Intuitively, if
human labeling is strategically directed toward observations where the outcome is more predictable
(e.g., labeling “easy” cases), the unlabeled observations may contribute noise rather than signal.
When labeling is non-random, the unlabeled set may be systematically harder to predict, and
the augmentation term can amplify noise rather than reduce it. The fundamental issue is that
strategic labeling creates a selection effect that can make the labeled sample more informative per
observation than the unlabeled sample, potentially reversing the efficiency ordering. In practice,
the random selection condition is satisfied when human labels are collected via random sampling,


--- Page 17 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
17
stratified sampling based only on observed covariates, or other designs where labeling probability
does not depend on outcomes or AI predictions conditional on covariates. We discuss extensions to
non-random labeling designs as a direction for future work in Section 7.
It is also instructive to compare our approach with PPI (Angelopoulos et al. 2023a,b), which
further highlights the generality of GAI for AI-data augmentation. The comparison reveals two key
differences. First, PPI treats AI outputs as surrogate labels for y and therefore cannot be directly
applied when z is categorically different from y—precisely the setting that motivates our framework,
as discussed in the introduction. Second, PPI’s confidence-interval construction and statistical
guarantees require z to be a deterministic function based solely on X. However, AI-generated data
differs in two key ways: (i) z may be inherently stochastic due to the internal randomization of
AI models; and more fundamentally,(ii) z may depend on predictive information beyond X, as in
our retail pricing experiment with digital twins (see Example 1 for details). In such cases, the
PPI-based methods do not apply and might only inflate variance relative to using human labels
alone, whereas GAI, by Corollary 1, is guaranteed to weakly dominate the primary-only estimator.
In Appendix A, we construct an example where PPI increases variance, and PPI++ ignores all
AI data (thus becomes equivalent to the human data-only estimator), while GAI substantially
reduces variance. Fundamentally, PPI imposes y ⊥z | X by construction as it builds on z = f(X).
In contract, GAI allows y ∼z | X, which is becoming more representative of common AI data
generation regimes, such as the digital twins. More broadly, GAI highlights the distinction between
“AI-based generation” and “machine learning-based prediction”: the representational power of AI
models creates the possibility of recovering unobservable information that govern the true DGP,
beyond what is available from (X,y) alone.
5.2.
Sources of Variance Reduction
The proof of Corollary 1 (Online Appendix C.2) also reveals that the variance reduction arises
from a specific structure in the score function. To provide deeper insight into when and why GAI
achieves variance reduction, we formalize this decomposition in the following corollary.
Corollary 2 (Variance Decomposition). Under the conditions of Corollary 1, the variance
gain of GAI over primary-only estimation decomposes as:
ΣP −ΣGAI ∝
(1
ρ −1)
| {z }
(I) Gain from sample expansion
·
(
E

X⊤
∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X]

∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X]
⊤
X

|
{z
}
(II) Potential gain from representational power of z
+ E

X⊤
E[y | X] −E[y | X,z]

E[y | X] −E[y | X,z]
⊤
X

|
{z
}
(III) Gain from extra information from z given X
)
,
(11)
where ρ = nP/n ∈(0,1) is the fraction of labeled observations.


--- Page 18 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
18
Both terms (II) and (III) in Equation 11 are positive semidefinite. The decomposition is additive
because the cross-product between (II) and (III) vanishes by the law of iterated expectations (See
Online Appendix C.6 for detailed proof). This decomposition identifies three distinct sources of
variance reduction:
Source (I): Sample Expansion. The factor 1/ρ−1 captures the variance reduction from expanding
the effective sample size. Primary-only estimation uses only the nP labeled observations, whereas
GAI leverages both labeled and auxiliary observations. If either term (II) or term (III) is positive
definite, as the auxiliary sample grows relative to the primary sample (i.e., ρ →0), this factor
increases, amplifying the variance reduction.
Source (II): Representational Power of z. This term captures the representational power of z when
the ground truth model is mis-specified, meaning ∇b(Xβ∗) ̸= E[y | X]. GAI could achieve variance
reduction even if z contains no information beyond X, i.e., y ⊥z | X. This occurs because the true
conditional expectation function E[y | X] is unknown and may be highly complex, falling outside the
canonical GLM family. Model misspecification ensures the term (II) to be positive definite and allows
GAI to realize variance reduction through sample expansion. Beyond this asymptotic improvement,
GAI also yields a gain in finite-sample performance when z, leveraging its pre-trained knowledge,
provides a better representation of X. Specifically, if E[y | X] is highly complex, estimating it using
only the limited primary sample is challenging. The auxiliary representation g(X,z) leverages z
to capture part of this complexity, thereby facilitating learning in small samples. For example, in
Example 2, directly estimating P(y|X) from primary data alone is challenging, whereas incorporating
z as an additional feature allows even a simple logistic regression model to recover P(y|X) effectively.
This illustrates one source of variance reduction achieved by GAI.
Source (III): Extra Information in z Given X. This term captures the additional predictive power
of z for y beyond what X alone provides. It is strictly positive definite whenever y ̸⊥z | X, i.e.,
whenever knowing z helps predict y even after conditioning on X. This reveals another source of
gain: if the auxiliary information provides additional signal about the outcome, GAI can exploit
this through the conditional expectation E[y | X,z].
6.
Experiments
We evaluate GAI across three empirical applications that span materially different auxiliary data
regimes. We deliberately order these applications so that the conditions become progressively
more favorable for PPI-based methods, making GAI’s sustained advantage increasingly difficult to
attribute to any single feature of the data.
First, a vaccine conjoint analysis (Section 6.1) uses high-dimensional LLM embeddings derived
from near-random predictions (54% accuracy) with no extra information (y ⊥z | X). This is the


--- Page 19 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
19
most demanding setting for any augmentation method and illustrates GAI’s unique ability to extract
signal from unstructured AI outputs that PPI-based methods cannot even accept as input. Second, a
retail pricing study (Section 6.2) places all methods on a level playing field: every estimator receives
the same binary AI prediction. Since the digital twin is trained on persona features beyond price, z
provides extra predictive information (y ̸⊥z | X), yet GAI’s advantage stems from its methodological
approach, not from a data advantage. We also illustrate the hyperparameter selection procedure
(Section 4.3). Third, a health insurance census analysis (Section 6.3) evaluates GAI on PPI’s home
turf: well-calibrated ML predictions with 85% accuracy and extra information (y ̸⊥z | X), using the
dataset and AI representations constructed by the PPI authors themselves.
Evaluation Metrics. Across all three applications, we evaluate each method along two comple-
mentary dimensions: point estimation and inference quality.
1. Point estimation, measured by mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) relative to ground-
truth parameters β∗:
MAPE = 100
d
d
X
j=1
|bβj −β∗
j |
|β∗
j | + c ,
(12)
where d is the number of parameters. Following prior work (Wang et al. 2024), we set c = 1 in the
conjoint and pricing studies to stabilize ratios when |β∗
j | is close to zero. To be consistent with
Angelopoulos et al. (2023a), we set c = 0 in the census study. MAPE summarizes the average
percentage deviation of estimated coefficients from their true values, with lower values indicating
more accurate estimation.
2. Inference quality, measured by three complementary metrics: (a) confidence interval coverage—
the empirical frequency with which 95% confidence intervals contain the true parameter value,
where valid inference requires coverage near the nominal 95% level; (b) confidence interval
width—the average width of 95% confidence intervals, where narrower intervals indicate more
precise inference but only if coverage remains valid; and (c) decision errors—cases where inference
leads to incorrect managerial decisions1.
Benchmark Methods. We compare GAI against four benchmark approaches that represent the
main alternatives available to practitioners:
1. Primary: Maximum likelihood estimation using only human-labeled data, ignoring all AI-
generated information. This approach provides valid inference but may lack precision when
human labels are scarce.
1 We define such errors in two ways: (i) CIs that exclude the true parameter value and whose lower and upper bounds
both indicate the opposite sign of the true effect; and (ii) CIs that exclude the true value but span zero, thereby
leading managers to incorrectly conclude an effect is of the opposite sign or not significant


--- Page 20 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
20
2. Naive: Maximum likelihood estimation that pools human and AI labels without correction,
treating AI outputs as if they were human labels. This approach is simple but can introduce
substantial bias when AI predictions differ systematically from human judgments.
3. PPI: The prediction-powered inference approach of Angelopoulos et al. (2023a), which treats
AI outputs as noisy proxies for the outcome and constructs confidence intervals that adapt to
prediction quality.
4. PPI++: A computationally efficient variant of PPI (Angelopoulos et al. 2023b) that tunes a
shrinkage parameter to optimize interval width.
Before presenting the detailed results, we highlight the main empirical findings that emerge
consistently across all three applications. GAI delivers substantial improvements in point estimation
accuracy, reducing MAPE by 50–75% relative to the strongest benchmark in each setting. These
gains translate into dramatic label savings: in most applications, GAI with the smallest primary
sample outperforms Primary with the largest. Regarding inference, GAI’s confidence intervals attain
coverage at or above the nominal 95% level in nearly every configuration, whereas PPI++ frequently
undercovers (as low as 83% in the census study). Despite this higher coverage, GAI’s intervals
are always better or at least comparable in width to those of PPI++. Decision quality follows
the same pattern—GAI achieves the lowest decision error rates across all studies, often by a wide
margin. In other words, GAI achieves substantially better coverage and decision quality without
meaningful sacrifice in interval precision. The consistency of these findings across three diverse
applications—spanning different auxiliary data formats, information structures, and prediction
accuracy levels—demonstrates the broad applicability of our approach.
6.1.
Vaccine Conjoint Analysis
This application presents the most demanding test for AI-augmented estimation: the LLM’s discrete
predictions are barely better than a coin flip (54% accuracy), and the AI observes no information
beyond the covariates already in the model (y ⊥z | X). Any gains must therefore arise from GAI’s
ability to extract useful structure from the AI’s outputs—either discrete labels or high-dimensional
embeddings of the reasoning process. This setting showcases GAI’s capability to leverage AI outputs
in multiple forms, even when PPI-based methods struggle to utilize them effectively.
Conjoint analysis is a standard tool in marketing for recovering consumer preference parameters
from discrete choice data (Green and Srinivasan 1990, Louviere et al. 2000). Respondents repeatedly
choose among product alternatives described by attribute bundles, and researchers infer the
underlying part-worth utilities governing these choices.
Data. Following Wang et al. (2024), we utilize a vaccine conjoint experiment dataset with
1,971 respondents from Kreps et al. (2020). Each task presents two hypothetical vaccines with 11


--- Page 21 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
21
attributes and lets respondents select their preferred option. Each respondent was asked to take
five tasks in the survey. We estimate the benchmark “ground truth” parameters β∗∈R11 by fitting
the same logistic choice model to the full human dataset. We exclude respondents who never select
any vaccine option, as many public LLMs are restricted from choosing an opt-out option when
generating auxiliary labels; this exclusion is applied consistently both when constructing β∗and
when forming experimental subsamples.
AI Representations. For each choice task, Wang et al. (2024) prompts LLMs using CoT
reasoning to generate detailed deliberation about the vaccine choice before making a prediction,
recording the decision as labels z ∈{−1,0,1} (abstain, option 1, or option 2).2 We evaluate multiple
auxiliary generators that vary in the underlying model. Across these configurations, we obtain
consistent, qualitatively similar results; for brevity, we report GPT-4o in the main text and defer
the full set of robustness results to Online Appendix E.1.3. We consider two forms of auxiliary
representation: (1) Labels: the discrete choice prediction z ∈{−1,0,1}, which can be used by both
GAI and PPI-based methods; and (2) Embeddings: the full LLM response text converted into a
vector representation using OpenAI’s text-embedding-3-large model, yielding z ∈R3072 that capture
the semantic content of the LLM’s reasoning. The embedding encodes not just the predicted choice,
but also the underlying reasoning patterns, attribute considerations, and decision heuristics that
the LLM employs.
As explained, GPT-4o achieves low accuracy in this setting, barely better than random guessing
in a binary choice task, and the LLM observes only the same vaccine attributes that comprise X,
which implies y ⊥z | X. Any efficiency gains must therefore arise from GAI’s sample expansion
and representational power (Source (I) and (II) in Corollary 2) rather than from extra information.
PPI-based methods struggle in this setting: while they can use the discrete labels, the low prediction
accuracy limits their effectiveness, and they cannot directly utilize the high-dimensional embeddings.
Experimental Design. We construct repeated experiments by drawing a primary sample of
size nP ∈{50,100,150,200} and an auxiliary sample of size nA = 1000 from the available task pool.3
For each (nP,nA) configuration, we run 50 independent trials. Within each trial, the underlying
random draw of observations is held fixed across methods to ensure fair comparison. All reported
statistics are averaged over the 50 trials.
GAI Implementation. We implement GAI with both auxiliary representations using 5-fold cross-
fitting. For GAI (Embeddings), given the high dimensionality of the embedding space (dz = 3,072),
we use strong ℓ2 regularization: logistic regression with ridge penalty (regularization strength
2 See Wang et al. (2024) for full details on the AI representation construction and replication materials.
3 We randomly sample nP /5 respondents and nA/5 respondents and use all their five choices to compose the primary
set and auxiliary set.


--- Page 22 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
22
Table 1
Benchmark Comparison for Conjoint Analysis: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
Primary
32.02 25.27 19.67 19.01 97.82 92.73 92.55 88.00 2.43 1.51 1.19 1.01
Naive
48.52 45.75 43.33 40.29 26.55 26.36 26.36 27.09 0.56 0.53 0.51 0.49
PPI
–
44.57 32.96 29.21 99.82 98.00 95.82 92.91 9.28 2.71 1.94 1.58
PPI++
–
29.69 22.96 21.00 94.55 89.09 90.91 85.09 2.44 1.52 1.19 1.00
GAI (Labels)
16.86 17.52 15.97 16.64 99.82 97.09 94.73 90.91 1.94 1.36 1.11 0.96
GAI (Embeddings) 16.50 17.23 15.73 16.24 99.45 98.55 96.91 94.55 2.11 1.50 1.21 1.05
Notes: A “–” symbol indicates cases where the value exceeds 1,000, which occurs because PPI-based methods can
suffer from singularity problems in small primary samples.
C = 0.01, maximum 2,000 iterations). The embeddings are standardized to zero mean and unit
variance before model training. For GAI (Labels), we use ℓ2-regularized logistic regression with
C = 0.05. In each fold, we fit g(X,z) on four-fifths of the primary data and generate out-of-sample
predictions for the held-out primary fold as well as for all auxiliary observations. This procedure is
repeated across the five folds, and the resulting predictions for each auxiliary observation bg(X,z) are
averaged. Because auxiliary data are never used in training, all predictions for auxiliary observations
are strictly out of sample. Predictions for primary observations are also out of sample by construction
due to cross-fitting. Since primary and auxiliary observations are randomly sampled from the same
underlying population, we set be(X,z) to the constant nP/(nP + nA).
Under the MNL model, we then estimate bβ by solving a single optimization problem that
minimizes the GAI-adjusted cross-entropy loss:
bβ = arg min
β
1
n
n
X
i=1
"
−
J
X
j=1
bτij log pij(β)
#
,
where
bτij = bg(Xi,zi)

1 −1
be

+ wiyij
be
, 4
and
pij(β) =
exp(X⊤
ijβ)
PJ
ℓ=1 exp(X⊤
iℓβ)
.
This estimator coincides with the general procedure described in Algorithm 1. Finally, we compute
standard errors according to Theorem 1.
Main Results. Table 1 reports estimation accuracy and inference quality across four primary
sample sizes, with results averaged over 50 independent trials.
Point Estimation. The most striking result is the magnitude of GAI’s advantage. Panel (a) shows
that both GAI variants achieve MAPE of 16–17% across all sample sizes—nearly flat, indicating that
both labels and embeddings provide sufficient signal to stabilize estimates even with very few human
labels. Between the two representations, GAI (Embeddings) achieves consistently lower MAPE than
4 We clip and normalize bτi to derive well-defined probability for numerical stability.


--- Page 23 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
23
GAI (Labels) across all sample sizes, suggesting that the richer semantic content in embeddings
provides additional signal for point estimation. By contrast, the Primary estimator ranges from
32% at nP = 50 down to 19% at nP = 200, reflecting its dependence on sample size. The practical
implication is dramatic: GAI with just 50 labels (16.5% MAPE) outperforms Primary with 200
labels (19.0% MAPE), representing more than 75% reduction in required human annotations. Naive
pooling performs worst (40–49% MAPE), confirming that treating inaccurate LLM predictions as
ground-truth labels is counterproductive. PPI-based methods encounter numerical instability at
small sample sizes (denoted “–” in the table), and when stable, their MAPEs remain substantially
above GAI. Paired t-tests confirm that all improvements are statistically significant (Online
Appendix E.1.1).
Inference Quality. Panels (b) and (c) together reveal that GAI’s estimation gains do not come at the
cost of inference quality—if anything, GAI produces the most reliable confidence intervals. Coverage
(Panel b) shows that GAI (Embeddings) achieves the highest coverage (95–99%), consistently
meeting or exceeding the nominal level, while GAI (Labels) also maintains valid coverage (91–100%).
In contrast, PPI++ undercovers throughout (85–95%), and Primary drops to 88% at nP = 200.
Naive pooling fails catastrophically (26–27%). Regarding interval width (Panel c), GAI (Labels)
produces the narrowest intervals among valid methods (1.94 at nP = 50, narrowing to 0.96 at
nP = 200). A potential reason of why GAI (Labels) yields tighter intervals than GAI (Embeddings)
is that the discrete label has better representational power than the high-dimensional embeddings.
GAI (Embeddings) maintains comparable widths to PPI++, while PPI produces extremely wide
intervals at small samples (9.28 at nP = 50), reflecting overly conservative inference. This comparison
illustrates a trade-off: embeddings yield smaller MAPE and better coverage while labels achieve
narrower intervals, with both GAI variants outperforming PPI-based methods. Paired t-tests confirm
these patterns (Online Appendix E.1.1). In terms of decision quality, GAI (Embeddings) achieves
the lowest decision error rate—averaging 2.6% compared to 6.9% for Primary, 3.2% for PPI, 8.7%
for PPI++, and 20.4% for Naive (Online Appendix E.1.2).
The source of GAI’s advantage in this setting is its ability to leverage AI outputs as informative
features. The LLM’s CoT reasoning generates both discrete choice labels and rich text that can be
converted to high-dimensional embeddings. The embeddings capture semantic information about
attribute trade-offs and decision heuristics, yielding superior coverage, while the discrete labels—
despite their simplicity—enable tighter confidence intervals, potentially because they provide a
more direct representation of the outcome structure. Both representations allow GAI to extract
predictive signal without requiring the LLM’s predictions to be accurate surrogates for human
choices. Additional robustness checks across different LLMs are reported in Online Appendix E.1.3.
Finally, we mention that GPT-4o reasoning power has been surpassed by more recent releases (e.g,


--- Page 24 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
24
GPT-5.3 at the time of writing), and new models are coming out frequently with much stronger
reasoning capabilities. As a result, in practical scenarios we suspect that such embedding-based
performance can be even stronger than what is presented in this empirical study.
6.2.
Retail Pricing Study
Having established that GAI can extract signal from unstructured, near-random AI outputs, we
now ask a sharper question: when every method receives the same auxiliary information, does
GAI’s feature-based approach still outperform the surrogate-label strategy of PPI? This application
provides a controlled comparison on a level playing field.
We consider the problem of estimating a logistic demand model that relates purchase decisions
to price. The AI purchase predictions exhibit systematic bias (30% vs. 44% actual purchase rate),
and we restrict all methods to the same binary AI prediction to ensure a fair comparison.
Data. We use the data and pricing experiment from Toubia et al. (2025), which contains 2,058
participants who completed over 500 questions across four survey waves spanning diverse domains
including demographics, personality traits, values, and behavioral preferences. Each participant
was presented with 40 products at randomized prices and asked to indicate whether they would
purchase each item. We evaluate our methods on all products and observe consistent results. For
conciseness, we report the results of the household cleaning product in the main text and show
the comprehensive performance across products in Online Appendix E.2.3. The outcome model
uses only price as the covariate: X = [1,price] ∈Rn×2, yielding a two-parameter logistic regression
(d = 2). The ground-truth parameters β∗∈R2 are estimated by fitting a logistic regression to the
full dataset. The empirical purchase rate is 44%, and the AI predictions agree with actual outcomes
67% of the time.
AI Representations. The AI purchase labels z ∈{0,1} are generated by “digital twins” in
Toubia et al. (2025)—LLM-based simulations of individual participants constructed from their survey
responses.5 For each participant, a persona profile is created by concatenating their answers to the
500+ survey questions, capturing demographics, personality traits, values, and stated preferences.
This profile is then provided as context to LLMs, which is prompted to simulate whether that
specific individual would purchase each product at the given price. The AI prediction rate (30.07%)
substantially underestimates the true purchase rate (44.10%), indicating systematic bias. Since the
digital twin is trained on persona and demographic features that are not included in the outcome
model’s covariates X, the AI prediction carries extra predictive information: y ̸⊥z | X.
In our main analysis, we restrict the auxiliary information to the binary AI purchase prediction:
z ∈{0,1}. This ensures that both GAI and PPI-based methods have access to identical information,
5 See Toubia et al. (2025) for full details on the AI representation construction and replication materials.


--- Page 25 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
25
Table 2
Benchmark Comparison for Pricing Study: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary 22.36 16.03 12.47
9.59
9.53
95.00
97.00
95.00
99.00
92.00 1.17 0.82 0.66 0.57 0.51
Naive
22.22 21.97 19.99 19.67 19.43
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00 0.37 0.35 0.33 0.32 0.31
PPI
26.91 15.31 14.10 13.98 12.88
95.00
98.00
97.00
94.00
96.00 1.40 1.01 0.85 0.75 0.69
PPI++
22.15 14.16 11.56
9.86
9.66
94.00
99.00
93.00
99.00
92.00 1.10 0.78 0.64 0.55 0.49
GAI
12.43
9.14
8.74
6.57
7.60
100.00 100.00 99.00 100.00 96.00 1.16 0.81 0.65 0.56 0.50
isolating the effect of the estimation strategy. In Online Appendix F, we extend to high-dimensional
auxiliary information z ∈R115 including persona and demographic features.
Experimental Design. We draw primary samples of size nP ∈{100,200,300,400,500} with a
fixed auxiliary sample of nA = 1,000. As in the conjoint study, we run 50 independent trials per
configuration with the same random draw held fixed across methods.
GAI Implementation. We use 5-fold cross-fitting with model selection to estimate the nuisance
function g(X,z). Since primary and auxiliary observations are randomly sampled from the same
underlying population, we set be(X,z) to the constant be = nP/(nP + nA).
Model Selection. This application illustrates the cross-validation procedure described in
Section 4.3. We estimate g(X,z) by searching over 8 configurations spanning three model classes:
regularized logistic regression (GLM with L1/L2 penalties and C ∈{0.01,0.1}), Random Forest
(depth ∈{5,10}), and LightGBM (learning rate ∈{0.05,0.1}). Within each of the 5 outer folds, we
perform cross-validation to select the best configuration using only the data from the remaining 4
folds. This nested structure ensures that model selection does not compromise the independence
required for valid inference. Across trials, regularized logistic regression configurations are most
frequently selected (particularly L1-penalized GLM with C = 0.1), followed by Random Forest, with
selection patterns varying by sample size and fold.
Main Results. Results in Table 2 are across five primary sample sizes, averaged over 50 trials.
Point Estimation. Panel (a) confirms that GAI outperforms all benchmarks even when given the
same information. GAI achieves MAPE of 6.6–12.4%, compared to 9.5–22.4% for Primary, 9.7–22.2%
for PPI++, and 12.9–26.9% for PPI. Naive pooling plateaus around 20% regardless of sample
size, reflecting persistent bias. The label savings remain substantial: GAI with 100 labels (12.4%
MAPE) matches Primary with 300 labels (12.5% MAPE), a 67% reduction in annotation cost. All
improvements are statistically significant by paired t-tests (Online Appendix E.2.1). Consistent with
these accuracy gains, Figure 2 shows that GAI yields parameter estimates that are more tightly
concentrated around the ground truth for both the intercept and price coefficient, whereas PPI and
PPI++ exhibit substantially greater dispersion.


--- Page 26 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
26
Intercept
Price
Feature
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
Parameter Value
PPI
PPI++
GAI
Ground Truth
Figure 2
Distribution of Estimates (PPI, PPI++, GAI) for Pricing Study (nP = 100)
Inference Quality. GAI’s confidence intervals maintain coverage at or above 96% across all
sample sizes (Panel b), reaching 100% at nP ∈{100,200,400}. PPI and PPI++ also maintain
near-nominal coverage (92–99%), while Naive severely undercovers at 50%. Interval widths (Panel
c) are comparable across GAI, Primary, and PPI++, while PPI intervals are noticeably wider.
Paired t-tests indicate that PPI++ achieves modestly narrower intervals in this study, while GAI
(Labels) produces significantly narrower intervals than PPI++ in the conjoint analysis (Table 1);
overall, the two methods generate comparable CI widths with neither consistently dominating. GAI
achieves a 0.2% decision error rate, the lowest among all methods (Online Appendix E.2.2).
The key insight from this study is that GAI’s advantage is methodological, not informational.
Both GAI and PPI receive the same two-dimensional covariate vector X = (1,price)⊤and the same
binary AI prediction z. Yet GAI substantially outperforms PPI-based methods because it models the
conditional expectation g(X,z) = E[y | X,z], extracting information from the AI prediction without
assuming it is an unbiased proxy for the outcome. PPI, by contrast, treats the AI prediction as a
surrogate label, which introduces systematic error when the AI underpredicts purchases (30% vs.
44%). In Online Appendix F, we show that GAI’s advantages extend further when z ∈R115 includes
persona and demographic features. Online Appendix G provides a robustness check confirming
that GAI still outperforms benchmarks even when the AI representation does not provide extra
information beyond the covariates.
6.3.
Health Insurance Census Analysis
Our final application tests GAI on PPI’s home turf: well-calibrated, continuous AI predictions with
high accuracy, using the dataset and AI representations constructed by the PPI authors themselves
(Angelopoulos et al. 2023a). This is the regime most favorable to PPI-based methods; if GAI
holds up here as well, practitioners need not switch estimators when moving from unstructured to
well-calibrated AI outputs.


--- Page 27 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
27
Table 3
Benchmark Comparison for Census Analysis: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width (10−5)
Method
100
250
500
750
1000
100
250
500
750
1000
100
250
500
750 1000
Primary 979.83 563.85 480.99 320.68 291.80
80.00
78.00
78.00
82.00 78.00 2.16 1.31 0.92 0.74 0.65
Naive
407.95 384.70 324.56 263.13 240.38
30.00
31.00
34.00
38.00 38.00 0.61 0.58 0.53 0.49 0.46
PPI
821.83 518.82 383.92 295.40 270.66
88.00
94.00
95.00
96.00 94.00 2.48 1.85 1.29 1.10 0.96
PPI++
866.27 508.75 404.75 299.52 282.43
83.00
88.00
91.00
93.00 89.00 2.24 1.70 1.24 1.02 0.89
GAI
161.37 147.93 147.38 139.65 141.49 100.00 100.00 100.00 99.00 99.00 2.64 1.79 1.28 1.08 0.93
Data. We use the California census healthcare dataset with 318,215 individuals to investigate
the relationship between private health insurance coverage (y ∈{0,1}) and income using a logistic
model. Ground truth of logistic regression coefficients β∗∈R2 is estimated using all data.
AI Representations. Auxiliary predictions are produced by Angelopoulos et al. (2023a) using a
gradient boosting classifier trained on a richer feature set including income, race, gender, and other
covariates.6 The model outputs predicted probabilities z = P(y = 1|all features) with approximately
85% accuracy. Since the classifier uses features beyond the income covariate in X, the AI prediction
provides extra information: y ̸⊥z | X. Unlike the conjoint analysis, this representation is well-
calibrated.
GAI Implementation. Because z already represents an accurate estimate of the conditional
mean based on richer features, learning an additional g(X,z) offers limited benefit. We therefore
set g(X,z) = z directly, and e(X,z) to the constant nP/(nP + nA). This yields a simplified version
of our estimator requiring no first-stage nuisance estimation or cross-fitting.
Experimental Design. We vary nP ∈{100,250,500,750,1000} with nA = 2000, again running
50 trials per configuration.
Main Results. Table 3 summarizes performance across five primary sample sizes. The most
striking finding is inferential: every other method fails to maintain nominal coverage, yet GAI
attains 99–100% throughout (Panel b). Primary and Naive exhibit severe undercoverage (30–82%),
and PPI++ ranges from 83% to 93%—consistently below the nominal 95% level. Importantly, GAI
achieves this coverage without inflating its intervals: widths are statistically indistinguishable from
PPI++ at every sample size (Panel c; Online Appendix E.3.1). Point estimation tells a similar story
(Panel a): GAI achieves MAPE of 140–161%, while Primary exceeds 290% even at nP = 1,000 and
PPI-based methods remain above 270%. All pairwise MAPE differences are statistically significant
(Online Appendix E.3.1). The label savings are the most dramatic of our three studies—GAI with
100 labels (161%) surpasses Primary with 1,000 labels (292%), a more than 90% reduction. GAI
6 See Angelopoulos et al. (2023a) for full details on the AI representation construction and replication materials.


--- Page 28 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
28
also achieves zero decision errors across all configurations, compared to 4.8% for Primary, 3.0% for
PPI, 4.2% for PPI++, and 15.8% for Naive (Online Appendix E.3.2).
Taken together, the three applications demonstrate that GAI’s advantages are robust across
auxiliary data regimes: high-dimensional embeddings with y ⊥z | X (conjoint), systematically
biased discrete predictions with y ̸⊥z | X (pricing), and well-calibrated continuous probabilities with
y ̸⊥z | X (census). Whether the AI output is an embedding, a binary label, or a probability; whether
it carries extra information or not; and whether the prediction is accurate or near-random—GAI
consistently delivers substantial improvements in estimation accuracy and decision quality. It does so
while maintaining valid coverage and comparable interval width to the best-performing benchmark.
Additional implementation details and robustness checks are provided in Online Appendix E.
7.
Conclusion
This paper introduces GAI, a framework that enables operations researchers and practitioners to
use AI-generated data for statistical estimation while preserving inferential validity. The central
insight is conceptual: AI outputs should be treated as informative features for predicting human-
generated outcomes, rather than as surrogate labels that replace them. Formalized through Neyman
orthogonality, this perspective supports valid inference across a wide range of AI output quality,
from systematically biased LLM predictions or reasoning texts to well-calibrated forecasts.
Our theory shows that GAI is asymptotically normal with a closed-form variance expression,
allowing standard confidence intervals and hypothesis tests. More importantly, under random
selection into labeling, GAI strictly dominates primary-only estimation in asymptotic efficiency
whenever AI outputs contain predictive information about outcomes, regardless of whether those
outputs are biased or inaccurate. These gains arise through three channels: sample expansion,
representational power of AI, and extra predictive information from AI. Our empirical results across
three applications provide strong evidence to support these predictions.
GAI helps resolve a core tension in data-driven operations management: precise estimation requires
large labeled samples, but human-generated ground truth is costly. By combining a limited number
of human labels with abundant AI-generated data, GAI reduces this burden while maintaining
statistical rigor. Across all applications, GAI consistently matches the precision of substantially
larger human-labeled samples, often reducing labeling needs by more than half. Such gains can
translate into substantial cost savings in settings such as conjoint analysis, demand estimation, and
field experimentation. Although our applications focus on consumer choice and demand estimation,
the framework applies more broadly to operations settings where human labels are scarce and
AI-generated signals are available, including healthcare operations, supply chain forecasting, service
operations, and quality management. In each case, GAI provides a principled way to combine
expensive human judgments with inexpensive AI-generated information.


--- Page 29 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
29
Several limitations suggest promising directions for future research. First, our dominance guaran-
tees rely on random selection into labeling; when labeling is strategically targeted, these guarantees
may fail. Extending the property to non-random labeling settings is therefore an important next
step. Second, integrating GAI into real-time decision systems raises computational challenges,
making online versions of the framework a valuable direction for future work.
More broadly, AI outputs create a statistical setting that is neither standard missing data nor
noisy labeling, but one with auxiliary representations available for all observations. This shifts
the inferential challenge from bias correction toward efficient information extraction. Human
labels remain the gold standard, but AI-generated signals can substantially reduce the amount of
human input needed to achieve a desired level of precision. As AI capabilities continue to advance,
frameworks with rigorous guarantees for human-AI data integration will become increasingly
important for credible empirical research in operations management and beyond.
Acknowledgments
References
Agarwal N, Ashlagi I, Rees MA, Somaini P, Waldinger D (2021) Equilibrium allocations under alternative
waitlist designs: Evidence from deceased donor kidneys. Econometrica 89(1):37–76.
Anderer A, Bastani H, Silberholz J (2022) Adaptive clinical trial designs with surrogates: When should we
bother? Management Science 68(3):1982–2002, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4096.
Andersen PK, Gill RD (1982) Cox’s regression model for counting processes: a large sample study. The
Annals of Statistics 1100–1120.
Angelopoulos AN, Bates S, Cand`es EJ, Jordan MI, Lei L (2023a) Prediction-powered inference. Science
382(6671):669–674.
Angelopoulos AN, Duchi JC, Zrnic T (2023b) Ppi++: Efficient prediction-powered inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.01453 .
Anonymous (2026) Generative augmented inference. Submitted to the International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), under review.
Athey S, Tibshirani J, Wager S (2019) Generalized random forests. The Annals of Statistics 47(2):1148–1178.
Athey S, Wager S (2021) Policy learning with observational data. Econometrica 89(1):133–161.
Ban GY, Keskin NB (2021) Personalized dynamic pricing with machine learning: High-dimensional features
and heterogeneous elasticity. Management Science 67(9):5549–5568, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.
1287/mnsc.2020.3680.
Bang H, Robins JM (2005) Doubly robust estimation in missing data and causal inference models. Biometrics
61(4):962–973.


--- Page 30 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
30
Bertsimas D, Thiele A (2006) A robust optimization approach to inventory theory. Operations Research
54(1):150–168, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.1050.0238.
Besbes O, Muharremoglu A (2013) On implications of demand censoring in the newsvendor problem.
Management Science 59(6):1407–1424, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.1120.1654.
Bickel PJ, Ritov Y, Tsybakov AB (2009) Simultaneous analysis of Lasso and Dantzig selector. The Annals of
Statistics 37(4):1705–1732.
Brown T, et al. (2020) Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33:1877–1901.
B¨uhlmann P, van de Geer S (2011) Statistics for High-Dimensional Data: Methods, Theory and Applications
(Springer).
Chakrabortty A, Cai T (2018) Efficient and adaptive linear regression in semi-supervised settings. The Annals
of Statistics 46(4), ISSN 0090-5364, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1214/17-aos1594.
Chen E, Chen X, Jing W (2025a) Data-driven knowledge transfer in batch q* learning. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 1–25.
Chen Y, Kirshner SN, Ovchinnikov A, Andiappan M, Jenkin T (2025b) A manager and an AI walk into a bar:
Does ChatGPT make biased decisions like we do? Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
27(2):354–368, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/msom.2023.0279.
Chernozhukov V, Chetverikov D, Demirer M, Duflo E, Hansen C, Newey W, Robins J (2018) Double/debiased
machine learning for treatment and structural parameters. The Econometrics Journal 21(1):C1–C68.
Davis AM, Mankad S, Corbett CJ, Katok E (2024) OM Forum—The best of both worlds: Machine learning
and behavioral science in operations management. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management
26(5):1605–1621, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/msom.2022.0553.
Farrell MH, Liang T, Misra S (2021) Deep neural networks for estimation and inference. Econometrica
89(1):181–213.
Gao Y, Li M, Sun S (2023) Field experiments in operations management. Journal of Operations Management
69(4):676–701, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/joom.1240.
Green PE, Srinivasan V (1990) Conjoint analysis in marketing: New developments with implications for
research and practice. Journal of Marketing 54(4):3–19.
Hirano K, Imbens GW, Ridder G (2003) Efficient estimation of average treatment effects using the estimated
propensity score. Econometrica 71(4):1161–1189.
Huang C, Tang Z, Hu S, Jiang R, Zheng X, Ge D, Wang B, Wang Z (2025) Orlm: A customizable framework
in training large models for automated optimization modeling. Operations Research 73(6):2986–3009.
Kalkanci B, Plambeck EL (2020) Managing supplier social and environmental impacts with voluntary versus
mandatory disclosure to investors. Management Science 66(8):3311–3328, URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1287/mnsc.2019.3382.


--- Page 31 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
31
Kallus N, Mao X, Uehara M (2024) Localized debiased machine learning: Efficient inference on quantile
treatment effects and beyond. Journal of Machine Learning Research 25(16):1–59.
Kaynar N, Siddiq A (2023) Estimating effects of incentive contracts in online labor platforms. Management
Science 69(4):2106–2126.
Kok AG, Fisher ML (2007) Demand estimation and assortment optimization under substitution: Methodology
and application. Operations Research 55(6):1001–1021, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.1070.
0409.
Kreps S, Prasad S, Brownstein JS, Hswen Y, Garibaldi BT, Zhang B, Kriner DL (2020) Factors associated with
us adults’ likelihood of accepting covid-19 vaccination. JAMA network open 3(10):e2025594–e2025594.
Lee DH, et al. (2013) Pseudo-label: The simple and efficient semi-supervised learning method for deep neural
networks. Workshop on challenges in representation learning, ICML, volume 3, 896 (Atlanta).
Levi R, Perakis G, Uichanco J (2015) The data-driven newsvendor problem: New bounds and insights.
Operations Research 63(6):1294–1306, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.2015.1422.
Little RJ, Rubin DB (2019) Statistical analysis with missing data (John Wiley & Sons), 3 edition.
Louviere JJ, Hensher DA, Swait JD (2000) Stated choice methods: analysis and applications. Cambridge
University Press .
Luca M, Zervas G (2016) Fake it till you make it: Reputation, competition, and Yelp review fraud. Management
Science 62(12):3412–3427, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2015.2304.
Luo Y, Spindler M (2016) High-dimensional L2 boosting: Rate of convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.08927
.
Miˇsi´c VV, Perakis G (2020) Data analytics in operations management: A review. Manufacturing & Service
Operations Management 22(1):158–169, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/msom.2019.0805.
Newey WK, McFadden D (1994) Large sample estimation and hypothesis testing. Handbook of Econometrics,
volume 4, 2111–2245 (Elsevier).
Nigam K, McCallum AK, Thrun S, Mitchell T (2000) Text classification from labeled and unlabeled documents
using em. Machine learning 39(2):103–134.
OpenAI (2023) Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .
Pan SJ, Yang Q (2009) A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
22(10):1345–1359.
Qi M, Shi Y, Qi Y, Ma C, Yuan R, Wu D, Shen ZJM (2023) A practical end-to-end inventory management
model with deep learning. Management Science 69(2):759–773, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/
mnsc.2022.4564.
Robins JM, Rotnitzky A (1995) Semiparametric efficiency in multivariate regression models with missing
data. Journal of the American Statistical Association 90(429):122–129.


--- Page 32 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
32
Robins JM, Rotnitzky A, Zhao LP (1994) Estimation of regression coefficients when some regressors are not
always observed. Journal of the American Statistical Association 89(427):846–866.
Rubin DB (1976) Inference and missing data. Biometrika 63(3):581–592.
Si N, Zhang F, Zhou Z, Blanchet J (2023) Distributionally robust batch contextual bandits. Management
Science 69(10):5772–5793.
Singhvi D, Singhvi S, Zhang X (2024) A data-driven approach to improve artisans’ productivity in distributed
supply chains. Proceedings of the 25th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation, 244–245.
Tang J, Qi Z, Fang E, Shi C (2025) Offline feature-based pricing under censored demand: A causal inference
approach. Manufacturing & Service Operations Management 27(2):535–553.
Toubia O, Gui GZ, Peng T, Merlau DJ, Li A, Chen H (2025) Database report: Twin-2k-500: A data set for
building digital twins of over 2,000 people based on their answers to over 500 questions. Marketing
Science 44(6):1446–1455.
Vaart Avd, Wellner JA (2023) Empirical processes. Weak Convergence and Empirical Processes: With
Applications to Statistics, 127–384 (Springer).
Van der Vaart AW (2000) Asymptotic statistics, volume 3 (Cambridge university press).
Vulcano G, van Ryzin G, Ratliff R (2012) Estimating primary demand for substitutable products from sales
transaction data. Operations Research 60(2):313–334, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.1110.
1012.
Wager S, Athey S (2018) Estimation and inference of heterogeneous treatment effects using random forests.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 113(523):1228–1242.
Wang M, Zhang DJ, Zhang H (2024) Large language models for market research: A data-augmentation
approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19363 .
Weiss K, Khoshgoftaar TM, Wang D (2016) A survey of transfer learning. Journal of Big Data 3(1):1–40.
Xiong R, Pelger M (2023) Large dimensional latent factor modeling with missing observations and applications
to causal inference. Journal of Econometrics 233(1):271–301.
Zhang DY, Aydin G, Parker GG (2022) Social responsibility auditing in supply chain networks. Management
Science 68(6):4268–4293, URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.2021.4117.
Zhu X, Goldberg AB (2009) Introduction to semi-supervised learning. Synthesis Lectures on Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning 3(1):1–130.


--- Page 33 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
33
Online Appendices
Appendix A:
Example illustrating distinction between GAI and PPI
We construct the following example illustrating the key distinction between GAI and PPI. Let X be a binary
random variable such that P(X = 1) = P(X = −1) = 1
2. Let U be a hidden random variable with E[U] = 0 and
Var(U) = σ2. X and U are independent. We assume that Y is governed by both X and the hidden random
variable as Y = XU. We have E[Y ] = E[X]E[U] = 0 and Var(Y ) = Var(X)Var(U) = σ2. Suppose that the AI
model fails to correctly specify the rule on X, but captures the hidden variable U, outputting Z = U. We
observe two independent datasets:
• DP = {(Xi,Yi,Zi)}nP
i=1 i.i.d.,
• DA = {(Xj,Zj)}nA
j=1 i.i.d..
Suppose our goal is to estimate the mean of Y . Let r = nP/nA. Following Angelopoulos et al. (2023b), given
a fixed constant λ ∈R, the PPI mean estimator can be written as
bθPPI
n,N(λ) = 1
n
n
X
i=1
Yi + λ
 
1
N
N
X
j=1
Zj −1
n
n
X
i=1
Zi
!
.
As n →∞, it is easy to verify that
√n(bθPPI(λ) −0)
d−→N
 0, σ2 1 + λ2(1 + r)

.
Meanwhile, we know that the human data-only estimator is bθP = 1
n
Pn
i=1 Yi, with
√n(bθP
λ −0)
d−→N
 0, σ2
.
Clearly, for any λ ∈R, σ2(1 + λ2(1 + r)) ⩾σ2. The basic PPI corresponds to the case of λ = 1, which inflates
the variance from the human data-only estimator. PPI++ optimizes λ by minimizing the asymptotic variance,
yielding λ∗= 0 (see Example 6.1 of Angelopoulos et al. (2023b).) As a result, PPI++ has no improvement
over the human data-only estimator, as it is essentially discarding all axillary samples.
Under this setup, the AI-signal correlates weakly with the actual human label because it fails to capture the
entire mechanism behind Y (missing X). However, it provides significant information on inferring actual human
label by recovering the hidden variable U. PPI fails to utilize this information. In contract, GAI operates in a
fundamentally different way. Using GAI, we can easily recover the relationship between X and Y , recovering
g∗(X,Z) = XZ with the primary set. Then, the GAI estimator is bθGAI =
1
n+N
Pn
i=1 Yi + PN
j=1 g∗(XjZj)

=
1
n+N
Pn
i=1 Yi + PN
j=1 Yj

, where
√
n + N(bθGAI −θ∗)
d−→N
 0, σ2
,
which always reduces the asymptotic variance from the human data-only estimator and efficiently uses all
data samples.
While this example is stylized, it is constructed to illustrate the key distinction between GAI and PPI.
PPI inherently imposes y ⊥z | X, as z = f(X). In contract, GAI allows y ∼z | X, the latter being more
representative of common AI data generation regimes, such as the digital twin setting in Example 1.
More broadly, GAI highlights the distinction between “AI-based generation” and “machine learning-based
prediction”: the representational power of AI models creates the possibility of recovering information about
unobserved variables U that govern the data-generating process, beyond what is available from (X,Y ) alone.


--- Page 34 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
34
Appendix B:
Auxiliary Example for Section 3.2
Example 2 (y ⊥z | X: Off-the-Shelf LLM Generation). This example follows the setting of Wang
et al. (2024). They consider a conjoint analysis framework in which X denotes the feature vectors of a
choice set with K alternatives, y represents the consumer’s choice, and z is the AI-generated choice. The
model corresponds to b(θ) = log
 1 + PK
j=1 exp(θj)

, yielding a standard MNL formulation. While similar to
Example 1, z may in principle be correlated with y conditional on X, for example when the AI system is
queried using additional customer persona or behavioral data. However, in many applications it is practically
convenient to use LLMs in an off-the-shelf fashion. In such cases both y and z are generated solely from X,
implying y ⊥z | X. Consequently, z does not contain additional information about y beyond what is already
present in X.
Despite this conditional independence, z can still be useful for estimation. If the AI output has strong
representational power and provides a highly informative summary of X, then a simple parameterization
such as
g(j)(X,z) =
exp
 ˇθ⊤x(j) + η[z = j]

1 + P
ℓ∈K exp
 ˇθ⊤x(ℓ) + η[z = ℓ]
 = gj(X,z;θ∗),
∀j ∈K,
as proposed in Online Appendix A of Wang et al. (2024), can approximate P(y = j | X,z) well.
To see the intuition, suppose z = ϕ(X) where ϕ(·) is a complex nonlinear mapping implicitly learned by the
LLM. Recovering an equivalent representation using X alone would require estimating
exp
 ˇθ⊤x(j) + η [ϕ(X) = j]

1 + P
ℓ∈K exp
 ˇθ⊤x(ℓ) + η [ϕ(X) = ℓ]
,
∀j ∈K,
which may be difficult in practice. One might attempt to approximate ϕ(·) using flexible methods such
as polynomial or spline expansions. However, with limited human-labeled data this approach may lead
to substantial model misspecification or overfitting on the small labeled sample DP, making it difficult to
extrapolate y to the full dataset D. In such cases the resulting performance may not be substantially better
than using DP alone and ignoring the auxiliary sample.
Although this example is deliberately stylized, the same intuition extends to more general set-
tings—particularly when the AI signal z takes more flexible or high-dimensional forms. In such cases
AI-generated features can act as rich summaries of latent structure in E[y | X], improving estimation even
when y ⊥z | X.
■
Appendix C:
Detailed Proofs
C.1.
Proof of Theorem 1
In the proof, for simplicity we assume without loss of generality that we can split the dataset into I and Ic,
each of size n. We obtain be(·) and bg(·) on Ic and estimate bβ on I. Let us define
τ(Ξ;e,g) := X⊤

g(X,z) −
w
e(X,z)(g(X,z) −y)

(13)
so ψ(Ξ;e,g;β) = X∇b(Xβ) −τ(Ξ;e,g) for all β ∈B. For simplicity, following the empirical process literature
(see Van der Vaart 2000, Vaart and Wellner 2023), we often use the shorthand notation Pnf to denote the


--- Page 35 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
35
empirical expectation of a function f based on data in I, Gnf to denote the empirical process based on data
in I, and Pf to denote its population expectation. Also, given the boundedness assumption on X, we assume
that there is C such that for any X ∈X, ∥X∥,∥X∥F ⩽C. We let B(x,ϵ) to denote an open ball of radius ϵ
around the vector x ∈Rq.
The next lemma establishes that our score function given in 7 is valid and states the key consequence of its
Neyman orthogonal design.
Lemma 1 (Score Function and Neyman Orthogonality). It holds that
Pψ(e∗,g∗;β∗) = 0 and Pnτ(be, bg) −Pnτ(e∗,g∗) = oP(n−1/2).
The next two key lemmas explores the concavity of our loss function. The first one clarifies the convergence
rate of the empirical score functions. Building on this, we present a consistency proof.
Lemma 2 (Rates of Empirical Scores). It holds that
Pnψ
 e∗,g∗; bβ
, inf
β∈B
Pnψ
 be, bg;β
 = oP(1/√n).
Lemma 3 (Consistency). bβ →P β∗.
With these lemmas we finish the proof of the main result. For ease of exposition, from this point on we
suppress e∗and g∗in ψ(·;e∗,g∗;β) and write it as ψ(·;β). We first establish that the score function is locally
Lipschitz. Indeed, fix an arbitrary ϵ and consider β1,β2 ∈B(β∗,ϵ), we have
∥ψ(Ξ;β) −ψ(Ξ;β2)∥=
X⊤∇b(Xβ1) −X⊤∇b(Xβ2)

=
X⊤
Z 1
0
∇2
θb(X(β1 + t(β2 −β1)))dt(β2 −β1)
⩽
X⊤
Z 1
0
∇2
θb(X(β1 + t(β2 −β1)))dt
∥β2 −β1∥
⩽∥X∥
Z 1
0
∇2
θb(X(β1 + t(β2 −β1)))
dt∥β2 −β1∥⩽∥β2 −β1∥
 
∥X∥
sup
β∈B(β∗,ϵ)
∥∇2
θb(Xβ)∥
!
⩽C1∥X∥∥β2 −β1∥
where we define C1 := supβ∈B(β∗,ϵ), X∈˘
X∥∇2
θb(Xβ)∥< ∞. Indeed, the supreme must be convex by the com-
pactness of ˘
X and B(β∗,ϵ) and the continuity of ∇2
θb(·). Clearly, PC2
1∥X∥2 < ∞Therefore, by Example
19.7 and Theorem 19.5 in Van der Vaart (2000), {ψ(·;β) : β ∈B(β∗,ϵ)} forms a Donsker class. By Lemma 3,
bβ →P β∗. Then, By Theorem 19.9 in in Van der Vaart (2000), it holds that Gnψ( bβ) −Gnψ(β∗) →P 0. Thus,
√n(Pψ( bβ) −Pψ(β∗)) = Gnψ( bβ) −Gnψ(β∗) −√nPnψ
  bβ

+ √nPnψ
 β∗ (a)
= √nPnψ
 β∗
+ oP(1),
where (a) follows from Lemma 2. We apply the Taylor expansion on the left-side of the equation, by continuous
mapping, we have
√n
h
PX⊤∇bθ(Xβ∗)X
  bβ −β∗
+ oP(1)
 bβ −β∗
i
= √nPnψ
 β∗
+ oP(1) = OP(1).
(14)
As shown in the proof of Lemma 2, PX⊤∇bθ(Xβ∗)X is invertible. Therefore, (14) implies that √n
 bβ −β∗ =
OP(1). Therefore, applying (14) again,
√n

bβ −β∗
=

PX⊤∇bθ(Xβ∗)X
−1√nPnψ
 β∗
+ oP(1),
as desired.


--- Page 36 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
36
C.2.
Proof of Corollary 1
To start, we first note that the empirical sums of score functions, i.e., P
i∈DP ∇βℓ(X,y;β) = 0, is equivalent
to Pn
i=1 wi∇βℓ(X,y;β∗) = 0. Note that by independence of w with respect to other random variables, it
holds that
E[w∇βℓ(X,y;β)] = ρE[∇βℓ(X,y;β∗)] = 0.
Thus, under the preset assumptions, it is easy to show that with probability approaching one, the solu-
tion to this equation, i.e., bβP, exists, and √n

bβ −β∗
⇝N
 0, ΣP
. We skip the proof. We further note
that ∇βℓ(X,y;β∗) := ζ(X,z) + π(X,y,z) where ζ(X,z) := X⊤(∇θb(Xβ∗) −g(X,z)) and π(X,y,z) =
X⊤(g(X,z) −y) and, because E[g(X,z) −y|X,z] = 0, we have
ΣP = 1
ρ

J−1E

ζ(X,z)ζ(X,z)⊤
J−1 + J−1E

π(X,y,z)π(X,y,z)⊤
J−1

.
(15)
Furthermore, observe that ψ(Ξ;e,g;β) = ζ(X,z) + w
ρ π(X,y,z), so
ΣGAI = J−1E

ζ(X,z)ζ(X,z)⊤
J−1 + 1
ρJ−1E

π(X,y,z)π(X,y,z)⊤
J−1.
(16)
The conclusion follows straightforwardly given (15) and (16).
C.3.
Proof of Lemma 1
To begin, first we note that by the definition of τ(e∗,g∗)
Pτ(e∗,g∗) = E

X⊤

g∗(X,z) −
w
e∗(X,z)(g∗(X,z) −y)

(a)
= E

X⊤

g∗(X,z) −E[w|X,z]
e∗(X,z)
 g∗(X,z) −E[y|X,z]

(b)
= E

X⊤E[y|X,z]

= E

X⊤y

,
where (a) follows from the law of iterated expectations and the conditional independence of w and y, and (b)
follows from the definition that E[w|X,z] = e∗(X,z). Therefore,
Pψ(e∗,g∗;β∗) = E

X⊤b(Xβ) −τ(Ξ;e∗,g∗)

= E

X⊤b(Xβ) −X⊤y

= 0.
This proves the first part. For the second, we notice that
√n(Pnτ(be, bg) −Pnτ(e∗,g∗))
=√nPn
h
1 −w
e∗

X⊤(bg −g∗)
i
|
{z
}
(I)
+√nPn
w(be −e∗)
bee∗
X⊤(g∗−y)

|
{z
}
(II)
+√nPn
w(be −e∗)
bee∗
X⊤(bg −g∗)

|
{z
}
(III)
.
We treat each term separately. For (I), we note that
E

1 −
w
e∗(X,z)

X⊤(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))
Ic

= E

1 −E[w|X,Z,Ic]
e∗(X,z)

X⊤(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))
Ic

= 0
(17)
so (I) has zero mean. Therefore, by Markov inequality
P(∥(I)∥⩾ϵ|Ic) ⩽E[∥(I)∥2 |Ic]
ϵ2
=
d
X
j=1
Var
√nPn
h
1 −w
e∗

x⊤
(j)(bg −g∗)
i Ic

ϵ2
=
d
X
j=1
Var

1 −
w
e∗(X,z)

x⊤
(j)(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))
Ic

ϵ2
= E
"

1 −
w
e∗(X,z)

X⊤(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))

2 Ic
#
ϵ2.
(18)


--- Page 37 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
37
From here, we note that


1 −
w
e∗(X,z)

X⊤(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))

2
P,2
⩽4
κ2
X⊤(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))
2
P,2
⩽4C2
κ2 ∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z)∥2
P,2
(c)
→0,
which implies the RHS of (18) converges to zero in probability by the Markov’s inequality. Here (c) follows
from Assumption 2. Since P(∥(I)∥⩾ϵ|Ic) is bounded therefore uniformly integrable, we can take expectation
and conclude that (I) is oP(1). An argument similar to (17) shows that (II) has zero mean. An argument
similar to (18) shows that
P(∥(II)∥⩾ϵ|Ic) ⩽E
"
w(be(X,z) −e∗(X,z))
be(X,z)e∗(X,z)
X⊤(g∗(X,z) −y)

2 Ic
#
ϵ2
(d)
=
2
κ2ϵ2 E
w(be(X,z) −e∗(X,z))X⊤(g∗(X,z) −y)
2
Ic

+ oP(1)
=
2
κ2ϵ2 E
"
|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|2
d
X
j=1
x⊤
(j)Cov(y|X,z,Ic)x(j)
Ic
#
+ oP(1)
(e)
⩽2˜σ2
κ2ϵ2 E
"
|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|2
d
X
j=1
x⊤
(j)x(j)
Ic
#
+ oP(1)
= 2˜σ2
κ2ϵ2 E

|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|2∥X∥2
F
Ic

+ oP(1)
= 2C2˜σ2
κ2ϵ2 E

|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|2
Ic

+ oP(1),
(19)
where (d) follows because for all X and z, (1) by assumption e∗(X,z) ⩾κ and (2) Assumption 2 states that
supX,z |be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)| →P 0, so with probability approaching one it holds that be(X,z) ⩾κ/2. (e) holds
because the distribution of y is independent of Ic so Cov(y|X,z,Ic) = Cov(y|X,z) and ∥Cov(y|X,z)∥⩽σ.
By an argument similar to the above discussion regarding (I), we have E

|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|2
Ic

= oP(1).
Therefore, (II) is also oP(1). For the third term, we have
P(∥(III)∥∞⩾ϵ|Ic) ⩽
d
X
j=1
P
√n
Pn
w(be −e∗)
bee∗
x⊤
(j)(bg −g∗)
 ⩾ϵ
Ic

⩽√n
d
X
j=1
E

w(be(X,z) −e∗(X,z))
be(X,z)e∗(X,z)
x⊤
(j)(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))

Ic

ϵ2
(f)
⩽2√n
κ2
d
X
j=1
E
(be(X,z) −e∗(X,z))x⊤
(j)(bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))
 Ic.
ϵ2 + oP(1)
(g)
⩽2√n
κ2
d
X
j=1
E

|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|
x(j)
∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))∥
Ic.
ϵ2 + oP(1)
⩽2√nC
κ2
d
X
j=1
E

|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))∥
Ic.
ϵ2 + oP(1),
where (f) follows from an argument similar to above and (g) follows from the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality.
Finally, we have
E[|be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)|∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z))∥] ⩽∥be(X,z) −e∗(X,z)∥P,2 ∥bg(X,z) −g∗(X,z)∥P,2
= a(n)/nr1+r2 = o(n−1/2).


--- Page 38 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
38
Therefore, P(∥(III)∥∞⩾ϵ|Ic) is oP(1) and (III) is oP(1) too. We conclude the proof.
C.4.
Proof of Lemma 2
For any functions e(·) and g(·), data point Ξ, and β, let us define
¯ℓ(Ξ;e,g;β) := b(Xβ) −

g(X,z) +
w
e(X,z)(g(X,z) −y)
⊤
Xβ,
so ∇β¯ℓ(Ξ;e,g;β) = ψ(Ξ;e,g;β) and ∇2
β¯ℓ(Ξ;e,g;β) = X⊤∇bθ(Xβ)X ⪰0. Therefore ¯ℓ(·) is convex. In particu-
lar, E[¯ℓ(Ξ,e∗,g∗,β)] is convex in β. By Lemma 1, we know that
∇βP ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗,β∗) = Pψ(e∗,g∗;β∗) = 0.
Also, for any fixed β ∈B it holds that ∇2
βP ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗,β) = PX⊤∇2
θb(Xβ)X ≻0. The last inequality
follows because by assumption for any X ∈˘
X, λmin
 ∇2
θb(Xβ)

> 0. For the purpose of contradic-
tion, if infX∈˘
X λmin
 ∇2
θb(Xβ)

= 0, there is a converging sequence {Xm}∞
m=1 with limit eX ∈˘
X such
that λmin
 ∇2
θb
  eXβ

= 0 by continuity of ∇2
θb(·). This is a contradiction. Therefore, ∇2
βP ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗,β) ≻
infX∈˘
X λmin
 ∇2
θb(Xβ)

· PX⊤X ≻0. In otherwords, P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗,β) is strictly convex. Therefore, β∗is the
unique minimum. By compactness of ˘
X and continuity of b(·), we have Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) →P P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) as an
application of the weak law of large numbers. By Theorem 2.7 of Newey and McFadden (1994), it holds that
there is a random sequence { ˇβn}∞
n=1 that solves minβ∈B Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) and converges to β∗with probability
one. This implies that with probability one there is a sequence { ˇβn}∞
n=1 such that Pnψ(e∗,g∗; ˇβn) = 0. By
Lemma 1, it holds that
√nPnψ(be, bg; ˇβn) = √nPnψ(e∗,g∗; ˇβn) + √n(Pnτ(e∗,g∗) −Pnτ(be, bg)) = oP(1),
(20)
or infβ∈B
Pnψ
 be, bg;β
 = oP(1/√n). This implies Pnψ
 be, bg; bβ

= oP(1/√n). Using the argument in (20)
again, we have Pnψ
 e∗,g∗; bβ

= oP(1/√n). This concludes the proof.
C.5.
Proof of Lemma 3
The notations and definitions are the same as in the proof of the Lemma 2. Fix arbitrary ϵ1 < ϵ2 such
that B(β∗,ϵ2) ⊂B. By Andersen and Gill (1982), convexity and the compactness of B(β∗,ϵ2), it holds that
Pnψ
 e∗,g∗;β

converges to Pψ
 e∗,g∗;β

in probability uniformly on B(β∗,ϵ2). Further, on B(β∗,ϵ2) \
B(β∗,ϵ1), by a Taylor expansion, it must be that
P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) =P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β∗)+1
2(β −β∗)⊤PX⊤∇2
θb(X ˜β)X(β −β∗)
(a)
⩾P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β∗)+c
2∥β −β∗∥2
which can be further lower bounded by P ¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β∗) +
cϵ2
1
2 , for some ˜β ∈[β∗,β] ⊂B(β∗,ϵ2) that depends
on β and a universal c > 0. We prove the inequality (a) as follows. It suffices to show that λmin (∇2
θb(Xβ))
is uniformly lower bounded by some positive number, when β ranges over B(β∗,ϵ2) and X ranges over X .
Suppose otherwise, there is then {(Xm,βm)}
∞
m=1 such that λmin (∇2
θb(Xmβm)) →0. By taking subsequence is
necessary, we assume that Xm →¯X ∈˘
X and βm →¯β ∈B(β∗,ϵ2) ⊂B. By assumption ¯X ¯β ∈Θ and continuity
of ∇2b(·) implies λmin
 ∇2
θb
  ¯X ¯β)

= 0, which contradicts our assumption.


--- Page 39 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
39
Consequently, by the uniform convergence in probability on B(β∗,ϵ2), with probability approaching one, it
must be that ∀β ∈B(β∗,ϵ2) \ B(β∗,ϵ1),
Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) −cϵ2
1
4
⩾Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β∗)
(b)
⩾Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) + (β −β∗)⊤Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β)
= Pn¯ℓ(e∗,g∗;β) + ∥β −β∗∥· (β∗−β)⊤
∥β −β∗∥Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β),
where (b) follows from subgradient inequality. This implies that
(β −β∗)⊤
∥β −β∗∥Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β) ⩾cϵ2
1
4ϵ2
.
(21)
Next, consider any β ∈B \ B(β∗,ϵ2), there is ˜β = λβ + (1 −λ)β∗∈B(β∗,ϵ2) \ B(β∗,ϵ1). By the integral form
of the intermediate value theorem,
(β −β∗)⊤
∥β −β∗∥
 Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β) −Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β∗)

= (β −β∗)⊤
∥β −β∗∥
Z 1
0
PnX⊤∇2
θb
 X(β∗+ t(β −β∗))

Xdt(β −β∗)
= ( ˜β −β∗)⊤
λ∥˜β −β∗∥
Z 1
0
PnX⊤∇2
θb

X

β∗+ t
λ(β −β∗)

Xdt( ˜β −β∗)
(c)
= ( ˜β −β∗)⊤
∥˜β −β∗∥
Z
1
λ
0
PnX⊤∇2
θb
 X(β∗+ t(β −β∗))

Xdt( ˜β −β∗)
(d)
⩾( ˜β −β∗)⊤
∥˜β −β∗∥
Z 1
0
PnX⊤∇2
θb
 X(β∗+ t(β −β∗))

Xdt( ˜β −β∗)·
= ( ˜β −β∗)⊤
∥˜β −β∗∥
 Pnψ(e∗,g∗; ˜β) −Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β∗)

(e)
⩾cϵ2
1
4ϵ2
−( ˜β −β∗)⊤
∥˜β −β∗∥
Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β∗),
where (c) follows from a change of variable in the integral, (d) follows because the ∇2
θb(·) is positive definite,
and (e) uses (21). Combining this again with (21), we conclude that with probability converging to one,
∥Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β)∥⩾(β −β∗)⊤
∥β −β∗∥Pnψ(e∗,g∗;β) ⩾cϵ2
1
4ϵ2
∀β ∈B \ B(β∗,ϵ2).
Finally, we note that by Lemma 2,
Pnψ
 e∗,g∗; bβ
 = oP(1/√n). Therefore, it must be that bβ ∈B(β∗,ϵ1)
with probability converging to one. We finish the proof.
C.6.
Proof of Corollary 2
This appendix provides the proof of Corollary 2, which decomposes the variance gain of GAI into two
interpretable components.
Recall that the primary-only estimator uses only labeled observations, while GAI incorporates auxiliary
data through the conditional expectation E[y | X,z]. To understand the variance gain, we decompose the
GLM score ∇βℓ(X,y;β∗) = X⊤(∇b(Xβ∗) −y) by inserting intermediate quantities.
From the proof of Corollary 1, the asymptotic variance of the primary-only estimator minus that of the
GAI estimator is proportional to:
ΣP −ΣGAI ∝(1
ρ −1) · E

X⊤
∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X,z]

∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X,z]
⊤
X

,
(22)
where ρ = nP/n ∈(0,1) is the fraction of labeled observations. This expression is always positive semidefinite
(PSD), confirming that GAI never increases variance relative to primary-only estimation.


--- Page 40 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
40
Table 4
Paired t-test p-values (GAI (Embeddings) vs benchmarks) for Conjoint Analysis
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
Primary 5e-33 3e-37 2e-38 2e-40
0.02
9e-5
5e-4
2e-4
4e-11
0.56
3e-3
5e-8
Naive
9e-33 9e-37 6e-38 8e-40 2e-117 1e-94 6e-85 2e-69 1e-41 6e-51 3e-57 3e-57
PPI
0.31
5e-37 5e-38 3e-40
0.31
0.48
0.31
0.26
0.02
1e-20 3e-28 2e-30
PPI++
0.01
4e-37 3e-38 2e-40
7e-5
4e-8
8e-5
1e-7
2e-8
0.42
0.02
1e-8
The variance reduction in (22) is strictly positive definite (i.e., GAI strictly dominates) whenever the inner
expectation is positive definite. We decompose the gap ∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X,z] into interpretable components:
∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X,z] =

∇b(Xβ∗) −E[y | X]

|
{z
}
(II) Model misspecification
+

E[y | X] −E[y | X,z]

|
{z
}
(III) Extra information in z
.
(23)
Since E[y | X] = E

E[y | X,z]
X

by the law of iterated expectations, term (III) has conditional mean zero
given X. This implies that the cross-product between terms (II) and (III) vanishes:
E
h
(I) · (II)
⊤i
= E
h
(I) · E

(II)
⊤| X
i
= 0.
Therefore, the variance gain decomposes additively into two non-negative components as stated in Corollary 2.
Appendix D:
An Example of Failure of Dominance
Generally, if e(X,z) is carefully constructed so that it is “advantageous” to ignore the data points with
missing label, one can show the following negative result.
Example 3. (Failure of Dominance) Consider a setting with canonical GLMs such that the GLM
density is correctly specified. Assume that k = 1 and b(θ) = 1
2θ2. In this case, we write X = x⊤∈R1×d. We
further assume that x is generated through a mixture distribution and there is ˜w such that ˜w = 1 with
probability p and zero otherwise. Also, E[xx⊤| ˜w] = I for all ˜w ∈{0,1}. Conditional on ˜w, the supports of
x are disjoint and we denote them by Xw. We assume that E[y |x] = x⊤β∗, and Var(y |x) = σ2
w whenever
x ∈Xw. Set z = y −x⊤β so g∗(x,z) = y. e(x,z) = 1 if x ∈X1 and e(x,z) = κ if x ∈X0. Conditional on ˜w, w is
independent of (y,z). In the setup, the GAI estimator leads to the same asymptotics variance as the case
where y is fully observed, i.e., (pσ2
1 + (1 −p)σ2
0)I. It is easy to see that bβP obtained under the score function
wi∇βℓ(xi,yi;β) is asymptotically normal with covariance given by
AVar
  bβP
= pσ2
1 + (1 −p)σ2
0κ
[p + (1 −p)κ]2 I ≺AVar
  bβGAI
= (pσ2
1 + (1 −p)σ2
0)I,
which holds when σ1,κ ↓0.
Appendix E:
Detailed Results of Experiments
E.1.
Vaccine Conjoint Analysis
E.1.1.
Tests for Performance Improvement
We conduct paired t-tests comparing GAI to each
benchmark method across repeated trials for each metric (MAPE, coverage, CI width). The paired design
controls for sampling variation and isolates estimator differences.


--- Page 41 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
41
Table 5
Paired t-test p-values (GAI (Labels) vs benchmarks) for Conjoint Analysis
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
50
100
150
200
Primary 3e-15 2e-12
5e-7
3e-6
3e-3
6e-4
0.03
0.02
7e-19 5e-17 2e-16 2e-15
Naive
6e-46 2e-44 5e-49 3e-40 5e-71 8e-55 3e-49 6e-41 5e-53 3e-64 7e-67 1e-68
PPI
0.32
2e-18 8e-15 1e-15
1.00
0.30
0.29
0.15
0.02
2e-22 9e-30 9e-32
PPI++
0.01
3e-15 3e-11 1e-10
3e-5
3e-7
3e-3
3e-5
2e-14 9e-17 9e-15 2e-15
Table 6
Decision Errors for Conjoint Analysis (% of all CIs)
Method
nP=50
nP=100
nP=150
nP=200
Primary
1.82
6.73
7.09
12.00
Naive
19.09
20.00
20.73
21.64
PPI
0.00
1.82
3.82
7.09
PPI++
2.91
9.09
8.18
14.55
GAI (Labels)
0.18
2.91
5.27
9.09
GAI (Embeddings)
0.55
1.45
3.09
5.45
Tables 4 and 5 report p-values for GAI (Embeddings) and GAI (Labels), respectively. Both GAI variants
achieve significant MAPE improvements over all benchmarks. Coverage differences relative to Primary, Naive,
and PPI++ are significant for both variants. For CI width, GAI (Labels) produces significantly narrower
intervals than PPI++ across all sample sizes, while GAI (Embeddings) produces narrower intervals than
PPI++ at nP = 50 but modestly wider intervals at nP ∈{150,200}.
E.1.2.
Decision Errors
Table 6 reports decision errors. GAI (Embeddings) averages 2.6%, lower than
Primary (6.9%), PPI (3.2%), PPI++ (8.7%), and Naive (20.4%). GAI (Labels) averages 4.4%, also substantially
lower than most benchmarks, except for PPI. Although PPI achieves the lowest error rate, it comes with a
cost of wider intervals.
E.1.3.
Robustness to Auxiliary Generator
Tables 7–9 report results using different LLMs (GPT-
3.5-Turbo, GPT-4, GPT-4o) with CoT prompting, comparing both label-based (z=Labels) and embedding-
based (z=Embeddings) auxiliary representations. GAI consistently achieves the lowest MAPE across all
configurations while maintaining near-nominal coverage, demonstrating robustness to both the choice of
auxiliary generator and representation type.
E.2.
Retail Pricing Study
E.2.1.
Tests for Performance Improvement
We conduct paired t-tests comparing GAI to each
benchmark method across repeated trials for each metric (MAPE, coverage, CI width). The paired design
controls for sampling variation and isolates estimator differences.
Table 10 reports p-values for the pricing study. GAI’s MAPE improvements over all benchmarks are
significant at most sample sizes. For CI width, PPI++ produces narrower intervals than GAI.
E.2.2.
Decision Errors
Table 11 reports decision errors. GAI achieves 0.2% averaged across sample
sizes, lower than PPI (1.2%), PPI++ (1.8%), and Primary (2.2%).


--- Page 42 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
42
Table 7
Benchmark Comparison for Conjoint Analysis: MAPE (%)
nP = 50
nP = 100
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
32.02
48.83
–
–
17.23
16.51
25.27
45.89
–
–
17.61
17.06
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
32.02
42.98
–
–
17.48
16.45
25.27
39.97
50.55
30.41
17.92
17.35
GPT-4
32.02
50.14
–
–
16.79
16.81
25.27
47.75
48.56
29.40
17.37
17.36
GPT-4o
32.02
48.52
–
–
16.86
16.50
25.27
45.75
44.57
29.69
17.52
17.23
nP = 150
nP = 200
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
19.67
42.73
39.02
22.60
16.35
16.62
19.01
40.10
35.08
21.20
17.22
16.87
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
19.67
37.40
36.11
23.07
16.64
16.13
19.01
35.17
29.95
20.96
17.22
16.63
GPT-4
19.67
46.00
33.54
22.62
15.96
16.04
19.01
43.11
29.21
20.96
16.64
16.53
GPT-4o
19.67
43.33
32.96
22.96
15.97
15.73
19.01
40.29
29.21
21.00
16.64
16.24
Notes: All models use CoT prompting. A “–” symbol indicates cases where the value exceeds 1,000, which occurs
because PPI-based methods can suffer from singularity problems in small primary samples.
Table 8
Benchmark Comparison for Conjoint Analysis: 95% CI Coverage Probability (%)
nP = 50
nP = 100
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
97.82
27.27
100.00
95.82
99.64
100.00
92.73
27.64
99.82
89.09
96.91
98.18
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
97.82
20.00
100.00
93.82
100.00
100.00
92.73
22.00
98.18
88.36
97.09
97.64
GPT-4
97.82
28.55
100.00
94.18
99.45
100.00
92.73
28.00
99.09
89.64
96.91
98.00
GPT-4o
97.82
26.55
99.82
94.55
99.82
99.45
92.73
26.36
98.00
89.09
97.09
98.55
nP = 150
nP = 200
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
92.55
27.45
98.00
90.36
94.73
96.73
88.00
29.09
95.64
84.73
90.18
94.36
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
92.55
24.36
96.73
90.91
94.18
96.91
88.00
27.45
94.55
84.73
90.00
93.45
GPT-4
92.55
27.27
97.64
90.18
94.73
96.91
88.00
26.18
92.55
84.36
91.09
95.64
GPT-4o
92.55
26.36
95.82
90.91
94.73
96.91
88.00
27.09
92.91
85.09
90.91
94.55
E.2.3.
Results Across All Products
Table 12 reports results averaged across all 40 products in the
Toubia et al. (2025) dataset, where we use the same experimental design as Section 6.2 and estimate g(X,z)
using ℓ1-regularized logistic regression (C = 0.1) with 5-fold cross-fitting.
The results across all 40 products reinforce the main findings: (1) GAI achieves the lowest MAPE at every
sample size; (2) GAI maintains coverage above 98% while Naive severely undercovers (46–48%); and (3) CI
widths are comparable across valid methods. These patterns confirm that GAI’s advantages generalize across
diverse product categories.


--- Page 43 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
43
Table 9
Benchmark Comparison for Conjoint Analysis: 95% CI Width
nP = 50
nP = 100
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
2.43
0.57
14.21
2.62
1.93
2.15
1.51
0.54
5.18
1.50
1.36
1.50
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
2.43
0.51
37.35
2.48
1.92
2.15
1.51
0.49
3.30
1.51
1.35
1.50
GPT-4
2.43
0.56
21.23
2.44
1.93
2.07
1.51
0.54
3.41
1.51
1.35
1.48
GPT-4o
2.43
0.55
9.28
2.44
1.94
2.11
1.51
0.53
2.71
1.52
1.36
1.50
nP = 150
nP = 200
GAI
GAI
Model
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
Primary
Naive
PPI
PPI++
Lab
Emb
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0613
1.19
0.52
2.39
1.19
1.11
1.23
1.01
0.50
1.99
1.01
0.96
1.05
GPT-3.5-Turbo-0125
1.19
0.47
2.14
1.19
1.11
1.23
1.01
0.46
1.67
1.01
0.96
1.04
GPT-4
1.19
0.52
1.97
1.19
1.11
1.21
1.01
0.50
1.61
1.00
0.96
1.04
GPT-4o
1.19
0.51
1.94
1.19
1.11
1.21
1.01
0.49
1.58
1.00
0.96
1.05
Table 10
Paired t-test p-values (GAI vs benchmarks) for Pricing Study
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary
7e-5
6e-5
0.01
2e-3
0.11
0.06 0.18
0.15
0.32
0.30
0.44
0.08
5e-3
5e-5
4e-8
Naive
4e-11 2e-20 8e-17 1e-31 1e-21
≈0
≈0
3e-43
≈0
2e-28 5e-55 3e-67 8e-61 4e-68 3e-63
PPI
1e-5
5e-4
3e-3
2e-5
9e-5
0.06 0.16
0.41
0.06
1.00
8e-14 5e-30 1e-41 2e-46 7e-58
PPI++
1e-4
2e-3
0.06
1e-3
0.09
0.03 0.32
0.11
0.32
0.26
9e-5
1e-7
4e-4
7e-4
3e-3
Notes: ≈0 represents p-value < 10−300.
Table 11
Decision Errors for Pricing Study (% of all CIs)
Method
nP=100
nP=200
nP=300
nP=400
nP=500
Primary
4.0
2.0
3.0
0.0
2.0
Naive
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
PPI
2.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
1.0
PPI++
4.0
0.0
4.0
0.0
1.0
GAI
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
Table 12
Pricing Study Averaged Across All 40 Products: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary 14.34
9.66
7.80
6.23
5.62
96.10 96.45 97.12 97.90 97.98 0.88 0.62 0.50 0.43 0.39
Naive
22.48 21.06 19.64 18.32 17.00 46.32 46.95 46.90 47.28 48.10 0.28 0.27 0.25 0.24 0.23
PPI
17.73 12.17 10.11
8.81
8.03
96.68 96.42 97.10 96.72 96.80 1.07 0.77 0.64 0.57 0.52
PPI++
14.16
9.40
7.60
6.14
5.51
94.88 95.92 96.78 97.52 97.52 0.84 0.59 0.48 0.42 0.38
GAI
8.51
6.94
6.14
5.07
4.68
99.25 98.60 98.65 99.02 98.92 0.88 0.61 0.49 0.42 0.38


--- Page 44 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
44
Table 13
Paired t-test p-values (GAI vs benchmarks) for Census Analysis
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
250
500
750
1k
100
250
500
750
1k
100
250
500
750
1k
Primary 2e-10
2e-8
5e-9 5e-6 7e-6
3e-4
1e-4
1e-4
8e-4
1e-4
0.09
5e-5
4e-8
1e-13 1e-15
Naive
1e-7
6e-8
3e-5 6e-4 4e-3 3e-25 4e-25 5e-25 6e-27 6e-27 4e-10 1e-15 2e-18 4e-23 1e-24
PPI
3e-7
7e-10 1e-7 6e-6 1e-4
2e-3
0.03
0.02
0.17
0.05
0.78
0.74
0.98
0.65
0.36
PPI++
1e-9
2e-9
1e-7 1e-5 2e-5
6e-4
2e-3
0.01
0.05
0.01
0.16
0.54
0.53
0.26
0.30
Table 14
Decision Errors for Census Analysis (% of all CIs)
Method
nP=100
nP=250
nP=500
nP=750
nP=1000
Primary
11.0
4.0
4.0
2.0
3.0
Naive
20.0
19.0
16.0
12.0
12.0
PPI
8.0
0.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
PPI++
10.0
3.0
3.0
2.0
3.0
GAI
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
Table 15
Pricing Study with High-dimensional Auxiliary Information: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI
widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary 22.36 16.03 12.47
9.59
9.53
95.00
97.00
95.00
99.00
92.00
1.17 0.82 0.66 0.57 0.51
Naive
22.22 21.97 19.99 19.67 19.43
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
50.00
0.37 0.35 0.33 0.32 0.31
PPI
26.91 15.31 14.10 13.98 12.88
95.00
98.00
97.00
94.00
96.00
1.40 1.01 0.85 0.75 0.69
PPI++
22.15 14.16 11.56
9.86
9.66
94.00
99.00
93.00
99.00
92.00
1.10 0.78 0.64 0.55 0.49
GAI
6.64
4.34
4.42
3.95
4.62
100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 1.12 0.80 0.65 0.57 0.50
E.3.
Health Insurance Census Analysis
E.3.1.
Tests for Performance Improvement
We conduct paired t-tests comparing GAI to each
benchmark method across repeated trials for each metric (MAPE, coverage, CI width). The paired design
controls for sampling variation and isolates estimator differences.
Table 13 shows GAI significantly outperforms all benchmarks in MAPE and coverage. For CI width, GAI
and PPI++ show no significant difference.
E.3.2.
Decision Errors
As shown in Table 14, GAI achieves zero decision errors across all sample sizes,
while Naive exhibits 12–20% error rates and Primary, PPI, PPI++ show moderate rates (2–11%).
Appendix F:
Pricing Study with High-dimensional Auxiliary Information
We
extend
the
auxiliary
information
to
include
persona
and
demographic
features:
z =
[z,persona,demographics] ∈R115, where z is the scalar AI prediction, persona includes 54 psychometric
features, and demographics includes 60 indicator variables. The outcome model remains X = [1,price].
We estimate g(X,z) using ℓ1-regularized logistic regression (C = 0.01) with 5-fold cross-fitting.
Results. Table 15 reports results across 50 Monte Carlo trials.


--- Page 45 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
45
Table 16
Decision Errors for Pricing Study with High-dimensional Auxiliary Information (% of all CIs)
Method
nP=100
nP=200
nP=300
nP=400
nP=500
Primary
4.00
2.00
3.00
0.00
2.00
Naive
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
PPI
2.00
0.00
1.00
2.00
1.00
PPI++
4.00
0.00
4.00
0.00
1.00
GAI
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Table 17
Paired t-test p-values (GAI vs benchmarks) for Pricing Study with High-dimensional Auxiliary
Information
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary 7e-10 4e-11
9e-9
4e-9
1e-5
0.06 0.18 0.06 0.32 0.02
7e-4
9e-6
5e-4
0.06
4e-5
Naive
6e-49 1e-58 4e-44 3e-45 4e-42
≈0
≈0
≈0
≈0
≈0
8e-58 2e-69 3e-71 6e-69 3e-71
PPI
5e-9
1e-9
4e-8
2e-8
4e-10 0.06 0.16 0.18 0.06 0.10 8e-16 6e-31 2e-38 2e-45 6e-53
PPI++
3e-9
2e-9
1e-7
2e-9
5e-6
0.03 0.32 0.05 0.32 0.01
0.07
6e-4
2e-5
2e-7
9e-8
Notes: ≈0 represents p-value < 10−300.
Panel (a) shows GAI achieves substantially lower MAPE. Panel (b) shows GAI maintains 100% coverage
across all sample sizes while Naive undercovers (50%). Panel (c) shows GAI produces CI widths comparable
to Primary and PPI++ while achieving better point estimation. Decision errors (Table 16): GAI averages
0.00% vs 1.20% for PPI, 1.80% for PPI++, and 2.20% for Primary.
Table 17 reports p-values. GAI achieves significant MAPE reductions at all sample sizes. For CI width,
GAI and PPI++ produce comparable intervals.
Appendix G:
Pricing Study with High-dimensional Covariates and Scalar Auxiliary
Information
This appendix examines a setting where the outcome model includes high-dimensional covariates (X ∈R115,
reduced to 77 PCA components) while auxiliary information remains scalar (z ∈{0,1}). This confirms GAI
outperforms benchmarks even when the auxiliary prediction provides no extra information beyond what
PPI-based methods can exploit.
We estimate g(X,z) using ℓ1-regularized logistic regression (C = 0.01) with 5-fold cross-fitting.
Results. Table 18 reports results across 50 Monte Carlo trials.
Panel (a) shows GAI achieves MAPE of 3.3–3.9% across all sample sizes, while Naive exhibits 4.8–6.6%
and PPI-based methods 11–97%. PPI/PPI++ fail at nP = 100 due to quasi-complete separation. Statistical
tests confirm GAI’s improvements (Table 20).
Panel (b) shows GAI maintains coverage near 99%, while Primary undercovers severely at small nP (49%
at nP = 100). Decision errors (Table 19): GAI averages 0.71% vs 2.33% for PPI++, 3.26% for Naive, and
7.35% for Primary. Panel (c) shows GAI intervals are narrower than PPI/PPI++ (0.39–0.81 vs 0.47–4.15)
while maintaining valid coverage.
Table 20 reports p-values. GAI achieves significant MAPE reductions and coverage improvement at all
sample sizes.


--- Page 46 ---
Lu et al.: Generative Augmented Inference
46
Table 18
Pricing Study with High-dimensional Covariates: MAPEs, coverage probabilities, and CI widths
(a) MAPE (%)
(b) 95% CI Coverage (%)
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary
–
73.83 25.72 15.65 11.68
48.97
84.44
89.97 94.46 94.21
–
2.57
1.09
0.77
0.57
Naive
6.61
5.93
5.40
5.08
4.77
94.31
93.85
94.18 93.67 92.62 0.34 0.31
0.27
0.27
0.23
PPI
N/A 38.16 97.06 56.76 52.33
N/A
100.00 99.91 99.85 99.91 N/A 5.30 57.75 19.14 16.90
PPI++
N/A 24.55 25.10 15.66 11.32
N/A
91.35
91.92 94.81 93.32 N/A 4.04
4.15
1.11
0.47
GAI
3.95
3.80
3.68
3.47
3.32
100.00
99.44
98.85 98.95 99.15 0.81 0.57
0.44
0.44
0.39
Notes: “–” indicates Primary estimator values exceeding 1,000 due to quasi-complete separation in unregularized
logistic regression at small sample sizes. “N/A” indicates PPI/PPI++ failed to produce valid estimates due to
singular Hessian matrices arising from extreme predicted probabilities.
Table 19
Decision Errors for Pricing Study with High-dimensional Covariates (% of all CIs)
Method
nP=100
nP=200
nP=300
nP=400
nP=500
Primary
22.44
6.69
3.87
1.82
1.92
Naive
3.03
3.13
3.03
3.23
3.87
PPI
N/A
0.00
0.04
0.09
0.00
PPI++
N/A
4.17
3.55
1.70
2.24
GAI
0.00
0.56
1.15
1.05
0.77
Notes: PPI/PPI++ failed to produce valid estimates at nP = 100 due to singular Hessian matrices.
Table 20
Paired t-test p-values (GAI vs benchmarks) for Pricing Study with High-dimensional Covariates
(a) MAPE
(b) 95% CI Coverage
(c) 95% CI Width
Method
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
100
200
300
400
500
Primary 2e-19 5e-15 1e-16 7e-22 9e-19 3e-39 2e-11
6e-7
8e-7
9e-9
1e-10 1e-21 4e-26 1e-7 2e-5
Naive
3e-50 7e-27 4e-31 6e-31 2e-46 2e-23 1e-21 1e-19 7e-24 1e-27 2e-14 1e-12 1e-43 2e-3 1e-4
PPI
–
7e-3
3e-5
1e-5
3e-3
–
1e-7
9e-18 3e-15
5e-7
–
0.20
0.04
0.03 0.17
PPI++
–
0.12
2e-3
2e-6
2e-4
–
0.17
4e-3
7e-8
5e-7
–
0.37
0.08
0.01 0.10
Notes: “–” indicates PPI/PPI++ failed at nP = 100 due to singular Hessian matrices.
