--- Page 1 ---
Draft
Edge Intelligence for Satellite-based Earth Observation:
Scheduling Image Acquisition and Processing
Beatriz Soret, Antonio M. Mercado-Mart´ınez, Antonio Jurado-Navas,
Nicolai D. Lyholm, Marco Moretti, Petar Popovski, and Israel Leyva-Mayorga
April 8, 2026
Abstract
Modern Earth Observation (EO) missions generate massive volumes of imagery that challenge
existing downlink and ground-processing capabilities, particularly for time-critical applications. This
work investigates how a low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite constellation equipped with heterogeneous
edge computing resources can enable real-time semantic processing of data acquired by EO satellites.
We introduce an energy-aware framework that optimizes the use of resources accounting for data ac-
quisition, computing, and communication constraints. Although we focus on maritime surveillance,
the formulation is task-agnostic and accommodates a broad class of semantic and goal-oriented in-
ference problems.
Specifically, we formulate two coupled optimization problems: (i) observation
scheduling, which selects image acquisition opportunities while accounting for turbulence-induced
image degradation and energy budget, and (ii) processing scheduling, which allocates semantic work-
loads across onboard and ground processors. We evaluate these mechanisms for the task of detection
and localization of vessels, for which we quantify the benefits of turbulence-aware observation schedul-
ing for preserving image quality and experimentally characterize the execution-time distribution of
YOLOv8 on different computing platforms. Results demonstrate that task- and turbulence- aware
observation scheduling can significantly improve the quality and quantity of observed targets. Fur-
thermore, cooperative edge processing within the constellation substantially reduces power consump-
tion compared to traditional downlink-centric architectures. These findings highlight the potential
of distributed edge intelligence to enhance the responsiveness and autonomy of future satellite-based
EO systems.
1
Introduction
We are witnessing a surge in satellite-based Earth Observation (EO) [1], driven by scientific, commercial,
and geopolitical factors, with the number of satellites expected to triple by 2033 [2]. This growth reflects
the essential role of EO in providing critical information for climate and environmental monitoring [3] [4],
maritime surveillance [5], disaster management [6], and beyond.
Historically, EO applications have
downloaded vast amounts of collected raw, or minimally processed, data to a server on ground, to be
stored and processed at some point in the future.
This is changed radically by making the EO data part of real-time computation-communication loops
within the emerging trend towards on-board intelligence. There are several drivers of this trend:
(i) Satellite and space technologies are drastically reducing the cost of the missions through specialized
yet affordable spacecrafts, leading to a densification of low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite networks and
increasing the volume of EO data generated in orbit.
B. Soret, A. M. Mercado-Mart´ınez, and A. Jurado-Navas are with the Telecommunications Research Institute
(TELMA), Universidad de M´alaga, M´alaga, Spain. N. D. Lyholm, P. Popovski and I. Leyva-Mayorga are with the Connec-
tivity Section, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. Marco Moretti is with the University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy and also
with the National Inter-University Consortium for Telecommunications (CNIT), 43124 Parma, Italy. This work was par-
tially funded by ESA SatNEx V (prime contract no. 4000130962/20/NL/NL/FE). The view expressed herein can in no way
be taken to reflect the official opinion of the European Space Agency. The work of B. Soret, A.M. Mercado-Mart´ınez and A.
Jurado-Navas is further supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaci´on under grant PID2022-136269OB-I00
funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and “ERDF A way of making Europe”.
The work of A.M. Mercado-
Mart´ınez is also supported by Grant DGP PRED 2024 01603, funded by the Consejer´ıa de Universidad, Investigaci´on e
Innovaci´on of Junta de Andaluc´ıa and the European Union. The work of Petar Popovski and Israel Leyva-Mayorga is par-
tially supported by the Velux Foundation, Denmark, through the Villum Investigator Grant WATER, nr. 37793. The work
of Marco Moretti is also partially supported by the Italian Ministry of Education and Research (MUR) in the Framework
of the FoReLab Project (Departments of Excellence).
1
arXiv:2604.05937v1  [cs.NI]  7 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Draft
Figure 1: Scenario overview: EO satellites capture images of a set of tracked objects (vessels), with image
quality affected by atmospheric turbulence. Raw images are transmitted to the edge layer via ISLs for
semantic compression (vessel detection and localization), and processed data transmitted to ground via
DL. Both the EO satellites and the edge constellation operate within the LEO layer.
(ii) Edge computing enables the use of the computing capabilities of the network infrastructure to
analyze information closer to the source, resulting in reduced latency and bandwidth. In the case of
space, LEO satellite edge nodes can process raw EO data before being sent to the ground, de-congesting
the communication network, specifically the feeder link connecting the space segment to the ground
segment [7].
(iii) Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Deep Learning are driving remarkable progress in data processing,
including image and video, by transforming raw data into actionable intelligence. When combined with
Semantic Communications (SemCom) [8] principles, these methods extract and transmit the informative
content (meaning, relevance and mission value), which allows a great reduction in data volume [9].
Although semantic compression and feature extraction have already been adopted in space missions,
such as ESA’s Sentinel-2, they typically operate in isolation at the source, without considering the end-
to-end communication context or task-specific objectives. In contrast, the SemCom concept is a broader
paradigm that envisions the joint optimization of sensing, processing, transmission, and interpretation,
guided by a shared Knowledge Base (KB) and aligned with the semantic goals of the application at the
intelligent communicating nodes [10].
Together, these developments form the foundation for edge intelligence in EO [11, 12], where satel-
lites do not simply observe the Earth, but understand it, enabling dynamic, efficient, and autonomous
sensing and processing, considering the final goal of the EO task. In this paper, we focus on two core
procedures for this vision: (1) Scheduling of observations, which determines what to observe, when, by
which satellites, and under which acquisition parameters. The latter includes adjusting the attitude
control subsystem at the spacecrafts for dynamic adjustment of pointing, accounting for impairments
caused by the atmospheric turbulence. (2) Scheduling of processing, which allocates data processing and
communication tasks between satellite edge nodes and ground resources. These optimizations explicitly
consider constraints in terms of time, energy, as well as computation and communication resources.
Our proposed scenario integrating observation and computation scheduling is illustrated in Fig. 1: A
set of EO satellites capture images subject to atmospheric turbulence, and may belong to, or operate
independently from, the LEO constellation providing edge computing capabilities. Although the theoret-
ical framework is general and task-agnostic to accommodate a broad class of semantic and goal-oriented
inference problems, we focus on the EO task of observing a set of vessels (the targets) on the Earth’s
surface. The resource orchestrator at the ground station (GS) translates this query into an observation
scheduling, to decide what to be observed and the corresponding observation parameters, and a pro-
cessing scheduling, to decide how image processing is distributed between satellite edge nodes and, if
necessary, ground resources. The scheduled satellites run an object detection and localization algorithm
on the acquired images and encode the result. The processed information is then transmitted to the
ground for final aggregation, interpretation, and delivery to the end user.
Extensive research has addressed the data acquisition process, including agile satellites, as reviewed
in Section 2. However, despite being a mature technology, several aspects remain unexplored for real-
time, quality-aware optimization, with a few exceptions [13]. The second component of interest, edge
computing in space, has only recently begun to receive attention. Relevant use cases include mobile edge
computing, Internet of Things (IoT), EO and federated learning [11, 12, 14–17]. An example of a joint
observation and communication optimization is found in [18]. However, the observation model does not
2


--- Page 3 ---
Draft
capture image quality or atmospheric turbulence, and the processing model also includes simplifications
that moves it away from the optimal allocation.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the fundamentals of EO, includ-
ing the key elements of the considered optimizations: the data acquisition and observation scheduling,
the meteorological and atmospheric turbulences, and the data processing techniques. Then, the system
model is introduced in Section 3. In Section 4, the optimization problems for the observation scheduling
and the edge computing are formulated, and Section 5 includes the evaluation results that demonstrate
the achieved gains. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2
Fundamentals of Earth Observation
EO satellites generate large amounts of data about the Earth’s surface, water bodies, and atmosphere.
For example, the ESA Sentinel missions acquire approximately 12 TB of images daily, while NASA
missions collectively provide 20-30 TB per day. These volumes are rapidly increasing as new missions
are planned and launched. EO images are used for different purposes requiring computer vision processing
and inference, e.g., object localization and detection, semantic labeling of image regions, change detection,
or time series analysis. Table 1 provides a representative list of EO missions and State-of-the-Art (SoA)
processing algorithms.
2.1
Data acquisition and scheduling
The EO satellite payload includes various remote sensing instruments, such as cameras, radar, spec-
trometers, or thermal sensors. Optical cameras are often multi-spectral, ranging from the near infrared
(NIR) to the ultraviolet (UV) wavelengths. A full frame is typically obtained by superimposing frames
captured at different wavelengths. For example, a color image is produced by combining red, green, and
blue (RGB) channels, whereas a panchromatic image is obtained from a wide-band capture that provides
higher spatial resolution.
The area covered and the quality of the resulting images are primarily affected by (i) the altitude
of the orbit; (ii) the Field of View (FOV), which is the angular width that determines the extent of
the observable area captured by the camera sensor; (iii) the Ground Sample Distance (GSD), which
represents the actual distance on the ground between the centers of adjacent pixels, determining the
spatial resolution of the imagery [7].
Typically, lower altitudes correspond to lower GSD and FOV
values. Since high-resolution imagery requires low GSD values, LEO satellites are the prevalent choice
for EO. As the captured frame extends further off-nadir (away from the point directly below the satellite),
the GSD increases, degrading image spatial resolution [19]. Therefore, accurate control of the observed
surface footprint is essential for high-resolution EO. Modern attitude control subsystems enable dynamic
adjustment of pointing to meet such observation requirements. Additionally, pansharpening, where a
multispectral frame is combined with a panchromatic frame, can be used to reduce the GSD and enhance
image quality.
The new generation of agile EO satellites (AEOSs), equipped with full three-axis attitude control
(roll, pitch, and yaw) [20], significantly enhances data acquisition capabilities, extending the duration of
visible time windows (VTWs), while enabling multiple observation time windows (OTWs) for a given
observation target within a single orbital pass. We refer to VTW as the time interval during which a
satellite has visibility of a target, whereas OTWs denote the specific subintervals during which the actual
imaging takes place. Although this improved flexibility expands the range of feasible observation sched-
ules, it also complicates the OTW selection when multiple targets are involved in the same scheduling
time horizon (STH). This challenge is known as AEOS scheduling problem (AEOSSP), which consists of
determining the target observation sequence, the corresponding OTW, and, in multi-satellite scenarios,
the satellite responsible for executing such actions [21]. The objective is to maximize the observation
profit while satisfying a set of operational and resource constraints. The observation profit is a metric
that quantifies the value of an observation and depends on the purpose of the mission; common definitions
include image quality [22], target priority [23], or the influence of atmospheric conditions [24]. Given the
NP-hard nature of the AEOSSP [25], where computational complexity grows rapidly with the number
of satellites and targets, exact optimization approaches become impractical for large problem instances.
Consequently, a large volume of literature has focused on heuristic and learning-based methods [13,26],
especially when resources are limited and real-time scheduling is required. Recent research integrates the
AEOSSP into the operation of the entire satellite system to jointly optimize observation, computation,
and communication tasks [18,27,28].
3


--- Page 4 ---
Draft
Table 1: Earth Observation (EO) missions and SoA image processing algorithms.
EO missions
Name
Agency/Company Constellation
Imaging capabilities
Sentinel-2
ESA
2 satellites at 786 km.
13 spectral bands from Visible
and Near Infra-Red (VNIR) to
Short Wave Infra-Red (SWIR).
GOES
NOAA and NASA
3 geostationary satellites.
16 spectral bands: VNIR, Mid
Wave Infra-Red (MWIR), and
Long Wave Infra-Red (LWIR).
PlanetScope
[29]
PlanetLabs
> 430 3U CubeSats Doves and
SuperDoves at 475-525 km.
8-band multispectral images.
WorldView
Series [30]
Maxar
3
satellites
at
496
km
(WorldView-1),
770
km
(WorldView-2)
and
617
km
(WorldView-3).
WorldView-1:
panchromatic
images.
WorldView-2 and 3:
8-band multispectral images.
Image processing algorithms
Name
Application
Architecture and charac-
teristics
Performance
JPEG2000
Compression
Scalable lossy and lossless com-
pression.
–
Single
Shot
Detector
(SSD)
Object
detection
and localization
Single CNN to predict multiple
bounding boxes and their class
probabilities from multiple fea-
ture maps.
Mean
Average
Precision
(mAP) @0.5 ≥68% on PAS-
CAL VOC2007 dataset.
YOLO
(v8)
[31]
Classification, seg-
mentation,
object
detection,
and
tracking
Multiple CNN and fully con-
nected layers to predict the
bounding boxes of the objects
mAP @0.5 = 76.8%.
GOTURN
[32]
Time series analysis
CaffeNet architecture to pre-
dict the bounding box coordi-
nates of an object in the frame
from a previous one.
Accuracy = 61%, Robustness
= 90%.
EndNet [33]
Multimodal
data
fusion
Encoder-decoder NN
Averaged accuracy = 93.88%.
2.2
Meteorological effects
Meteorological factors play a key role in selecting the most suitable image acquisition and processing
techniques, directly impacting their effectiveness and accuracy. The atmosphere acts as a massive ther-
modynamic system with slow, periodic oscillations caused by atmospheric tides, and small fluctuations
in the atmospheric refractive index due to slight temperature variations.
The thermal micro-variations are explained by the appearance of convective air currents. These are
caused, horizontally, by the progressive warming of the ground by the Sun and, vertically, by veloc-
ity gradients between different atmospheric layers. The latter modifies the uniform characteristics of
medium’s viscosity due to dynamic mixing and random subflows, called turbulent vortices or eddies [34],
which induce characteristic image aberrations, compromising the achievable angular camera resolution.
Atmospheric turbulence can be modelled through phase screens, which contain the phase fluctuation
related to the refractive index fluctuation spectrum. To realistically simulate the way lightwave aberra-
tions are captured by a camera, a thin phase screen technique is employed, based on the Kolmogorov
power spectrum density of the refractive index [34]. This phase screen is then superimposed on the wave-
front of the light as it propagates through the simulated atmospheric layer. Figure 2 shows an example
of the impact of the atmospheric turbulence in the performance of the state-of-the-art object detection
4


--- Page 5 ---
Draft
Figure 2: Impact of the atmospheric turbulence in ship detection and localization using YOLOv8. The
severity of the atmospheric turbulence is parametrized in the structure parameter C2
n(0) [34]. The input
images and mission parameters are from [35]. The output of the algorithm are the blue bounding boxes
that include coordinates and confidence about the detection.
Figure 3: CDF for C2
n(0) based on experimental ground-level measurements. Measures taken from [36].
and localization algorithm, YOLOv8, applied to a pre-trained EO database of images collected from a
500 m eye altitude level [35]. As the turbulence becomes more severe, parameterized in larger refractive
index fluctuations and structure parameter C2
n [34], the algorithm struggles to detect vessels. However,
this effect is often overlooked in system optimization. Fig. 3 shows an empirical CDF of this parameter
as derived from experimental ground-level measurements [36].
2.2.1
Atmospheric channel estimation
Accurate estimation of the refractive index structure constant, C2
n, is essential for modeling optical prop-
agation, outage probability, scintillation, and beam-wander effects in satellite-to-ground optical links.
Unlike ground-based astronomy or terrestrial FSO, where C2
n can be measured directly using SCIDAR
(Scintillation Detection and Ranging), MASS (Multi Aperture Scintillation Sensor), DIMM (Differential
Image Motion Monitor), or scintillometers, LEO platforms impose strict constraints on payload mass,
power, pointing, and telemetry budget. Consequently, a rigorous assessment of all estimation method-
ologies is required to identify those suitable for spaceborne implementation.
In Table 2 we summarize the most robust and practical methods for estimating C2
n in LEO missions
based on physical arguments, algorithmic feasibility, and published empirical evidence. Passive optical
approaches, including speckle-based, image-gradient, and hybrid CNN–physics methods, are fundamen-
tally unsuitable for spaceborne implementation, as they are primarily sensitive to turbulence local to the
receiver, which is negligible at satellite altitude, while the dominant contribution to optical degradation
arises in the lower atmosphere; moreover, their assumptions of quasi-stationary, long-path geometries are
incompatible with rapid orbital motion and impose significant on-board computational and calibration
burdens. Instrumental profilers such as scintillometers, SCIDAR, MASS, and radiosondes are likewise
infeasible for LEO platforms and remain limited to ground-based validation. In contrast, meteorologi-
cal estimation methods based on Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) models and satellite sounders
provide a physically consistent and operationally viable solution, offering global, continuous, and fore-
5


--- Page 6 ---
Draft
Table 2: Overview of C2
n estimation techniques .
Comparison of C2
n Estimation Techniques and Associated References
Category
Technique
Method Basis
Key
Limitation
/
Chal-
lenge
Speckle-based
Ob-
servation (ML) [37]
ML
reconstruction
of
the
C2
n
profile
from
single-shot
star/beacon speckle patterns.
Lack of a clear analytical the-
ory connecting speckle obser-
vations to the turbulence pro-
file. For GSs only.
Passive
Op-
tical
Image
Gradient
Method [38,39]
Calculates C2
n from the statis-
tics of image shifts (tilt vari-
ance) in long-range video, sim-
plifying physics-based assump-
tions.
Influenced by turbulence near
the camera,
gradient imple-
mentation
and
ROI
choice.
Critical for implementing and
processing on-board a satellite.
Physics-based CNN
(Hybrid) [37,38]
Integrates convolutional layers
with a differentiable gradient
approach,
explicitly incorpo-
rating optical parameters like
aperture (D) and distance (L).
Suffer from poor generaliza-
tion across unseen datasets or
changes in optical parameters.
Tatarskii Gradient
(NWP/Satellite)
[40–44]
Calculates C2
n using the verti-
cal gradient of potential tem-
perature derived from satellite
(AIRS) or Numerical Weather
Prediction (NWP) data.
Requires empirical estimation
of
the
outer
length
scale.
Suffers
from
zero-gradient
problem in neutrally-buoyant
boundary layer.
Meteorological Horizontal
Structure
Func-
tions [43,44]
Estimates C2
n from horizontal
spatial statistics from NWP,
applying corrections for inher-
ent model smoothing.
Produces area-averaged esti-
mates that fail to capture local,
highly intermittent turbulence
variability.
Second-Order
Turbulence
Clo-
sure [43]
Predictive
approach
solving
prognostic equations for scalar
variances within NWP turbu-
lence closure schemes. Turbu-
lent mixing effects.
Largest errors near the top of
the boundary layer. Requires
accurate determination of Con-
vective Boundary Layer (CBL)
height (zi).
Instrumental
Scintillometers [38,
39,41]
Double-ended optical measure-
ment of irradiance scintillation
and
angle-of-arrival
fluctua-
tions. Measures path-averaged
C2
n.
Bulky, costly, and requires pre-
cise alignment over long dis-
tances. Systematic errors due
to poor focal alignment.
For
communications with GSs.
Thermosondes [37,
39,42,44]
Balloon-borne fine-wire probes
measuring temperature turbu-
lence (C2
T ) directly over a wide
range of elevations.
Estimation error is dominated
by the intrinsic intermittency
of turbulence (RMS error ≈
50%). Intrusive deployment.
castable C2
n profiles with full four-dimensional coverage and inherent sensitivity to the atmospheric layers
that dominate optical propagation. These characteristics enable seamless integration with link-budget
analyses and end-to-end simulators without imposing additional payload, power, or calibration require-
ments on the spacecraft.
While existing SemCom frameworks increasingly account for physical and
semantic noise, atmospheric noise that originates at the observation stage remains largely unexplored.
Incorporating atmospheric effects into a unified system optimization of observation, communication, and
semantic processing constitutes a key open research challenge.
6


--- Page 7 ---
Draft
2.3
Data processing
There is a plethora of image processing and compression techniques that can be applied to the acquired
images, ranging from traditional methods like JPEG to advanced AI semantic extraction algorithms
designed for specific tasks.
This also includes popular object detection and localization algorithms,
such as the YOLOv8 algorithm mentioned earlier and, more recently, the use of generative AI [45].
The selection of the specific algorithm depends on multiple factors, including the compression factor,
the complexity of the algorithm, and the accuracy of the task. The compression factor indicates the
reduction of the data size, which is critical for efficient data storage and transmission. The algorithm
complexity affects the time elapsed from data capture until the information is ready for transmission, as
well as the energy consumed during processing. More complex algorithms require additional resources but
may provide better performance. Finally, task accuracy is measured by specific performance parameters
that ensure the desired outcomes are met. AI algorithms can be trained on EO image datasets that
often include images captured under varying conditions and featuring a small GSD to achieve a high
accuracy [35].
Regarding object detection and localization algorithms, several performance metrics are used to
evaluate their effectiveness, with the supported frames per second (FPS) being crucial for real-time
applications. Precision and recall refer to the proportion of correctly detected objects among all detected
objects and among all actual objects, respectively. In addition, the mAP, ranging between 0 and 1, is
derived from the precision and recall values. Another metric is the Intersection over Union (IoU), which
measures the overlap between the predicted boundary and the real object boundary (i.e., the ground
truth).
An IoU threshold is predefined (typical values being 0.5 and 0.95) to determine whether a
detection is correct.
3
System description
In the considered network, the space segment is responsible for sensing (image capturing), preliminary
data handling, and on-board processing, and is organized into two logically distinct but tightly coupled
functional layers: the Observation Layer, for Earth data acquisition, and the Edge Layer, for distributed
computing, storage, and communication.
These layers define functional roles rather than physically
distinct satellite platforms. Typically, EO satellites have limited on-board computing and storage, being
optimized for sensing performance, including spatial resolution, coverage, and revisit time, rather than
onboard processing and long-term storage. They transmit raw or minimally processed data (the images)
to the edge layer for processing and delivery to the ground segment, where the GS and end-users are
located.
However, other missions may adopt more integrated designs, with sensing and processing
capabilities coexisting on the same spacecraft. This layered abstraction enables a general and technology-
agnostic system analysis based on a logical separation between sensing and processing functionalities,
while still allowing flexible cooperation between satellites.
The end-to-end workflow of the system (Fig. 4) can be described as a sequence of interconnected
functional blocks across the different layers. An end-user issues a query, which specifies an observation
task that can be either semi-static (“Map area X for Y months”) or dynamic (“Track vessel with ID X”
or “Map the area around volcano Y in eruption”). In our scenario, the task is dynamic, involving the
observation of multiple targets over a specified time horizon. The query is translated into a technical
request to the network in the form of an orchestration of sensing, energy, computation, and communica-
tion resources, typically performed at the GS. This orchestration is divided into observation scheduling
and processing scheduling, both representing complex optimization problems [1], as they must account
for resource availability, network conditions, and environmental factors such as metheorological effects.
Following the observation schedule decision, which includes the attitude parameters to be applied, the
EO satellites acquire raw observational data. These measurements are affected by atmospheric noise,
which impacts the quality of the acquired information, while the observation strategy aims at maximiz-
ing observation profit. The acquired data, consisting of images containing the observed targets, is then
transmitted from the observation layer to the edge layer through inter-satellite links. At the edge layer,
semantic-aware processing is performed in parallel by cooperating edge nodes according to the processing
schedule. The images are processed and compressed using either classical algorithms, such as JPEG,
or more advanced semantic-empowered processing techniques (see Table 1), enabling task-oriented data
reduction prior to transmission of the processed information to the GS. The workload associated with
semantic processing and compression is distributed across multiple edge nodes, each characterized by
heterogeneous computing, energy, and connectivity capabilities. The allocation of processing tasks to
7


--- Page 8 ---
Draft
Figure 4: E2E procedure of the proposed framework: (1) Upon receiving a task, the ground station
orchestrates sensing, computation, and communication resources; (2) EO satellites acquire images ac-
cording to the observation schedule; (3) the acquire data is transmitted to the edge layer; (4) based on
the processing schedule, the edge layer performs semantic processing and delivers the processed data to
ground; (5) any data not processed on-board is further computed at the ground layer; (6) the ground
layer performs data gathering, producing the final result for the end user.
edge nodes is a key system decision that must account for the available computational resources at each
node, the current network conditions, and the timing constraints imposed by the end-user query. The
processed outputs generated by the edge nodes are forwarded to the GS through the downlink, where they
are gathered. If complete processing at the edge is not feasible due to timing constraints, the remaining
data is processed at the cloud-enabled GS. The final result is then delivered to the end-user. For this
workflow, satellites in the Observation and the Edge layer are connected to the ground segment through
feeder links, in the downlink and uplink directions, while intra-space communications are enabled via
intra- and cross-layer ISLs.
We next describe the models and notation for the elements of Fig. 4.
3.1
Topology
Observation Layer: The AEOS satellites in the Observation Layer, indexed by s ∈S, perform data
acquisition over a set of targets T distributed across the visible surface. The satellites are deployed at an
altitude ho with an inclination io. The quality of observations is affected by atmospheric turbulence, as
detailed in Section 2. Each target t ∈T can be observed by a satellite s ∈S across multiple orbital passes;
we denote by Os,t the set of orbits during which satellite s can observe target t. As representative cases,
our evaluations in Section 5 consider two configurations for this layer: a single AEOS and a four-satellite
Walker Star constellation, with one satellite per orbital plane.
Edge Layer: The Edge Layer consists of a LEO satellite constellation of N cooperative satellites, indexed
by e ∈E. These satellites process raw or partially processed data close to the source, supporting timely
and efficient delivery of results to the GS. Without loss of generality, we consider a single orbital plane
deployed at an altitude he with an inclination ie, noting that the extension to multiple planes follows
8


--- Page 9 ---
Draft
directly. The slant range between these satellites is defined as dISL = 2(RE + he) sin (π/N), where RE
denotes the Earth’s radius.
Each satellite in this layer is equipped with computational resources to
perform onboard processing, as detailed later, and communicates with both the Observation and the
Ground Layer.
Ground Layer: The ground segment comprises a set of GSs, denoted by g ∈G, which connect to
end-users and the space segment via feeder links, in the downlink and uplink directions.
Without
loss of generality, we assume a single GS receives user requests, which are translated into a resource
orchestration plan that includes the observation scheduling and processing allocation, and all GSs can
potentially receive processed images from the Edge Layer. Ground stations are equipped with substantial
cloud computing resources to handle non-time-critical tasks and to augment edge capacity. The downlink
feeder links connecting the GSs to the Edge Layer are typically the main communication bottleneck. In
the evaluations of Section5, the 26 GSs are located at ground positions accordingly to the KSAT ground
station service [46].
3.2
Acquisition model
For each orbit o ∈Os,t of the Observation Layer satellites, VTWs,t,o represents the VTW for satellite
s over target t, defined as the interval [sws,t,o, ews,t,o], with sws,t,o and ews,t,o representing its start
and end times. Exploiting the enhanced maneuverability of AEOSs, each VTWs,t,o is discretized into
a set of OTWs with a fixed time step of prc seconds. Accordingly, OTWs,t,o,w denotes the OTW for
satellite s and target t in orbit o, and w ∈Ws,t,o refers to the indexes of OTWs contained within such
VTWs,t,o. We assume that the actual observation duration is significantly shorter than the required
attitude maneuvering and onboard processing times, which is typically the case; hence, the operation is
constrained by these tasks rather than by acquisition time. Accordingly, each OTWs,t,o,w is characterized
solely by its observation timestamp τs,t,o,w and an associated profit σs,t,o,w. For the sake of simplicity,
this profit is defined in terms of image quality, specifically the GSD, although the formulation can be
extended to incorporate additional Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) such as image freshness. [13].
Observing OTWs,t,o,w requires a given attitude defined by its roll (θs,t,o,w), pitch (ϕs,t,o,w), and yaw
(ψs,t,o,w) angles. Each satellite’s maneuvering capabilities are restricted by its maximum roll, pitch, and
yaw angles (θmax, ϕmax, and ψmax, respectively), as well as by the slewing velocity of the sensor. The
attitude transition time function is typically modeled as a piecewise linear function. Specifically, the
attitude transition time between two consecutive observations is computed as [47]:
∆τt,w−t′,w′ =















11.66,
αt,w−t′,w′ ≤10◦
5 + αt,w−t′,w′/1.5,
10◦< αt,w−t′,w′ ≤30◦
10 + αt,w−t′,w′/2,
30◦< αt,w−t′,w′ ≤60◦
16 + αt,w−t′,w′/2.5,
60◦< αt,w−t′,w′ ≤90◦
22 + αt,w−t′,w′/3,
αt,w−t′,w′ > 90◦
,
(1)
αt,w−t′,w′ = |θs,t,o,w −θs,t′,o,w′| + |ϕs,t,o,w −ϕs,t′,o,w′| + |ψs,t,o,w −ψs,t′,o,w′|,
(2)
where αt,w−t′,w′ is the total attitude transition angle between OTWs,t,o,w and OTWs,t′,o,w′. The power
required for attitude maneuver transitions is denoted by Pman. While existing literature on the AEOSSP
frequently discusses the energy consumption rate (energy per unit of time), we explicitly formulate this in
terms of power to maintain consistency throughout this work. For each satellite s, the total maneuvering
energy is limited by Emax, which defines the maximum allowable energy budget for attitude transitions.
The sequence of selected OTWs,t,o,w by the AEOSSP is denoted by OTW⋆, and it defines the sequence
of times τsk,tk,ok,wk at which the Observation Layer will deliver a new image to be processed by the Edge
Layer:
OTW⋆=
 OTWs1,t1,o1,w1, OTWs2,t2,o2,w2, . . . , OTWsK,tK,oK,wK

,
τs1,t1,o1,w1 ≤τs2,t2,o2,w2 ≤· · · ≤τsK,tK,oK,wK,
ysi,ti,oi,wi = 1, ∀i = 1, . . . , K,
(3)
where ysi,ti,oi,wi is the binary decision variable that denote if OTWsi,ti,oi,wi is scheduled or not. Each
element in OTW⋆corresponds to an observation, i.e., a frame composed of Nimg images of size Dimg with
a total size Ds to be processed by the Edge Layer. The images containing the targets have a resolution
wimg × himg bits, where wimg and himg are the width and height in pixels.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Draft
As described in Section 2, atmospheric turbulence significantly affects the quality of this acquired
data and is quantified by the C2
n value during the OTW, which in our evaluations is sampled from
the distribution in Fig. 3.
To ensure high-quality observations, we establish a threshold, C2
n,max(0),
measured at ground-level, which represents the maximum allowable turbulence for a high-quality frame.
Any observation performed under conditions exceeding this threshold is discarded.
3.3
Computation model
We next introduce the computational and energy consumption models used to characterize the processing
capabilities of the Edge and Ground Layers nodes, providing an abstract representation of execution
time and energy consumption. The space and ground processing nodes, indexed by p ∈P = E ∪G,
are equipped with a multi-core parallel processing architecture, characterized by the number of available
processing cores N (p)
cores, the maximum operating frequency f (p)
max, and the power consumption P (p)
max when
operating at maximum frequency. In the evaluations of Section 5, both Central Processing Unit (CPU)
and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) architectures are considered, resulting in heterogeneous parameter
settings.
When processing node p operates at a clock frequency fp ≤f (p)
max, its processing power consumption
is modeled as
P (fp) = P (p)
max
 
fp
f (p)
max
!3
.
(4)
Let W denote the work of the algorithm of interest, defined as the number of floating-point operations
(FLOPs) required to process a single unit of data (i.e., an image). The value of W is assumed to be
known and depends on the algorithmic characteristics, such as the stopping criteria or the architecture
of a neural network in a machine learning model. To account for non-ideal execution, we introduce
a random variable (RV) C(p) that captures the computational inefficiency at processing node p when
executing a computing task. This factor models the overhead due to imperfect task allocation, memory
access, and data management, and depends on both the node architecture and the algorithm. Finally, let
N (p)
FLOPs denote the number of FLOPs that each processing core at node p can perform per clock cycle.
According to the Bulk-Synchronous Parallel (BSP) model [48], the execution time of an algorithm
that is executed in parallel in processing node p operating at frequency fp can be modeled as
T (p)
proc (fp) = T (p)
work

fp; C(p)
+ T (p)
sync,
(5)
where RV T (p)
sync is the delay due to communication and synchronization among processing cores in the
architecture, and the RV of the time needed to execute the work of the algorithm is
T (p)
work

fp; C(p)
=
C(p)W
N (p)
coresN (p)
FLOPsfp
.
(6)
Consequently, the mean execution time µ(p)
T
is modeled as
µ(p)
T (fp) =
µ(p)
C W
N (p)
cores N (p)
FLOPs fp
+ µ(p)
sync,
(7)
where µ(p)
C
and µ(p)
sync are the mean values of C(p) and T (p)
sync, respectively. T (p)
proc(fp) is experimentally
characterized in Section 5 for representative computing platforms.
If the processing power for a given clock frequency P(fp) is constant, the mean energy consumption
for processing an image at node p using an algorithm requiring W FLOPs can be calculated as
E(p)
proc (fp; W)= P (fp) · µ(p)
T (fp) = P (p)
maxf 3
p µ(p)
T (fp)

f (p)
max
3
=
P (p)
max

f (p)
max
3
 
f 2
pµ(p)
C W
N (p)
coresN (p)
FLOPs
+ f 3
pµ(p)
sync
!
.
(8)
10


--- Page 11 ---
Draft
3.4
Communication model
The satellites are interconnected both with the ground segment and with each other through the feeder
link and the ISLs, respectively.
Free-space optical (FSO) technology is considered the primary ISL
solution, as it has become the de facto standard for high-data-rate LEO inter-satellite communications.
Due to the controlled relative positioning and stable distances among satellites within the constellation,
pointing errors can be effectively minimized. Consequently, ISLs are assumed to be fixed during network
operation, with a constant data rate RISL and consuming a fixed transmission power PISL. In contrast,
satellite-to-ground Radio Frequency (RF) feeder links are more robust to atmospheric impairments and
less sensitive to pointing errors than FSO, which makes them suitable for DL transmissions where channel
conditions vary due to satellite mobility and atmospheric effects. Hence, the feeder links are assumed to
rely on conventional RF technology, characterized by bandwidth B, transmission power PDL, and total
antenna gain GDL.
The system operation is divided into time slots of equal duration Tslot, which are indexed by k ∈
{0, 1, 2, . . . }. Let Nimg(k) be the number of images captured at time slot k by the Observation layer,
with a total data size Ds. Moreover, for notation simplicity,let g(k) denote the ground station defined for
transmitting the images captured at slot k in the downlink and ℓg(k) = (e, g(k)) be the (edge) satellite-
to-ground link established to download the data captured at time slot k, such that e ∈E is the satellite
that communicates with ground station g(k). We define the time-varying data rate for ℓg(k) from its
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) on an interference-free additive-white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with
free-space path loss and with noise power σ as
γk = GDL PDL

c
4π de,g(k) fc σ
2
,
(9)
where fc is the carrier frequency, and de,g(k) is the distance between satellite e and GS g(k). Then, the
communication rate is selected using the set of achievable spectral efficiencies defined in the DVB-S2X
system [49], which constitute the set RDVB = {r} in b/s/Hz. Next, let γmin(r) ≥2r −1 be the minimum
required SNR to achieve a block error rate < 10−5 with spectral efficiency r. The modulation and coding
scheme for downlink communication is selected to achieve the data rate
Rk = B max {r ∈RDVB-S2 : γk ≥γmin(r)} .
(10)
Scattering refers to the transmission of uncompressed data from a source EO satellite s ∈S to a
processing node p ∈P = E ∪G, i.e., either to an edge-layer satellite or directly to a ground station for
processing. Gathering, on the other hand, is the operation of collecting the compressed data from all the
servers at the ground station. In the following, the apex (u) will be the label associated to the scatter
phase where the data is uncompressed, while the apex (c) the label associated to the gather phase where
the data has been compressed.
Immediately after capturing a frame of Nimg images at satellite s with a total data size Ds, these
are scattered to the edge satellites for processing, leading to a distributed computing problem. The
goal is to deliver the data in a timely manner while reducing the end-to-end (E2E) energy consumption,
which involves the joint optimization of communications and computing. To maintain the stability of
the system, the scatter phase for an observation performed at time slot k ∈{0, 1, . . . } is scheduled in
the same time slot k. Then, the processing of the Nimg captured images is scheduled in time slot k + 1,
and the gather phase is scheduled in time slot k + 2. Note that this allows for implementing pipelining,
where the scatter phase of the images captured at time slot k occurs in parallel with the processing and
gathering phases for images captured at time slots k −1 and k −2, respectively.
The overall path from satellite s to ground station g is time-varying. During scattering and gathering,
data may need to traverse multiple ISLs before reaching a satellite that is currently connected to the
ground segment.
While the ISLs are assumed to be stable and fixed during network operation, the
ground-to-satellite feeder link may change over time. In particular, both the satellite e ∈E connected
to the GS via the feeder link eg(k) and the corresponding transmission rate Rk may vary with time
index k. Hence, time dependence is explicitly captured in the notation through the time-slot index k.
Accordingly, the path for sending uncompressed data from s to p and compressed data from p to g in
time slot k is denoted as
Ls,p,g(k) = L(u)
s,p(k)
[
L(c)
p,g(k),
p ∈P.
(11)
where L(u)
s,p(k) is the set of links where uncompressed bits are routed to satellite p (scatter phase) and
L(c)
p,g(k) is the set of links over which the compressed bits are routed from satellite p to the ground station
(gather phase) in time slot k.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Draft
During the scatter phase, the observation satellite transmits data packets – each containing entire
images of average size Dimg or segments of them – to the edge satellites. Let D ∈(0, Dimg] bits be the
size of a data packet to be transmitted. Since the intra-plane ISL data rate, RISL, is fixed, the mean
time needed to deliver and image from the source satellite s to a processing satellite p ∈E is the sum of
the transmission time and the propagation time, i.e.,
T (u)
comm(s, p, D) =
X
ℓ∈L(u)
s,p(k)
 D
RISL
+ dISL
c

(12)
Conversely, the time needed to deliver the semantic information extracted from an image in satellite
p to the GS g in time slot k is
T (c)
comm(p, g, D) = T (c)
comm(p, e, D) + T (c)
comm(e, g, D)
(13)
=
X
ℓ∈L(c)
p,e(k)

D
ρRISL
+ dISL
c

+ D
ρRk
+ de,g(k)
c
,
(14)
where ρ ≥1 is the summarization capacity (i.e., compression ratio) of the compression algorithm.
Next, we define the energy consumption models for communication. Since the ISLs operate at a fixed
transmission power and we assume an ideal power amplifier efficiency, the energy required to transmit
D bits of data over the ℓ-th FSO ISL is given by the product of the effective transmit power and the
transmission duration
Etx
ISL,ℓ(D) = PISL,ℓD
RISL
.
(15)
Similarly, the energy required to transmit D bits of data over the feeder link during time slot k is
Etx
DL(D, k) = PDLD
Rk
.
(16)
4
Optimization
Fulfilling an EO task in a constrained environment involves a delicate balance between accuracy, delay,
and energy consumption. The conflicting objectives must all be considered in the resource allocation
optimization, which can be conceptually formulated as follows: Identify the best set of EO and edge
satellites for image capturing, semantic information extraction and encoding, and routing to the ground,
with the aim of minimizing energy consumption while meeting accuracy and timing constraints. Energy
consumption is influenced mainly by the data acquisition, on-board algorithm execution, and data trans-
mission. Image capturing is mainly impacted by the amount and frequency of the targets to be observed,
which can exceed the Observation Layer capacity. On the Edge Layer, semantic extraction introduces
a fundamental trade-off: it increases onboard processing energy, yet significantly reduces transmission
energy by shrinking the data volume, since semantically processed information is much smaller than raw
imagery. Additionally, the system optimization must take into account the hard constraint that each
frame must be captured, processed, and completed before the subsequent frame arrives. If this is not
achieved, images may need to be discarded or not captured to avoid congestion in the system. If only a
portion of the data can be processed, the remaining data will be transmitted in its raw form to the GS,
thereby increasing the load on the communication network and prolonging transmission time.
These considerations form the basis for formulating the two optimization problems underlying obser-
vation scheduling (Pobs) and processing scheduling (Psch), as discussed next.
4.1
Observation scheduling and attitude control for observation profit max-
imization
The main difficulty when addressing the AEOSSP, denoted Pobs, is that the volume of requests exceeds
the observation capacity of the AEOS and therefore only a selection of targets can be observed in each
time slot. In this case, the aim is to maximize the collected observation profit while meeting all time,
energy, and storage constraints.
Data from the Observation Layer is dynamically processed as it is
acquired, and therefore storage constraints are neglected in this problem.
As introduced in (3), for each observation time window OTWs,t,o,w, let ys,t,o,w ∈{0, 1} denote
whether the window is scheduled (ys,t,o,w = 1) or not (ys,t,o,w = 0). Furthermore, let zt,w,t′,w′ ∈{0, 1}
12


--- Page 13 ---
Draft
indicate whether OTWs,t,o,w is scheduled immediately before OTWs,t′,o,w′. The goal is to optimize the
profit associated with observation OTWs,t,o,w, which we define in terms of image quality. Without loss
of generality, we assume that all targets have the same priority and define the profit in terms of the GSD
during the observation as
σs,t,o,w = GSDnadir
GSDs,t,o,w
,
(17)
where GSDnadir and GSDs,t,o,w are the GSD at nadir and during OTWs,t,o,w, respectively.
The observation scheduling problem is then formulated as
Pobs :
maximize
ys,t,o,w, zt,w,t′,w′∈{0,1}
X
s∈S
X
t∈T
X
o∈Os,t
X
w∈Ws,t,o
σs,t,o,w · ys,t,o,w
(18)
subject to
sws,t,o ≤τs,t,o,w ≤ews,t,o
(18a)
zt,w,t′,w′ · (τs,t,o,w + ∆τt,w−t′,w′) ≤τs,t′,o,w′
(18b)
X
t,t′∈T
X
w,w′∈Ws,t,o
zt,w,t′,w′ · (Pman · ∆τt,w−t′,w′) ≤Emax
(18c)
X
s∈S
X
o∈Os,t
X
w∈Ws,t,o
ys,t,o,w ≤1
(18d)
where the optimization objective function (18) is designed to maximize the sum of collected profits;
constraint (18a) ensures that the observation of target t occurs within one of its VTW; constraint
(18b) models the attitude transition requirement, ensuring that OTWs,t′,o,w′ can only be scheduled
after OTWs,t,o,w if the attitude maneuver is feasible; constraint (18c) guarantees that the total energy
consumption does not exceed the maximum allowed energy and constraint (18d) guarantees that each
target can be observed at most once in the schedule.
In Pobs, the integer optimization variables take values in {0, 1}, and both the objective function
and the constraints are linear; therefore, this is a binary integer linear programming (0–1 ILP) prob-
lem. Such formulations, which are commonly used to model resource-constrained scheduling tasks, do
not admit closed-form solutions and can exhibit high computational complexity, especially at scale.
Therefore, sub-optimal or heuristic approaches are typically adopted in practice, as exhaustive search
becomes computationally prohibitive for large-scale instances. In this work, we solve Pobs using the SCIP
solver [50,51], a state-of-the-art framework for mixed-integer optimization.
4.2
Edge computing for energy minimization
The scheduling of edge computing and downlink tasks is organized according to the available downlink
times at the ground segment and the observation scheduling for image acquisition at the EO satellites.
The pipeline model establishes that Nimg captured and scattered in time slot k are processed in k + 1
and gathered in time slot k + 2. This imposes a constraint for the optimization that the scattering and
processing of the images in a frame captured at time slot k must complete in time to reach the downlink
satellite before the end of time slot k + 2. Otherwise, downlink is considered a failure and the system
must proceed to capture, process, and deliver the frames captured in the upcoming time slots.
The optimization variables are the P-dimensional vector of the processing frequencies f = [f1, f2, . . . , fP ]
of each satellite and GS in P and the SP-dimensional vector of the load distribution x = [x1,1, x1,2, . . . , xS,P ].
The variable xs,p indicates the fraction of the computation load generated in s ∈S that is processed in
p ∈P. Accordingly, a value of xs,p ̸= 0 means that xs,pDs uncompressed bits are scattered from the
source satellite s to the processing node p and then xs,pDs/ρ compressed bits are gathered from satellite
p to ground station g. Both the computing load and data scale linearly with the value of xs,p, so that
if source s generates the load Cs and data Ds, the load processed at the satellite p is xs,pCs addressing
xs,pDs data.
The mean energy consumption for a batch of images captured at time slot k is modeled as the sum
of the transmission energy and the processing energy, i.e.,
Ek (x, f; W, Ds, ρ) = E(u)
k
(s, g, x, Ds) + E(c)
k
(s, g, x, Ds, ρ) +
X
p∈P
Dsxs,p
Dimg
E(p)
proc (fp; W) .
(19)
Given the workload allocation vector x, the total energy consumed during the scattering phase,
which occurs during the observation time slot k, corresponds to the energy required to transmit the
13


--- Page 14 ---
Draft
uncompressed data to the processing nodes through the routing paths
n
L(u)
s,p(k)
o
, including the downlink
to the GS g(k) as
E(u)
k
(s, g, x, Ds) =
X
p∈E



X
ℓ∈L(u)
s,p(k)
Etx
ISL,ℓ(xs,pDs)


+
X
ℓ∈L(u)
s,e (k)
Etx
ISL,ℓ
 xs,g(k)Ds

+ Etx
DL
 xs,g(k)Ds, k

,
(20)
Similarly, the energy consumed during the gathering phase corresponds to the energy required to transmit
the compressed data to the ground station.
E(c)
k
(s, g, x, Ds, ρ) =
X
p∈E



X
ℓ∈L(c)
p,g(k)
Etx
ISL,ℓ

xs,p
Ds
ρ

+ Etx
DL

xs,p
Ds
ρ




(21)
Accordingly, the scheduling optimization Problem Psch, which determines the optimal task allocation
vector x and processor frequency vector f, is formulated based on the BSP model as
Psch : minimize
x,f
Ek (x, f; W, Ds, ρ)
(22)
subject to
Dsxs,pµ(p)
T (fp)
Dimg
≤Tslot
∀p ∈P
(22a)
Ds

xs,g + 1
ρ
X
p∈E
xs,p

≤(Tslot −Tdelay(k))Rk
(22b)
X
p∈P
Dxs,p

I

ℓ, L(u)
s,p(k)

+ 1
ρI

ℓ, L(c)
p,g(k)

≤TslotRISL,ℓ
ℓ∈Ls,g,p(k) (22c)
fp ≤f max
p
,
∀p ∈P
(22d)
0 ≤xs,p ≤1,
∀p ∈P
(22e)
xs,g +
X
p∈E
xs,p = 1.
(22f)
Constraint (22a) represents the processing latency constraint, ensuring the computation assigned to
processing node p in ∈P can be completed, on average, within one time slot. Specifically, the mean
processing time required to handle the fraction xs,p of the workload generated at source s must not exceed
the slot duration Tslot. Constraint (22b) ensures that the total data sent to the ground station during
time slot k + 2, including both compressed and uncompressed portions, remains within the available
downlink capacity, where
Tdelay(k) = max
p∈E

T (c)
comm(p, e, Ds xs,p) + max
n
T (p)
proc (fp; Ds xs,p/Dimg) −Tslot, 0
o
(23)
is the maximum delay experienced by the data from an observation at slot k to begin the downlink in the
scheduled time slot k +2. Constraint (22c) enforces the inter-satellite link (ISL) capacity limit. For each
ISL ℓinvolved in the routing path Ls,g,p(k) during time slot k, the total traffic — either compressed or
not — must not exceed the available ISL transmission capacity. The indicator function I(ℓ, L) equals 1
if the routing path L contains link ℓand 0 otherwise. It is therefore used to account only for the portion
of traffic that traverses link ℓ. Constraint (22d) imposes bounds on the processor frequencies, ensuring
that each processing node operates within its feasible frequency range. Constraint (22e) enforces that the
workload allocation variables are fractional and bounded between zero and one. Finally, constraint (22f)
guarantees workload conservation, i.e., the total computation load generated at source s is fully allocated
across the ground station and the edge satellites.
Problem Psch is non-convex: a local-optimal solution can be obtained through partial dual decom-
position, block coordinate descent, or successive convex approximation.
However, we observed that
the processor frequency f ∗
p for all p ∈P that minimizes the energy consumption under stability con-
straints (22a) and (22d) is
f ∗
p =
µ(p)
C W
N (p)
coresN (p)
FLOPs
TslotDimg
D xs,p
−µ(p)
Tsync

(24)
14


--- Page 15 ---
Draft
which makes µ(p)
T
 f ∗
p

= Tslot for all p ∈P. Thus, for a given xs,p, the optimal processing energy is
Dxs,g
Dimg
E(p)
proc
 f ∗
p ; W

=
P (p)
maxTslot

µ(p)
C W
3

N (p)
coresN (p)
FLOPs
TslotDimg
D xs,p
−µ(p)
Tsync

f (p)
max
3
(25)
By substituting (25) into (22) and replacing the constraints (22a) and (22d) with
Dsxs,p
Dimg
 
µ(p)
C W
N (p)
coresN (p)
FLOPs f (p)
max
+ µ(p)
Tsync
!
≤Tslot,
∀p ∈P,
(26)
problem Psch becomes convex and can be readily solved using standard optimization libraries.
5
Performance evaluation
We present exemplary results for the two optimization problems in a system comprising a satellite
constellation with 23 satellites that provide edge computing resources to one EO satellite. Parameters
from the satellite WorldView-3 [30] are used for the image acquisition model and orbital parameters.
Without loss of generality, we assume that the observation satellites also serve as edge node, i.e., they
perform dual functions, so that he = ho = 617 km and ie = io = 98.6◦. The task of interest is vessel
detection within a defined area of interest. The Observation Layer captures images of regions where
vessels are present, which are then semantically processed using YOLOv8 to perform vessel localization
and detection.
Attitude maneuvers are constrained by slew limits θmax = 45◦, ϕmax = 45◦, and ψmax = 90◦, and
by a total energy budget of Emax = 1000 J. The power consumption for attitude transitions is set to
Pman = 2 W. Additionally, aligning with WorldView-3 specifications, we assume GSDnadir = 0.31 m/pixel.
We consider scenarios both with and without the effect of atmospheric turbulence. When turbulence is
accounted for, we perform a Monte Carlo simulation by sampling C2
n(0) values from the CDF shown in
Fig. 3, generating 1000 realizations for each acquisition. A threshold of C2
n,max(0) = 2 × 10−14, m−2/3 is
applied to evaluate these cases.
The EO satellite captures a given number of FPS with a resolution of 600×600 pixels and an average
GSD of 0.5 m, which might be affected by atmospheric turbulence. On average, the size of the semantic
data for ship detection (i.e., ships and bounding boxes) is 336 bits per image. Executing YOLOv8 for
this task requires WYOLO = 79.1 GFLOPs per image.
We consider both CPU and GPU architectures for the edge satellites. Specifically, three different
configurations are considered, where each satellite has either an 8-core CPU running at up to 1.8 GHz
with a power consumption of 6 W, or an NVIDIA Jetson Orin GPU, which can be either a Nano Super
or AGX, with a maximum power consumption of 15 and 60 W, respectively. The GS has a 64-core CPU
operating at a maximum frequency of 2.6 GHz with a maximum power consumption of 280 W.
For the considered constellation, average image size Dimg = 788.513 kbits and compression ratio
ρ = 2346. Under these conditions, the communication latency due to the transmission of both uncom-
pressed T (u)
comm(s, p, Dimg) and compressed data T (c)
comm(p, e, Dimg) can be closely approximated through
the propagation latency per intra-plane ISL for an orbital plane with N satellites in the Edge Layer
deployed at an altitude he:
Tprop(N, he) = dISL(N, he)
c
= 2(RE + he) sin (π/N)
c
,
(27)
where RE is the radius of the Earth. The later gives 3.1 ms for the selected N = 23 and he = 617 km,
which is much larger than the time to transmit one image per ISL Dimg/RISL ≤0.1 ms. Building on
this, the upper bound in propagation delay for a path between satellites in the Edge Layer following
a shortest-path routing algorithm is ⌊N/2⌋Tprop(N, he), which gives 34.1 ms for N = 23. Therefore,
during optimization, we approximate T (c)
comm(p, e, D), defined in (14), with the latter upper bound of the
propagation latency. Note that the upper bound of propagation latency for any value of N is achieved
as N →∞and is 2(RE + he)/c, which gives 36 ms for the selected he.
The summary of main parameters and values can be found in Table 3.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Draft
Table 3: Parameters and settings.
Parameter
Settings
Cloud CPU
Satellite CPU
Satellite GPU
Processing architectures
AMD EPYC 7H12
Snapdragon 855
Nano
AGX
Number of cores Ncores
64
8
1024
2048
Max. power consumption Pmax [W]
280
6
25
60
Max. clock frequency fmax [GHz]
2.6
1.8
1.02
1.3
Number of FLOPs per Hz NFLOPs
32
32
2
2
Processing inefficiency µC
1.079
1.079
1.071
1.122
Mean synchronization time µTsync [ms]
0
0
17.48
14.14
Max. processing speed 1/µ(p)
T (f (p)
max) [FPS]
62.377
5.398
17.231
32.45
Data acquisition
No. of images in a frame, for training, for evaluation (Nimg, N train
img , N eval
img )
2601, 1668, 50 images
Image resolution wimg × himg
600×600 pixels
Average frame, image, ship (Dframe, Dimg, Dship)
2.05·106, 788.513,
6.913 kbits
GSD, GSDnadir
0.43, 0.31 m
STH
1600 s
Time slot Tslot
10 s
Power for camera maneuvering Pman
2 W
Total energy budget for image acquisition Emax
1000 J
Communication network
Number of orbital planes Np
1
Edge satellites per plane N
23
Altitude ho, he
617, 617 km
Inclination io, ie
98.6, 98.6◦
Edge Layer ISL data rate RISL
10 Gbps
Edge Layer ISL transmit power PISL
60 W
Satellite-to-ground transmit power PDL
10 W
Downlink bandwidth B
500 MHz
Noise power σ2
dB
–119.32 dBW
Total downlink antenna gain GDL
66.33 dBi
5.1
Observation scheduling
To evaluate observation scheduling performance, we present two sets of results. The first demonstrates
how an effective optimization of the AEOSSP leads to high-quality data acquisition. The second assesses
the impact of atmospheric turbulence.
First, we evaluate the scheduling performance in an idealized environment, disregarding atmospheric
turbulence effects. The AEOSSP is solved for a single AEOS, problem instances of {80, 100, 120, 140}
targets (i.e., areas with vessels), and a STH ≈1600 s.
Our proposed solution is compared against
schedules generated by two conventional benchmark algorithms: first-in first-out (FIFO) and genetic
algorithm (GA). For the GA, we utilize the implementation provided by the pymoo library [52], extended
with custom crossover and mutation operators to ensure schedule feasibility. Specifically, the population
size is set to 20, the number of generations to 100, and both crossover and mutation probabilities are
fixed at 0.2.
As shown in Fig. 5, a higher observation profit correlates with a larger number of observed targets, and
16


--- Page 17 ---
Draft
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Performance results for the turbulence-free scenario. (a) Observation profit (left) and number
of observed targets (right). (b) GSD distribution of the acquired data.
Figure 6: Impact of atmospheric turbulence (C2
n,max(0) = 2 × 10−14, m−2/3) on the actual collected
observation profit (left) and average schedule precision defined as the ratio of observations meeting
quality requirements (right).
acquisitions with lower GSD, i.e., better image spatial resolution. In turn, improved spatial resolution
enhances the accuracy of the semantic extraction algorithm, YOLOv8 in this study. To quantify this
impact, evaluating the algorithm’s performance in terms of recall (the ratio of correctly detected objects
to total actual objects) reveals a drop from 87% to 73% when images are downsampled to simulate a
GSD twice the original. Thus, effective observation scheduling, achieved through a precise solution of
the AEOSSP, significantly boosts overall system performance. Specifically, the exact solution given by
SCIP yields an average observation profit improvement of 77.86% and 6.25% compared to FIFO and
GA, respectively. Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 5b, the proposed schedule attains an average GSD
of approximately 0.43 m/pixel. This matches the characteristics of one of the reference datasets [53];
consequently, this value will be assumed for the subsequent processing scheduling section. The output of
this scheduling is the set of OTWs,t,o,w, OTW⋆, and corresponding times τsk,tk,ok,wk at which the edge
nodes will receive new frames to be processed.
When the atmospheric turbulence is considered, with a threshold C2
n,max(0) = 2 × 10−14, m−2/3,
Fig. 6 illustrates the divergence between the expected and actual average collected profit. .Additionally,
the figure displays the average schedule precision, defined as the portion of observations meeting quality
requirements. Two key conclusions emerge: (1) the actual profit is significantly lower than expected; and
(2) the proportion of acquisitions failing to meet quality standards is substantial. It should be noted that,
although the volume of data declines in a similar way to observation profit, it does not do so in exactly
the same way, as the value of each individual acquisition is different. This difference would probably
be accentuated in conventional scenarios where each observation target is associated with a different
priority. Therefore, accounting for atmospheric turbulence is essential for optimal resource allocation. It
avoids wasted energy during image acquisition and attitude maneuvers, while also reducing the load on
data processing and transmission, ultimately leading to more efficient satellite resource management.
Without prior knowledge of the C2
n value during the schedule generation, we next evaluate the impact
of targets observed under unfavorable conditions that are deemed invalid and re-queued for subsequent
scheduling processes. For this simulation, we consider a constellation of four AEOSs arranged in a Walker
Star topology, with each satellite in its own orbital plane. The AEOSs are tasked with observing target
sets of sizes {150, 200, 250, 300} over 10 consecutive STHs, where each STH corresponds to one orbital
17


--- Page 18 ---
Draft
Table 4: Observation performance.
Number of
targets
Total
profit
Successfully observed
targets [%]
Average observations
per target
Rescheduled
targets [%]
150
109.16
90
1.49
36.5
200
148.06
84.5
1.46
38.4
250
177.18
86.8
1.5
36.3
300
205.15
86
1.5
33.6
period (≈97 minutes). If a target is observed satisfying C2
n(0) ≤C2
n,max(0), it is considered successfully
acquired, and its corresponding candidate OTWs are removed from subsequent STHs. Conversely, if such
condition is not met, the target is retained in the problem instance for future scheduling. Consequently,
certain targets may undergo multiple observation attempts before a high-quality image is obtained.
Table 4 summarizes the results of the simulation, specifically: the actual collected profit (accounting
for turbulence), the percentage of successfully observed targets, the average number of observations per
target, and the percentage of rescheduled targets. It is observed that each target undergoes an average
of 1.5 observation attempts, with 33.6% to 38.6% of targets requiring at least two attempts due to
turbulence effects. Despite these rescheduling efforts, full coverage is not attained in every instance, with
success rates ranging from 84.5% to 90%. Finally, as with the single-satellite experiment, instances with
a larger number of targets yield a higher total profit.
5.2
Processing scheduling
To optimize the processing of the collected data at the Edge Layer, we first characterize the execution
time of the task of interest, i.e. semantic extraction using YOLOv8, on the considered computing archi-
tectures. Then, we illustrate the performance of distributed edge processing for the different computing
architectures in an isolated and controlled snapshot, where the task parameters and network topology
have been fixed. Finally, we showcase the performance of the optimization in a realistic scenario with
scheduled observations throughout the satellite orbit.
As a starting point, we perform a statistical analysis of the execution time for single images and for
the available clock frequencies. We then employ a BSP model to extend the mean execution time to
other frequencies and the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) to derive a statistical model for the execution
time of an arbitrary number of images.
Specifically, we first obtained the mean execution time µ(p)
T (fp) of YOLOv8 on individual images
executed on the GPU NVIDIA Jetson Orin platforms. For this, the mean execution times were estimated
for each available operating frequency fp using all the images in the dataset. Then, to estimate the mean
execution time for all f (p) ∈(0, f (p)
max), we performed a least-squares regression for the parameters of the
BSP model µ(p)
C
and µ(p)
Tsync. Table 3 lists the operational parameters for the GPUs and the estimated
parameters for the BSP model. Recall that the complexity of YOLOv8 is WYOLO = 79.1 GFLOPs. The
results of the estimated mean execution times are shown in Fig. 7, where the mean execution times
obtained empirically are shown with markers and the solid lines show the estimation using the BSP
model with least-squares regression. Fig. 7 also shows the estimated mean execution time using the
BSP models for the CPUs at the satellite and GS, which were adapted following same procedure on
similar CPU architectures and scaled to the number of cores N (p)
cores and CPU clock frequencies of the
models considered in Table 3. Clearly, the BSP model provides a nearly perfect fit to the mean execution
times obtained in our experiments, which validates its suitability for the numerical optimization of the
processing at the Edge Layer.
Next, we aim to characterize the randomness of the execution time on the GPU architectures. Fig. 8
shows the results obtained for three clock frequencies f (p)
p
available at both Nano Super and AGX
models, where we observe that the execution time of YOLOv8 individual images executed on the GPU
NVIDIA Jetson Orin platforms T (p)
proc (fp) at the selected clock frequencies follows a Gamma (α(fp), θ(fp))
distribution with mean µ(p)
T (fp) = α(fp)θ(fp) and variance var(p)
T
= α(fp)θ(fp)2.
Interestingly, we
observed that the execution time of YOLOv8 on images with a high object density can exhibit a bimodal
distribution, primarily due to Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) post-processing. For simplicity, our
18


--- Page 19 ---
Draft
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
101
102
103
NVIDIA Jetson Orin AGX
NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano Super
Satellites’ CPU
Cloud CPU
Clock frequency [MHz]
Mean execution time [ms]
Empirical
BSP model
Figure 7: Estimated mean execution time of YOLOv8 on individual images with the considered com-
puting architectures obtained empirically for all the operating clock frequencies fp (markers) and using
the least-squares regression for the BSP model parameters (solid lines).
60
80
100
120
140
160
Execution Time (ms)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability Density
(a) Jetson Nano
Fitted Distribution
306 MHz
714 MHz
1020 MHz
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Execution Time (ms)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Probability Density
(b) Jetson AGX Orin
Fitted Distribution
306 MHz
816 MHz
1300 MHz
Figure 8: Probability density of YOLOv8 execution time on the NVIDIA Jetson Orin (a) Nano Super and
(b) AGX platforms at selected GPU clock frequencies. Solid lines represent fitted Gamma distributions,
indicating the execution time distribution follows T (p)
proc(fp) ∼Gamma(α(fp), θ(fp)).
400
600
800
1000
1200
Frequency (MHz)
50
100
150
200
250
300
Nano GPU 
AGX GPU 
Nano GPU 
AGX GPU 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
(a) Empirical and fitted Gamma parameters
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Number of Images
9.8
9.9
10.0
10.1
10.2
Total Computing Time (s)
Nano Super 
 95th percentile
Nano Super 
 5th percentile
AGX 
 95th percentile
AGX 
 5th percentile
(b) Quantiles for CLT approximation
Figure 9: (a) Empirical and fitted Gamma distribution parameters α(fp) and θ(fp) for YOLOv8 execution
time on the NVIDIA Jetson Orin GPU architectures and (b) 5-th and 95-th quantiles for the GPU
computing time for a time slot duration of Tslot = NimgµT (f ∗
p ) = 10 seconds for the NVIDIA Nano
Super and AGX models with CLT approximation N
 Tslot, Nimgα(fp)θ(fp)2
.
fitted Gamma distribution captures the dominant mode, which corresponds to the most typical scenario
in maritime observation conditions.
As with the mean execution time, the parameters α(fp) and θ(fp) for the execution time of YOLOv8
were estimated for each available operating frequency fp using all the images in the dataset.
The
resulting distribution parameters are shown with markers in Fig. 9a, where both platforms exhibit similar
19


--- Page 20 ---
Draft
qualitative behavior: the shape parameter α(fp) decreases with frequency, while the scale parameter θ(fp)
increases. To enable analytical treatment in the optimization framework, we approximate the frequency-
dependent distribution parameters using third-order polynomial regression P3
i=0 cif i
p and obtaining the
approximated parameters ˆα(fp) and ˆθ(fp) shown with line plots in Fig. 9a.
Building on these models, we approximate the RV for the execution time T (p) for all f (p) ∈(0, f (p)
max)
and Nimg ∈R+ by applying the CLT with the mean execution time per image obtained from the
BSP model µ(p)
T
and the variance of the Gamma distribution var(fp) = ˆα(fp)

ˆθ(fp)
2
. Therefore, we
approximate the execution time of YOLOv8 on Nimg images using GPU p operating at frequency fp as
T (p)
proc(fp, Nimg) =
X
Nimg
T (p)
proc (fp) ∼Gamma
 Nimgα(fp), θ(fp)

(28)
≈N

Nimgµ(p)
T (fp), Nimgvar(fp)

as Nimg →∞
(29)
Fig. 9b shows the approximated 5th and 95th percentiles of the execution time for Nimg in the GPU
platforms for a target Nimgµ(p)
T (fp) = 10 seconds. As it can be seen, the 5th and 95th quantiles deviate
from the mean by at most 1.8% for all the considered values of Nimg. This small deviation from the mean,
in combination with a negligible delay due to gather extremely compressed data towards the downlink
satellite T (c)
comm(p, e, Dimg) ≤36 ms, simplifies the scheduling of the downlink, as it implies that, even
when Nimgµ(p)
T
= Tslot and the downlink is scheduled k + 2 time slots after a set of images is captured, a
large fraction of the slot (i.e., above 98%) will be available to transmit the processed images to the GS.
With the experimental characterization of the execution time, we can now address the optimization
problem Psch. In Fig. 10, we plot the mean power consumption versus the computing load for a single
time slot for the three considered computing architectures at the satellites. The load is given in FPS,
ranging between 60 to 180, and the power consumption is divided between the processing at the satellites,
the ground station, and communication. The network topology is fixed, considering an EO satellite five
hops away from the GS, located at the edge of coverage of the serving satellite, leading to a data rate of
Rk = 2.3 Gbps for the feeder link.
The power consumption for directly downloading the images and processing at the GS is not included
in the plots, as the maximum supported load is only 63 FPS and leads to a mean power consumption
over the time slot of 250 W. Furthermore, note that the mean power consumption over the time slot is
nearly 10× greater with the satellite’s CPU, shown in Fig. 10a, than with the Nano Super GPU, shown
in Fig. 10b. In turn, the mean power consumption of the latter is between 2× and 3× greater than
with the AGX GPU, shown in Fig. 10c. Thus, processing the images with the AGX GPU is almost 30×
more power efficient than with the satellite’s CPU. Furthermore, we observed that using the on-board
computing architectures at the Edge Layer is more power efficient than offloading the computations to
the GS when the computational load is sufficiently light. Then, as Fig. 10a and Fig. 10b show, the use
of the CPU at the GS increases with the computing load. In particular, the CPU of all the satellites in
the Edge Layer must operate at maximum fp to process 160 FPS and higher loads. Consequently, the
power consumption due to processing at the satellites is constant for both 160 and 180 FPS in Fig. 10a,
and this computing architecture cannot support 200 FPS. On the other hand, the power consumption
at the GS’s CPU with the GPU architectures at the Edge Layer is small compared to the total, as the
configuration with the Nano Super GPU can support up to 460 FPS and the configuration with the AGX
GPU can support up to 820 FPS.
Next, we evaluate the real-time energy consumption of the optimal processing scheduling in a realistic
scenario where the AEOSSP is solved for observing 140 target areas over an episode of 2000 seconds and
each observation results in 2601 images captured at the AEOS. The total number of observations in the
period is 32, which leads to an average of one observation every 62.5 seconds. For the ground segment,
we consider the 26 KSAT GSs [46] and, for each time slot k of duration Tslot = 10 seconds, the GS that
offers the highest downlink rate at the scheduled time slot k + 2 is selected as destination GS.
Fig. 11 shows the mean, 5th, and 95th, quantiles of the energy consumption per observation with the
optimal processing scheduling for the two GPU architectures: NVIDIA Jetson Oring Nano Super and
AGX. Clearly, the energy per observation with the Nano Super GPU is more than 5× greater than with
the AGX GPU, which is due to the high computing load of 260 FPS at each observation. Another clear
trend is the increase in energy consumption with the number of observations, which is a consequence of
the AEOS moving away from a group of GSs in Svalvard, Tromsø, and Vardø, Norway, which offer the
highest downlink rates throughout the considered period. Moreover, the 5th and 95th quantiles of the
20


--- Page 21 ---
Draft
60
80
100 120 140 160 180
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Frames per second [FPS]
Mean power consumption [W]
Processing at the satellites
Processing at the GS
Communication
(a) Satellite’s CPU
60
80
100 120 140 160 180
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Frames per second [FPS]
Mean power consumption [W]
(b) NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano Super
60
80
100 120 140 160 180
0
2
4
6
8
10
Frames per second [FPS]
Mean power consumption [W]
(c) NVIDIA Jetson Orin AGX
Figure 10: Power consumption for the three considered computing architectures at the satellites for 60
to 180 FPS. Communication happens at the edge of coverage and the source satellite is 5 hops away
from the GS.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
800
810
820
830
Observation index
Energy per observation [J]
95th percentile
5th percentile
Mean
(a) NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano Super
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
135
140
145
150
Observation index
Energy per observation [J]
95th percentile
5th percentile
Mean
(b) NVIDIA Jetson Orin AGX
Figure 11: Mean, 5th, and 95th quantiles for the optimal energy consumption of semantic extraction
at the satellites with NVIDIA Jetson (a) Nano Super and (b) AGX. A total of 32 observations were
performed with the moving satellites.
energy consumption per observation deviate between 1.2 and 1.4% from the mean, which is due to the
relatively small deviation of these quantiles for the execution time of the YOLOv8 algorithm.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
100
101
102
Satellite’s CPU
Nano Super
AGX
Satellite’s GPU
Time slot duration [s]
Avg. power consumption [W]
Figure 12: Optimal average power consumption for EO with the three considered satellite edge computing
architectures and for time slot durations between 5 and 40 seconds.
Finally, we plot the average power consumption (in logarithmic scale) throughout the observation
period of 2000 seconds for different time slots durations Tslot = {5, 10, . . . , 40} seconds and for the three
considered computing architectures in Fig. 12. Since the average period between observations is 62.5
seconds, all the considered values of Tslot lead to a stable system. However, the minimum period between
observations in the optimal schedule is 18 seconds, which means that all the cases with Tslot above this
value would lead to new observations been taken while computing tasks from previous observations are
still being processed. Among the three computing architectures, only the AGX GPU is able to support
time slots of 5 seconds, which result in a computing load of 520.2 FPS and the CPU architecture can
21


--- Page 22 ---
Draft
only support time slot durations of 15 seconds or higher, leading to computing loads below 174 FPS. As
in previous results, the AGX GPU is the computing architecture that leads to the lowest average power
consumption, but increasing the time slot duration from 20 to 40 seconds leads to a minimal decrease in
average power consumption from 1.59 to 1.23 W, which is mostly required to scatter the data to nearby
satellites.
6
Conclusions
Considering the huge volume of data generated by EO missions, we have investigated the potential of
leveraging the edge computing power provided by a LEO satellite constellation to support real-time
object localization and detection of vessels, specifically using YOLOv8. The framework is organized
into two layers: the Observation Layer, which determines what and how to observe targets; and the
Edge Layer, which decides where processing occurs and how results are transmitted to the ground. For
the former, atmospheric turbulence impacts both quality and quantity of the images with the observed
targets, while the degrees of freedom provided by AEOSs increase the complexity of the observation
scheduling. For the latter, processing is constrained by the pipelined workflow of scattering the captured
images across satellites, performing the computations, and transmitting the processed information to
ground via the satellite constellation. Overall, this work highlights the strong potential of distributed
edge intelligence to improve the efficiency, autonomy, and responsiveness of future satellite-based EO
systems.
References
[1] H. Chen, S. Peng, C. Du, and J. Li, Earth Observation Satellites - Task Planning and Scheduling.
Springer Singapore, 2023.
[2] Novaspace, “Earth observation satellites set to triple over the next decade,” Press release, 2024,
accessed:
2026-02-20. [Online]. Available:
https://nova.space/press-release/earth-observation-
satellites-set-to-triple-over-the-next-decade/
[3] J. Yang, P. Gong, R. Fu, M. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Liang, B. Xu, J. Shi, and R. Dickison, “The role
of satellite remote sensing in climate change studies,” Nature Climate Change, vol. 3, no. 10, pp.
875–883, 2013.
[4] C. Persello, J. D. Wegner, R. H¨ansch, D. Tuia, P. Ghamisi, M. Koeva, and G. Camps-Valls, “Deep
learning and earth observation to support the sustainable development goals: Current approaches,
open challenges, and future opportunities,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine, vol. 10,
no. 2, pp. 172–200, 2022.
[5] G. Soldi, D. Gaglione, N. Forti, A. D. Simone, F. C. Daffin`a, G. Bottini, D. Quattrociocchi, L. M.
Millefiori, P. Braca, S. Carniel, P. Willett, A. Iodice, D. Riccio, and A. Farina, “Space-based global
maritime surveillance. part i: Satellite technologies,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Mag-
azine, vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 8–28, 2021.
[6] P. Oddo and J. D. Bolton, “The value of near real-time earth observations for improved flood disaster
response,” Frontiers in Environmental Science, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 2–3, 2019.
[7] I. Leyva-Mayorga, M. Gost, M. Moretti, A. P´erez-Neira, M. V´azquez, P. Popovski, and B. Soret,
“Satellite edge computing for real-time and very-high resolution Earth observation,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 10, pp. 6180–6194, 2023.
[8] X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “Semantic communications: Overview, open issues, and future
research directions,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 210–219, 2022.
[9] S. S. Hassan, L. X. Nguyen, Y. K. Tun, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong, “Semantic enabled 6G LEO
satellite communication for Earth observation: A resource-constrained network optimization,” in
Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2024, pp. 4472–4478.
[10] D. G¨und¨uz, Z. Qin, I. E. Aguerri, H. S. Dhillon, Z. Yang, A. Yener, K. K. Wong, and C.-B. Chae,
“Beyond transmitting bits: Context, semantics, and task-oriented communications,” IEEE Journal
on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 5–41, 2023.
22


--- Page 23 ---
Draft
[11] N. Ruan, K. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Lov´en, P. K. Donta, Y. Jia, and S. Dustdar, “Edge ai for earth
observation,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 31–40, 2025.
[12] B. Denby and B. Lucia, “Orbital edge computing: Machine inference in space,” IEEE Computer
Architecture Letters, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 59–62, 2019.
[13] A. M. Mercado-Mart´ınez, B. Soret, and A. Jurado-Navas, “Scheduling agile earth observation
satellites
with
onboard
processing
and
real-time
monitoring,”
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.11556
[14] Z.
Yin,
C.
Wu,
C.
Guo,
Y.
Li,
M.
Xu,
W.
Gao,
and
C.
Chi,
“A
compre-
hensive
survey
of
orbital
edge
computing:
Systems,
applications,
and
algorithms,”
Chinese
Journal
of
Aeronautics,
vol.
38,
no.
7,
p.
103316,
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1000936124004709
[15] R. Xie, Q. Tang, Q. Wang, X. Liu, F. R. Yu, and T. Huang, “Satellite-terrestrial integrated edge
computing networks: Architecture, challenges, and open issues,” IEEE Network, vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
224–231, 2020.
[16] B. Matthiesen, N. Razmi, I. Leyva-Mayorga, A. Dekorsy, and P. Popovski, “Federated learning in
satellite constellations,” IEEE Network, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 232–239, 2024.
[17] B. Denby, K. Chintalapudi, R. Chandra, B. Lucia, and S. Noghabi, “Kodan:
Addressing the
computational bottleneck in space,” in Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 3, ser. ASPLOS
2023.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 392–403. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3582016.3582043
[18] T. Xiong, Y. Li, L. Chen, and J. Dai, “Joint observation, transmission, and computation scheduling
for earth observation tasks,” in 2025 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in
China (ICCC), 2025, pp. 1–6.
[19] S. Nag, A. S. Li, and J. H. Merrick, “Scheduling algorithms for rapid imaging using agile cubesat
constellations,” Advances in Space Research, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 891–913, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0273117717308050
[20] X. Wang, G. Wu, L. Xing, and W. Pedrycz, “Agile earth observation satellite scheduling over 20
years: Formulations, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 15, no. 3, p.
3881–3892, Sep. 2021.
[21] H. Chen, S. Peng, C. Du, and J. Li, Earth observation satellites : task planning and scheduling,
1st ed.
Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2023.
[22] G. Peng, R. Dewil, C. Verbeeck, A. Gunawan, L. Xing, and P. Vansteenwegen, “Agile Earth obser-
vation satellite scheduling: An orienteering problem with time-dependent profits and travel times,”
Computers & Operations Research, vol. 111, pp. 84–98, 2019.
[23] A. Herrmann and H. Schaub, “Reinforcement learning for the agile earth-observing satellite schedul-
ing problem,” IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 5235–5247,
2023.
[24] G. Yi, C. Han, Y. Chen, and W. Xing, “Mission Re-planning For Multiple Agile Earth Observation
Satellites based on Cloud Coverage Forecasting,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth
Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 12 2021.
[25] M. Lemaˆıtre, G. Verfaillie, F. Jouhaud, J.-M. Lachiver, and N. Bataille, “Selecting and scheduling
observations of agile satellites,” Aerospace Science and Technology, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 367–381, 2002.
[26] W. Huang, H. Wang, J. Wu, H. Hou, J. Li, Z. Li, and Y. Song, “A reinforcement learning-enhanced
dung beetle optimization approach for agile earth observation satellite scheduling,” IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 22, pp. 1–5, 2025.
23


--- Page 24 ---
Draft
[27] M. Shang,
R. Yuan,
B. Song,
X. Huang,
B. Yang,
and S. Li,
“Joint observation and
transmission scheduling of multiple agile satellites with energy constraint using improved
aco
algorithm,”
Acta
Astronautica,
vol.
230,
pp.
92–103,
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0094576525000797
[28] Y. Rocha, G. O. Chagas, L. C. Coelho, and A. Subramanian, “The integrated agile earth
observation satellite scheduling problem,” Computers & Operations Research, vol. 184, p. 107212,
2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0305054825002400
[29] ESA,
“Planetscope,”
accessed:
2026-02-20.
[Online].
Available:
https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/planetscope
[30] DigitalGlove, “WorldView-1, WorldView-2, WordView-3 datasheet,” accessed: 2026-02-20. [Online].
Available: https://earth.esa.int/eogateway/missions/worldview
[31] G. Jocher, A. Chaurasia, and J. Qiu, “Ultralytics YOLOv8,” 2023, accessed: 2026-02-20. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics
[32] D. Held, S. Thrun, and S. Savarese, “Learning to track at 100 fps with deep regression networks,”
in Proceedings of (ECCV) European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, October 2017, pp.
749 – 765.
[33] D. Hong, L. Gao, R. Hang, B. Zhang, and J. Chanussot, “Deep encoder–decoder networks for
classification of hyperspectral and lidar data,” IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Letters, vol. 19,
pp. 1–5, 2022.
[34] L. C. Andrews and R. L. Phillips, “Laser beam propagation through random media,” Laser Beam
Propagation Through Random Media: Second Edition, 2005.
[35] K. Stavrakakis, “Ships-google-earth dataset,” https://universe.roboflow.com/k–stavrakakis/ships-
google-earth, May 2022, accessed: 2026-02-20.
[36] A. Jurado-Navas, J. M. Garrido-Balsells, J. F. Paris, M. Castillo-V´azquez, and A. Puerta-
Notario, “Impact of pointing errors on the performance of generalized atmospheric optical
channels,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 12 550–12 562, May 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-20-11-12550
[37] S. Ciarella, L. Orozco, V. Azizi, M. Arvis, and R. Saathof, “Speckle cn2 profiler:
Improving
satellite communications with machine learning,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 10, no.
114, p. 9127, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.09127
[38] R. K. Saha, E. Salcin, J. Kim, J. Smith, and S. Jayasuriya, “Turbulence strength c2
n estimation
from video using physics-based deep learning,” Opt. Express, vol. 30, no. 22, pp. 40 854–40 870, Oct
2022. [Online]. Available: https://opg.optica.org/oe/abstract.cfm?URI=oe-30-22-40854
[39] J.
E.
McCrae,
S.
R.
Bose-Pillai,
and
S.
T.
Fiorino,
“Estimation
of
turbulence
from
time-lapse imagery,” Optical Engineering, vol. 56, no. 7, p. 071504, 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1117/1.OE.56.7.071504
[40] D. C. Meier and S. T. Fiorino, “Correlated satellite-derived turbulence, clouds & aerosol data,” in
Imaging and Applied Optics 2014.
Optica Publishing Group, 2014, p. PM1E.4. [Online]. Available:
https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?URI=pcDVT-2014-PM1E.4
[41] S. T. Fiorino, “Satellite and radar measurement of ct2, cn2, and cv2,” in Imaging and
Applied
Optics
2014.
Optica
Publishing
Group,
2014,
p.
PM1E.1.
[Online].
Available:
https://opg.optica.org/abstract.cfm?URI=pcDVT-2014-PM1E.1
[42] D. C. Meier and S. T. Fiorino, “Comparison of index of refraction structure function ( c n 2) profiles
derived from polar-orbiting satellite data and numerical weather prediction models,” in Imaging and
Applied Optics 2015.
Optica Publishing Group, 2015.
[43] S. Wang, Q. Wang, B. J. Wauer, and Q. Jiang, “Computing refractive index structure parameter
cn2 in a numerical weather prediction model,” Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 47, no. 17, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/2020GL089168
24


--- Page 25 ---
Draft
[44] R. Frehlich, R. D. Sharman, F. Vandenberghe, W. Yu, Y. Liu, J. C. Knievel, and G. Jumper,
“Estimates of Cn2 from numerical weather prediction model output [presentation],” 14th Conference
on Aviation, Range, and Aerospace Meteorology, Atlanta, US. NCAR Report, 2010, Jan. 2010.
[45] A. Xiao,
W. Zuan,
J. Wang,
J. Huang,
D. Tao,
S. Lu,
and N. Yokoya,
“Foundation
models for remote sensing and earth observation:
A survey,”
2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.16602
[46] Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT), “Ksat global ground station network,” accessed: 2026-02-20.
[Online]. Available: https://www.ksat.no/ground-network-services/the-ksat-global-ground-station-
network/
[47] X. Liu, G. Laporte, Y. Chen, and R. He, “An adaptive large neighborhood search metaheuristic for
agile satellite scheduling with time-dependent transition time,” Computers & Operations Research,
vol. 86, pp. 41–53, 2017.
[48] M. Amaris, D. Cordeiro, A. Goldman, and R. Y. De Camargo, “A simple BSP-based model to
predict execution time in GPU applications,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on High
Performance Computing (HiPC), 2015, pp. 285–294.
[49] “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and mod-
ulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite
applications (DVB-S2),” ETSI, France, Standard, October 2014.
[50] T.
Achterberg,
“Scip:
solving
constraint
integer
programs,”
Mathematical
Programming
Computation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–41, Jul 2009. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12532-
008-0001-1
[51] T. Achterberg, T. Berthold, T. Koch, and K. Wolter, “Constraint integer programming: A new
approach to integrate cp and mip,” in Integration of AI and OR Techniques in Constraint Pro-
gramming for Combinatorial Optimization Problems, L. Perron and M. A. Trick, Eds.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 6–20.
[52] J. Blank and K. Deb, “pymoo: Multi-objective optimization in python,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
89 497–89 509, 2020.
[53] S. Kızılkaya et al., “VHRShips: an extensive benchmark dataset for scalable deep learning-based
ship detection applications,” ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 11, no. 8, 2022.
25
