--- Page 1 ---
1
Joint Task Offloading, Inference Optimization and
UAV Trajectory Planning for Generative AI
Empowered Intelligent Transportation Digital Twin
Xiaohuan Li, Member, IEEE, Junchuan Fan, Bingqi Zhang, Rong Yu, Member, IEEE,
Xumin Huang, and Qian Chen
Abstract—To implement the intelligent transportation digital
twin (ITDT), unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) are scheduled
to process the sensing data from the roadside sensors. At this
time, generative artificial intelligence (GAI) technologies such as
diffusion models are deployed on the UAVs to transform the
raw sensing data into the high-quality and valuable. Therefore,
we propose the GAI-empowered ITDT. The dynamic processing
of a set of diffusion model inference (DMI) tasks on the UAVs
with dynamic mobility simultaneously influences the DT updating
fidelity and delay. In this paper, we investigate a joint opti-
mization problem of DMI task offloading, inference optimization
and UAV trajectory planning as the system utility maximization
(SUM) problem to address the fidelity-delay tradeoff for the
GAI-empowered ITDT. To seek a solution to the problem
under the network dynamics, we model the SUM problem as
the heterogeneous-agent Markov decision process, and propose
the sequential update-based heterogeneous-agent twin delayed
deep deterministic policy gradient (SU-HATD3) algorithm, which
can quickly learn a near-optimal solution. Numerical results
demonstrate that compared with several baseline algorithms, the
proposed algorithm has great advantages in improving the system
utility and convergence rate.
Index Terms—Intelligent transportation digital twin; un-
manned aerial vehicles; diffusion model; deep reinforcement
learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
NTELLIGENT transportation digital twin (ITDT) exploits
the digital twins (DTs) technology to create DT models
of the physical entities by capturing the real-time sensing
data, and employ the DT models to facilitate the simulation,
understanding, analysis and control of the entire intelligent
Xiaohuan Li and Junchuan Fan are with the Guangxi University
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networking and Scenario System (School
of
Information
and
Communication,
Guilin
University
of
Electronic
Technology), Guilin 541004, China (e-mail: lxhguet@guet.edu.cn; fan-
junchuan@mails.guet.edu.cn).
Bingqi Zhang is with the Research Institute of Highway Ministry of
Transport, Beijing 100000, China (e-malis: bq.zhang@rioh.cn).
Rong Yu is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: yurong@gdut.edu.cn).
Xumin Huang is with the School of Automation, Guangdong University of
Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the Guangxi University
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Networking and Scenario System (School of
Information and Communication, Guilin University of Electronic Technology),
Guilin 541004, China (e-mail: huangxu min@163.com).
Qian Chen is with the School of Architecture and Transportation Engi-
neering, Guilin University of Electronic Technology, Guilin 541004, China
(e-mail: chenqian@mails.guet.edu.cn).
transportation system (ITS) [1]. The ITDT promises to signif-
icantly achieve the full life-cycle network monitoring, accurate
transportation safety warning, and informed transportation
decision-making for the ITS. To fulfill the ITDT, a variety of
enabling technologies such as 5G/6G cellular communications,
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), artificial intelligence (AI)
and mobile cloud/ edge computing have been proposed for
coping with the massive data streams and promoting the
network intelligence [2]. As one of the advanced AI technolo-
gies, generative artificial intelligence (GAI) can automatically
generate, manipulate, and modify different sensing data to
address the issues of data scarcity, noise, and biases in high-
dynamic environment. We are motivated to employ the GAI
to provide high-quality and valuable sensing data and make
the updated DTs precisely reflect the physical entities [3] [4].
With the integration of GAI with ITDT, we propose a new
networking paradigm termed by GAI-empowered ITDT, which
facilitates the high-fidelity DT creation for ITDT.
The implementation of the proposed GAI-empowered ITDT
consists of three stages: raw sensing data collection, GAI-
enabled data processing, and high-fidelity DT updating. In the
first stage, a number of roadside sensors are deployed on the
roads to periodically sense the physical entities of the ITS [5].
In the second stage, the sensing data collected by roadside
sensors may be missing or abnormal. The state-of-the-art GAI
models (e.g., diffusion model) are employed to process the
raw sensing data, e.g., performing the data augmentation [6],
imputing the missing data [7], and repairing the anomalous
data [8]. Thus, a series of computation-intensive GAI-enabled
data processing tasks are generated on the roadside sensors.
In this paper, we also call the above computation tasks of
the roadside sensors as the diffusion model inference (DMI)
tasks. In addition, UAV have the advantages of ubiquity, high
mobility, and low cost, and are leveraged as aerial comput-
ing nodes to provide computation offloading and enable the
resource-constrained roadside senors to offload the DMI tasks,
saving the time and energy consumption. Finally, reliable and
accurate state information is obtained for the high-fidelity
ITDT updating, which aims to reduce the deviation between
the DT models and physical entities.
Nevertheless, there are still challenges that needs to be
addressed for the large-scale applications of GAI-empowered
ITDT. First, since the UAVs with the limited computing
resources are dynamically scheduled to compute the DMI task
from geo-distributed roadside sensors. Thus, both the task
arXiv:2604.07687v1  [cs.LG]  9 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
offloading and the UAV trajectories should be well addressed
to let different UAVs successfully serve more roadside sensors
within the same time periods. Second, for the ITDT updating,
we necessitate to tackle the tradeoff between the ITDT fidelity
and ITDT updating delay. Regarding the DMI, prior studies
have demonstrated that the output quality of a pre-trained
diffusion model depends on the number of inference steps
[9]. Performing more inference steps is beneficial to generate
the high-quality data that is important for the ITDT fidelity;
nevertheless, it will result in more computational workloads
and prolong the ITDT updating delay. To ensure the real-
time virtual-real synchronization while satisfying the ITDT
fidelity requirement, we could perform the joint optimization
of both the DMI task and the UAV sides for the proposed
GAI-empowered ITDT. As a result, there exists a challenging
joint optimization problem of task offloading, inference opti-
mization, and resource allocation. Last but not least, seeking
a solution to the joint optimization problem in the dynamic
and large-scale complex environment is nontrivial. Compared
with the conventional convex optimization approaches, multi-
agent deep reinforcement learning (MADRL) algorithm is
superior to solving the complex decision-making tasks under
the network dynamics. MADRL algorithm enables multiple
agents to collaboratively seeking a near-optimal solution while
making the solution robust to the changes in the network
dynamics. However, the current MADRL algorithms should
be revised to cope with the challenges such as actor network
update conflict and optimization direction deviation in the
heterogeneous agents [10].
To address the above challenges, we study a novel system
utility maximization (SUM) problem for the GAI-empowered
ITDT, and propose an improved MADRL algorithm to ap-
proximate near-optimal optimization policies and makes quick
decisions to adapt to the changing environment. In the system
model, a set of UAVs are dynamically scheduled to fly and
provide computation offloading for the nearby roadside sensors
while computing the DMI tasks. To fulfill the GAI-empowered
ITDT in a comprehensive manner, we aim to maximize the
long-term system utility relevant with the overall ITDT fidelity
and ITDT updating delay. In the studied SUM problem, we
jointly design the task offloading strategy, the inference opti-
mization of all diffusion models, and the UAV trajectory. We
also consider feasible constraints such as computing resource
capacity, the ITDT fidelity and delay requirements.
Recent works have demonstrated that DRL enables and
enhances the multi-agent decision-making in complex and
dynamic environments [11]. To obtain an adaptive solution
for the heterogeneous-agent optimization problem, we convert
the original formulation into a heterogeneous-agent Markov
decision process (MDP) that can be addressed by the Twin
Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient (TD3). Inspired
by the work [12], we further revise the TD3 algorithm by
using the sequential update mechanism. This replaces the
conventional simultaneous updates with the sequential update
mechanism that leads to more stable actor network improve-
ment. Specifically, the sensor agent actor networks are updated
first and the UAV agent actor networks are subsequently
updated based on the latest sensor agent actor networks. The
approach can avoid the actor networks conflicts and improving
the stability of heterogeneous-agent learning. We are motivated
to adopt the sequential update-based Heterogeneous-agent
TD3 (SU-HATD3) algorithm to efficiently learn a near-optimal
cooperative strategy for the proposed SUM problem. The
detailed contributions of this work are listed as follows.
• We present the system model of the GAI-empowered
ITDT. In this system model, each roadside sensor gen-
erates a DMI task for ITDT update. The UAVs are
dynamically scheduled to computer the computationally
intensive DMI tasks offloaded from the roadside sensors,
which involve processing the sensing data to enhance the
ITDT. The cloud server aggregates the processed sensing
data from all UAVs and uses this data to update the high-
fidelity ITDT.
• We study the SUM problem to maximize the long-
term system utility while satisfying necessary ITDTs
constraints. To balance the tradeoff between the ITDT
fidelity and ITDT updating delay, we study how to offlaod
the DMI tasks to UAVs. Meanwhile, we investigate the
inference optimization of diffusion models and UAV
trajectory planning based on the offloading decisions to
perform the ITDT updates.
• We propose the SU-HATD3 algorithm to solve the
SUM problem. The algorithm uses the sequential update
mechanism. The proposed algorithm addresses the strong
cooperation and coupling among heterogeneous agents,
ensuring the monotonic improvement of their actor net-
work through a sequential update mechanism. Compared
with the baseline DRL algorithms the proposed algorithm
has great advantages in improving the long-term system
utility and achieving the faster convergence rate.
The structure of the paper is outlined below. Section II
provides a review of related works. Section III introduces
the system model. In Section IV, we present the problem
formulation. A SU-HATD3 algorithm is proposed in Section
V. Section VI is dedicated to the simulation experiments and
their analysis, while Section VII provides the conclusion.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we review the related work on the GAI-
empowered ITDT, UAV scheduling for DT updating and
performance comparison.
A. GAI-empowered ITDT
Extensive research has been conducted on the application
of DT in ITS. In ITS, DT serves as a virtual representation
of physical entities to simulate their attributes, behaviors,
and interactions [13]. In [14], the authors proposed the DT-
based transportation signal control framework in ITS, where
sensors provide real-time trajectories and transportation flows
for modeling, prediction and simulation. In [15], the authors
defined DT as a module that reconstructs detailed digital road
models to simulate scenarios. In [16], a DT framework was
developed for ITS by integrating real-time traffic data with
SUMO simulation to support transportation management and
safety decisions.


--- Page 3 ---
3
Despite challenges such as complex modeling, low simu-
lation efficiency and deviations in practical applications, the
emergence of GAI has provided DT with a new foundation
of efficiency and accuracy [17]. In [18], a GAI-enhanced DT
framework was proposed using federated and MARL for real-
time awareness and resource optimization in ITS. In [19],
GAI was employed for data augmentation to improve DT-
based traffic simulation and adaptive modeling in ITS. In
[20], a GAI-driven DT framework with mechanisms such as
‘Priority Pooling’ and ‘Twin Adapter’ was designed to enhance
Internet of Things (IoT) modeling and adaptive management.
In [21], a GAI-based flow model was embedded into urban
DT to improve the modeling and prediction of urban flows,
supporting sustainable smart city development.
B. UAV Scheduling for DT Updating
UAVs have the advantages of high mobility, easy deploy-
ment and good line-of-sight link, which can provide aerial
computing to realize data collection and DT updating with
low delay, low energy consumption and high precision [22]. In
previous UAV scheduling for DT updating research, optimiza-
tion objectives such as low delay or high-fidelity are typically
achieved by adjusting UAV trajectories, bandwidth allocation,
or task offloading ratios [23]–[26]. In [23], UAV swarms
were employed as distributed nodes, integrating federated
learning and aerial computing with heterogeneous sensing
and devices scheduling to improve DT accuracy and energy
efficiency. In [24], a semantic communication framework
optimized the UAV CPU frequency and transmission power
to improve the timeliness and energy efficiency of DT syn-
chronization. In [26], UAV-based DT construction leveraged
parameter identification and data assimilation to optimize the
model variables, significantly enhancing the DT fidelity and
simulation performance. In [25], a hierarchical digital twin
network was constructed through heterogeneous UAV clusters,
where cluster-head selection and Digital Twin synchronization
optimization improved communication efficiency and reduced
transmission delay.
C. Performance Comparison
Existing studies have demonstrated that GAI model can
enhance DT performance. However, most of those works
overlook the fidelity and delay requirements of DT updating.
Due to the limited computing capability of roadside sensors,
UAVs are essential for computing DMI tasks and flexibly up-
dating the DTs, enabling efficient and dynamic DT updating.
Nevertheless, the integration of GAI-empowered ITDT with
UAV has not been thoroughly explored in existing research.
Building on this motivation, we consider the SUM opti-
mization problem for the GAI-empowered ITDT with UAV,
with the objective of maximizing the ITDT fidelity while min-
imizing the total update delay. Unlike traditional computation
tasks that are either fully completed or dropped, the DMI task
can be partially computed with varying computing resource,
leading to different output qualities. To accommodate this
unique characteristic, we jointly optimize the task offloading,
Sensor
Sensor
Sensor
Diffusion model
Cloud server
DT 
models
Inference step
UAV
UAV
UAV
Road
network model
Realtime 
traffic model
Environment 
model
...
...
Behavior 
model
Fig. 1. System model.
inference optimization and UAV trajectory planning under
dynamic environments and limited UAV computing resources.
Furthermore, while some studies utilize MARL to address
UAV scheduling, they often encounter challenges such as
training instability and slow convergence, particularly in large-
scale heterogeneous systems remain significant limitations.
In contrast, our work introduces an enhanced MARL-based
framework that supports cooperative decision-making between
the UAVs and sensors, achieving both fast convergence and
higher system utility in GAI-empowered ITDT.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we present the system model of the
proposed GAI-empowered ITDT. There are several key entities
to support the model functionalities, i.e., roadside sensor, UAV,
and cloud server. The following provides additional details
about the network entities.
• Roadside sensor: A variety of roadside sensors such as
roadside LiDAR and camera are deployed to collect the
sensing data as the state information of the physical
entities of the ITS, e.g., vehicle and pedestrian. How-
ever, the raw sensing data is always sparse and low-
quality in the inherently complex and dynamic traffic
environment, which suffers from the missing values or
noise contamination. The noisy or incomplete sensing
data necessitates to be processed before the utilization.
To this end, diffusion models are exploited to process
the sensing data, causing a computation-intensive DMI
task on each roadside sensor. Particularly, computation
workloads of a DMI task is controllable by adjusting the
number of inference steps on demand.
• UAV: The DMI task computations brings the rather
large computational burdens to the resource-constrained


--- Page 4 ---
4
roadside sensors. Diffusion models are deployed on the
UAVs to process the DMI tasks, such as performing data
augmentation, imputing missing values, and repairing
anomalies. To accelerate the DMI task processing for the
real-time ITDT updating, a set of UAVs are dynamically
scheduled to fly to provide computation offloading for the
roadside sensors when necessary. In this paper, we con-
sider the binary offloading scenario between the roadside
sensors and UAVs.
• Cloud server: After completing the DMI tasks, high-
quality sensing data is submitted by the UAVs to the
cloud server. The cloud server updates the DT models
based on these reliable and accurate data sources, such as
environment model, road network model, realtime traffic
model, and behavior model. We also consider that the
cloud server acts as a centralized manager to solve the
studied joint optimization problem of task offloading,
inference optimization, and UAV trajectory planning in
a centralized manner.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
To implement the GAI-empowered ITDT, R roadside sen-
sors and N UAVs are deployed for the sensing data collection
and processing. Let R and N represent the sensor set and the
UAV set, respectively. Each sensor and UAV is indexed by r
and n, respectively. The system time horizon T is divided into
T time slots, where each slot t has a duration of τ = T /T.
For simplicity, all roadside sensors are randomly distributed
in a rectangular area with the size l × l and each UAV
maintains a steady altitude H in the rectangular area. Each
roadside sensor periodically collects real-time sensing data
from the corresponding physical entity and a diffusion model
is employed to improve the quality of the collected sensing
data. At time slot t, roadside sensor r collects sr,t amounts
of sensing data and generates a DMI task for the sensing
data processing. Thanks to the UAV-assisted computation
offloading, the DMI task can be entirely offloaded to a proper
UAV when the UAV approaches to the roadside sensor. We
consider that each DMI task is indivisible and offloaded to a
UAV and each UAV computes the DMI tasks at each time slot.
The binary offloading decision set of all roadside sensors is
A = {αn,r,t|n ∈N,r ∈R,t ∈T }, where αn,r,t = 1 means that
roadside sensors r offloads the DMI task to UAV n at time
slot t, otherwise the offloading decision is not chosen.
A. Diffusion Model Inference
We take the DMI task offloading between roadside sensors
r and UAV n as an example and let αn,r,t = 1. Then UAV n
receives the sensing data of roadside sensor r, and allocates a
portion of computing resource Sn,r,t to compute the DMI task
with the computational frequency fn,r,t. Here, we define Sn,r,t
denotes the computing resource allocated by UAV n for DMI
task r, which corresponds to the number of inference step and
its unit is steps. We define fn,r,t as the computation frequency
of the UAV to compute the DMI task and its unit is steps/s.
Note that the output quality of the diffusion model depends on
the number of the inference steps, and determines the sensing
data quality. Previous studies [27] [28] show that the number
of inference steps plays a positive impact on the output quality
of a diffusion model. Note that during the diffusion model
inference, performing more inference steps (i.e., denoising
steps) leads to the higher output quality. Utilizing the sensing
data with the higher quality is helpful to improve the ITDT
fidelity. In the case αn,r,t = 1, we evaluate the ITDT fidelity
gain contributed by processing the sensing data of roadside
sensor r as
Fr,t =





Fmax
r
Smax
r
−Smin
r
 Sn,r,t −Smin
r

,
Smin
r
≤Sn,r,t ≤Smax
r
0,
Sn,r,t < Smax
r
Fmax
r
,
Sn,r,t > Smax
r
(1)
where the Smin
r
and the Smax
r
are the minimal and maximal
inference steps, respectively, and the Fmax
r
is the maximal DT
fidelity gain by means of inferring the entire diffusion model
with sufficient steps.
B. UAV-Assisted Computation Offloading
Next, we introduce the UAV mobility model and DMI task
offloading model in the UAV-assisted computation offloading.
1) UAV mobility model: Without the loss of generality,
we consider a three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system
where the horizontal position of each roadside sensor at time
slot t is known as qr,t = [xr,t,yr,t,0] and the instantaneous
horizontal position of UAV n at time slot t is given by
qn,t = [xn,t,yn,t,H]. The UAV position is changed over time
according to the given flight angle θn,t and a constant velocity
vn,t. Thus, we update the position of UAV n by
xn,t+1 = xn,t +νn,tτ cos(θn,t)
(2)
yn,t+1 = yn,t +νn,tτ sin(θn,t)
(3)
Besides, there exist basic constrains for the UAV mobility.
The flight distance constraint of UAV n is expressed by
∥qn,t+1 −qn,t ∥≤Lmax,∀t
(4)
where Lmax is the maximal flight distance of the UAV. The
flight speed constraint of UAV n is expressed by
vmin ≤vn,t ≤vmax,∀t
(5)
where vmin and vmax are the minimal and maximal speed of
the UAV, respectively. The flight area constraint of UAV n is
expressed by
0 ≤xn,t ≤l,0 ≤yn,t ≤l,∀t
(6)
2) DMI task offloading model: If αn,r,t = 1, roadside sensor
r submits the sensing data to UAV n for the DMI task
offloading. Similar to the work in [29], we consider a time-
invariant channel, where the statistical characteristics of the
channel remain constant over extended periods. The free-space
path loss is assumed in the communication channel between
roadside sensor r and UAV n and we calculate the channel
gain by
hn,r,t = h0
nd−2
n,r,t
(7)
where dn,r,t =∥qn,t −qr,t ∥is the communication distance, h0
n is
the channel gain at one meter reference distance, and the path


--- Page 5 ---
5
loss exponent is set as 2. Furthermore, we adopt the orthogonal
frequency division multiple access technology to eliminate
the interference among the roadside sensors. We calculate the
achievable data transmission rate between roadside sensor r
and UAV n by
Rn,r,t = log
 
1+ Pr ∥hn,r,t∥2
σ2
0
!
(8)
where Pr is the transmit power of the roadside sensor and σ2
0
is the noise power. After that, the sensing data transmission
delay between roadside sensor r and UAV n is
Dtrans
n,r,t = αn,r,t
sr,t
Rn,r,t
(9)
.
For the GAI-enabled sensing data processing, the DMI task
is performed on UAV n. Based on the computing resources
Sn,r,t allocated to the DMI tasks, the inference delay of the
diffusion model by UAV n is expressed as
Dinfer
n,r,t = Sn,r,t
fn,r,t
(10)
Finally, we utilize αn,r,t(Dinfer
n,r,t +Dtrans
n,r,t ) to express the DMI
task completion delay, which includes both sensing data trans-
mission delay and DMI task inference delay.
C. SUM Problem Formulation
We define the system utility at time slot t as the ITDT
fidelity gain of processing all sensing data by using the
diffusion models minuses the total time consumption for the
ITDT updating. On one hand, the ITDT fidelity gain of
processing all sensing data is evaluated by ∑1≤r≤R Fr,t. On the
other hand, we neglect the output data transmission delay on
the UAVs that help upload the output data of the DMI tasks to
the cloud server for the ITDT updating, and roughly measure
the total time consumption for the ITDT updating by
Dr,t =
R
∑
r=1
(Dinfer
n,r,t +Dtrans
n,r,t ),∀n ∈N
(11)
Then the system utility at time slot t is expressed by
Ut =
R
∑
r=1
(ϕ1Fr,t −ϕ2Dr,t)
(12)
where ϕ1 and ϕ2 are two presetting weighting coefficients.
In this paper, we aims to maximize the long-term sys-
tem utility of the GAI-empowered ITDT subject to fea-
sible constraints. We jointly optimize the task offloading,
the inference steps of all diffusion models, and the UAV
trajectory. To achieve maximize system utility, three key
elements are optimized: 1) The DMI task offloading, de-
noted as A = {αn,r,t,∀n ∈N,∀r ∈R,t ∈T }; 2) The infer-
ence optimization of all diffusion models, denoted as S =
{Sn,r,t,∀n ∈N,∀r ∈R,t ∈T }; 3) The UAV trajectory plan-
ning, denoted as G =

θn,t,vn,t,∀n ∈N,t ∈T
	
. Accordingly,
we express the long-term SUM problem with necessary con-
straints as follows
P : max
A,S,G lim
T→∞
1
T
T
∑
t=1
Ut
s.t. C1 :
N
∑
n=1
αn,r,t ≤1,∀n ∈N,∀r ∈R,∀T ∈T
C2 : 0 ≤Fmin
r
≤Fr,t,∀r ∈R,
C3 :
R
∑
r=1
αn,r,tSn,mr,t ≤Sn,∀n ∈N,∀r ∈R,∀t ∈T
C4 : Dr,t ≤Dmax
r
< τ,∀r ∈R,∀t ∈T
C5 : (2)−(6)
(13)
Constraint C1 indicates each DMI task can only offload
to one UAV in each time slot. Constraint C2 present the
ITDT fidelity gain requirements. Constraint C3 represents
the resource constraint of the UAV. Constraint C4 represents
the GAI task completion delay requirement. Constraint C5
defines the mobility limitation of UAV. The problem P has
the following properties that make it challenging to solve.
First, the problem is a nonconvex mixed-integer nonlinear
programming problem. Specifically, the problem has the in-
teger and continuous decision variables, thus exhibits the non-
convex properties. Second, the solution should be adaptive
to quickly react to the dynamic environment. Furthermore,
considering the formulated problem exhibits characteristics of
the long-term accumulation, we can transform this problem
into a multi-agent decision-making problem and employ the
MADRL approach to address it.
V. THE PROPOSED SU-HATD3 ALGORITHM
In this section, we integrate the sequential update mech-
anism into the commonly utilized MADRL algorithm, i.e.,
MATD3 algorithm, and present a SU-MATTD3 algorithm to
efficiently address the problem P by capturing the relationships
between the sensor states and the UAV states. We introduce the
the motivation of SU-HATD3, the heterogeneous-agent MDP,
the SU-HATD3 algorithm architecture and the computational
complexity analysis.
A. Motivation of SU-HATD3 Algorithm
The motivation for the sequential update mechanism is
to enhance optimization efficiency and system utility in the
heterogeneous agents environment. The traditional parallel
updates often lead to policy conflicts and unstable convergence
[30] [31]. In this approach, sensor agents first determine the
task offloading strategy, followed by UAV agents allocating
computing resources and planning their trajectories. The se-
quential update mechanism addresses this by ensuring that
each agents decisions are based on the most recent updates
from other agents, reducing the likelihood of conflicting
policies. This ordered update process enhances coordination
among agents, accelerates convergence, and ultimately im-
proves system utility.


--- Page 6 ---
6
UAV N
UAV N
UAV n
UAV n
UAV 1
Actor Network
Actor Network
Actor Network
UAV N
UAV n
UAV 1
Actor Network
Actor Network
Sensor R
Sensor R
Sensor R
Sensor r
Sensor r
Sensor r
Sensor 1
Actor Network
Actor Network
Actor Network
Sensor R
Sensor R
Sensor r
Sensor r
Sensor 1
Actor Network
Actor Network
Association decision
Execute 
actions
Execute 
actions
Trajectory and allocation 
A. Execution
Experience Replay Buffer
0 0 0
B. Sequential Update 
Store
Randomly sample 
B transitions
Target 
action 
network
Action 
network
Critic 
network
Target 
critic 
network1 2
Max Q-
value
Soft Update
Min the loss 
function
...
...
......
......
...
...
Update
...
...
Update
Consider  
Consider  
Consider  


new
0
i
i R


Update
1
new
1
1
ta
new
1
1
ta
new
1
new
R

R

R

new
R

t
R
a
1
1
new
1
1
1
N

N

N

N





1
,
,
,
t
t
t
t
i
i
i
i
i
i
o
a
r
o +



1


1



t
i
i
o


t
i
i
o


t
i
i
a


t
i
i
a


t
i
i
a


t
i
i
a

Fig. 2. The diagram of the proposed SU-HATD3 algorithm.
B. Heterogeneous-agent MDP Model
To alleviate the complexity of decision-making and find
near-optimal solutions, we define sensor agents and UAV
agents. The set of agents is denoted as i ∈I
△= {1,2,...,R,R+
1,··· ,R + N}. Thus, the problem is formulated as the
heterogeneous-agent MDP with R sensor agents and N
UAV agents. In particular, the interaction process for sen-
sor agents and UAV agents is characterized by the tu-
ple

{oi,t}i∈I ,{ai,t}i∈I ,rt,{oi,t+1}i∈I

. The {or,t}r∈R and
{on,t}n∈N define the observation spaces for sensor agents
and UAV agents, respectively. The {ai,t}i∈R and {ai,t}i∈N
represent the action sets available to sensor agents and UAV
agents, respectively. The rt denotes the reward function. The
observation space, action space, and reward function for the
sensors and UAVs are described for each time slot t.
1) MDP of Sensor Agents
The sensor agent mainly selects the UAVs for the DMI
task offloading. Aiming at determining the offloading strategy,
sensor agents require observe the maximum inference step,
their own locations, the computing resource of UAV, as well
as the UAVs’ locations.
a) Observation: At time slot t, the observation of sensor
agents r is expressed as
or,t = {Smax
r
,qr,t,qn,t,Tn,∀n ∈N},r ∈R
(14)
It is worth noting that each sensor can only access its
own location, while the coordinates of other sensors remain
unknown. In contrast, the positions of all UAVs are known to
the sensors because UAVs are broadcast their locations.
b) Action: At time slot t, the observation of sensor agents
r is expressed as
ar,t = {αn,r,t,∀n ∈N},r ∈R
(15)
2) MDP of UAV Agents
After the sensor agents determines the offloading strategy,
the UAV agents makes the inference optimization and trajec-
tory decision according to the observed offloaded the sensor
information.
a) Observation: At time slot t, the observation of UAV
agents is expressed as
on,t =

qn,t,qr,t,Smax
r
,Fmax
r
,∀r ∈R′
n
	
,n ∈N
(16)
where R′
n represents the set of sensors that offload DMI tasks
to the UAV n.
b) Action: At time slot t, the observation of UAV agents is
expressed as
an,t =

θn,t,vn,t,Sn,r,t,∀r ∈R′
n
	
,n ∈N
(17)
where θn,t ∈[−1,1] represents the flight angle of the UAV,
vn,t ∈[−1,1] represents the flight speed of the UAV, Tn,r,t ∈
[−1,1] represents an unnormalized weight indicating the rela-
tive proportion of computing resources to be allocated for the
DMI task r. Since the total available computing resource of
UAV is limited, the actual allocated computing resource for
the DMI task is computed via normalization as


--- Page 7 ---
7
˜Sn,r,t =
Sn,r,t
∑r′∈R′n Sn,r,t
Sn,∀r ∈R′
i
(18)
where ˜Sn,r,t is the final number of inference steps assigned to
model.
c) Reward: Each agent receives an immediate reward from
the environment after performing an action at time slot t. The
system utility is considered as the immediate reward. If a DMI
task fails to meet its completion deadline or if the ITDT update
fails to achieve the required fidelity, a penalty term ρr,t will be
further incorporated into the reward to impose a punishment.
Therefore, the long-term discounted cumulative reward across
T time slots can be represented as
rt = U −
R
∑
r=1
ρr,t
(19)
weher ρr,t can be represented as
ρr,t = max(Dr,t −Dmax
r
,0)+max(Fmin
r
−Fr,t,0)
(20)
C. The SU-HATD3 Algorithm Architecture
To address the above heterogeneous-agent MDP, consider-
ing the cooperation among heterogeneous agents for ITDT
updates, the SU-HATD3 algorithm is proposed. As shown
in Fig. 2, the sensor agents and UAV agents input their
respective observations into the corresponding actor networks
to determine the optimal actions for the current time step.
After executing actions in the environment, the agents re-
ceive new observations and immediate rewards. The tuples

{oi,t}i∈I ,{ai,t}i∈I ,rt,{oi,t+1}i∈I

are stored in the cloud
server’s experience replay buffer. The cloud server uses these
experiences for centralized training to update the actor net-
work and global critic networks, and applies a soft update
mechanism to maintain training stability. The updated actor
networks are distributed to the agents, enabling them to make
more efficient and coordinated decisions in the next round of
environment interaction.
In the SU-HATD3 framework, sensor agents and UAV
agents are assigned actor networks

µθi
	
i∈I and target actor
networks

µθi′	
i∈I. Each actor network µθi generates the
action based on local observation. To evaluate the joint actions
of all agents, two critic networks

Qφk
	
k=1,2 and two target
critic networks
n
Qφk′
o
k=1,2 are deployed on the cloud server.
These critic networks estimate the global Q-values using
the combined observations and actions of all agents, thereby
guiding the actor network optimization. At each time step t,
trajectories are collected and used to update the networks over
T time steps (i.e., T time slots). All collected samples are
centrally processed on the cloud server. The server aggregates
interaction data from all agents and updates the actor networks
and critic networks.
1) Execution phase
In the execution phase, the heterogeneous agents interact
with the environment based on their current actor networks.
Due to the strong coupling between sensor and UAV agents,
a collaborative decision-making is adopted. For sensor agents,
the DMI task offloading decision of sensor agents is discrete.
This paper convert the continuous action output of the actor
network into a discrete decision by using a discretization
mapping. The action of sensor agent i at time slot t is given
by
ar,t = µθr(or,t)+Xt,r ∈R
(21)
where oi,t denotes the local observation and Xt represents the
exploration noise. After executing action {ar,t}r∈R, UAV agent
obtains the local observation {on,t}n∈N . The action of UAV
agent n at time slot t is expressed as
an,t = µθn(on,t)+Xt, n ∈N
(22)
t
After all agents execute their actions, the environment
provides the global reward rt and updates the observations for
the next time step. The tuples

oi,t,ai,t,ri,t,ot+1
i

are stored in
the experience replay buffer B for subsequent training.
2) Update phase
The distinctive observation and action spaces associated
with sensor and UAV agents often cause training instability
and pose challenges for convergence [32]. To handle the
complexity of the MDP involving R + N agents, we adopt
the sequential update mechanism. In detail, the multi-agent
advantage decomposition lemma suggests that sequential actor
networks updates can effectively improve cooperation stability
in heterogeneous multi-agent systems, as each agent’s actor
networks optimization is conditioned on the latest actions of
the others [12]. Consequently, the sequential update mech-
anism allows each agent to optimize actor network while
considering the most recent behaviors of others, thus prevent-
ing conflicts in actor updates and ensuring monotonic policy
improvement.
In the update phase, the SU-HATD3 algorithm updates all
actor–critic networks by using experiences sampled from the
experience replay buffer. Specifically, the sensor agents update
their actor networks first. The UAV agents then update their
actor networks based on the latest sensor agent actor networks.
This sequential update design improves coordination among
heterogeneous agents and stabilizes convergence. The loss
function L is formulated as the mean squared error between the
predicted Q-values and target Q-values, which is minimized
to optimize the critic networks Qφ1 and Qφ2.
L(φk) = E(o,a,r,o′)∼B
h yt −Qφk
 {oi,t}i∈I ,{ai,t}i∈I
2i
,
k = 1,2
(23)
where the target Q-values yt is computed as:
yt = rt +γ minQφk′  {oi,t+1}i∈I ,{ ˆai,t+1}i∈I

,k = 1,2
(24)
where { ˆai,t+1}I
i=1 is generated from

µθi′	I
i=1.
After updating the critic networks, the algorithm proceeds
to sequentially update the actor networks. The sensor agent r
actor network are preferentially updated as


--- Page 8 ---
8
θ new
r
=
argmax
θr E
"
Qφ1

oi,t
	
i∈I,µθr
 {or,t}r∈R

,µθn
 {on,t}n∈N
#
(25)
and the UAV agents n are subsequently updated based on the
updated sensor agent r actor network
θ new
n
=
argmax
θn E
"
Qφ1

{oi,t}i∈I ,µθnew
r
 {or,t}R∈R

|
{z
}
Latest sensor networks
,µθn
 {on,t}n∈N
#
(26)
Finally, the target networks are softly updated to ensure
stability
φ1′ ←τφ1 +(1−τ)φ1′,
φ2′ ←τφ2 +(1−τ)φ2′,
θi′ ←τθi +(1−τ)θi′
(27)
Algorithm 1 presents the pseudocode of the proposed SU-
HATD3 algorithm for solving the system utility maximization
problem. In the execution phase, the agents interact with
the environment to sequentially make decisions (Lines 3–18).
Each sensor agent observes oi,t,i ∈R and makes an association
decision ai,t,i ∈R (Lines 6–9). UAV agents perform inference
optimization for the DMI task and plan the trajectories based
on the observation oi,t,i ∈N (Lines 11–14). The environment
returns new states and rewards. These transitions are stored
in the experience replay buffer (Lines 16–17). In the update
phase, a batch of transitions is sampled from the experience
replay buffer (Line 20). The critic networks are updated (Line
21). Then, the actor networks are updated sequentially. The
sensor agent actor networks are updated based on the current
UAV agent actor networks (Line 23). The UAV agents then
update their actor networks based on the last sensor agent
actor networks (Lines 26). This sequential update ensures that
each agent actor network is optimized individually. This also
maintains coordination between the sensor agents and the UAV
agents.
D. Computational Complexity Analysis
The computational complexity of the SU-HATD3 algorithm
can be expressed as O(E [(R+N)BLa +2BLc]), where E
denotes the number of training episodes, R and N represent the
numbers of sensor agents and UAV agents, respectively, B is
the batch size. The term La and Lc represent the sizes of the ac-
tor network and critic networks, respectively, and are related to
factors such as the number of layers and neurons per layer. The
complexity is dominated by the need to update both the actor
network and critic networks. Specifically, O((R+N)BLa)
accounts for the sequential optimization of the actor networks,
which scales linearly with the number of agents and the size
of each actor network. The O(BLc) reflects the computational
cost of updating the global critic networks. Therefore, the
Algorithm 1 SU-HATD3 Algorithm
1: Initialize: actor networks {µθi}i∈I, target actors {µθ′
i }i∈I,
critics Qφ1,Qφ2, target critics Qφ′
1,Qφ′
2, experience replay
buffer B, training episodes Epi, and step length Ste.
2: for Episode = 1 to Epi do
3:
Initialize the environment.
4:
// Execution phase
5:
for step = 1 to Ste do
6:
for r = 1 to R do
7:
Sensor agent r acquires observations ot
i from the
environment.
8:
Sensor agent r takes actions ar,t according to (21).
9:
end
10:
Roadside sensors execute actions {ar,t}r∈R.
11:
for i = 1 to N do
12:
UAV agent n acquires observations ot
i from the
environment.
13:
UAV agent n takes actions an,t according to (22).
14:
end
15:
Execute actions {an,t}n∈N in the environment.
16:
Observe next observations {oi,t+1}i∈I and reward rt.
17:
Push transition ⟨oi,t,ai,t,rt,oi,t+1⟩into B.
18:
end
19:
// Update phase
20:
Sample a batch of b transitions from B.
21:
Update the global critic networks with parameters
φ 1,φ 2 by formula (23).
22:
for r = 1 to R do
23:
Update sensor agent r actor network according to
(25).
24:
end
25:
for n = 1 to N do
26:
Update UAV agent n actor network according to
(26).
27:
end
28:
Smoothly update the target critic networks utilizing
(27).
29: end
overall complexity depends on several factors, including the
number of agents, the size of the neural networks, and the
minibatch size.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Experiment Setup
We conduct extensive simulations to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the SU-HATD3 algorithm in the GAI-empowered
ITDT. All experiments are implemented in PyTorch and exe-
cuted on a workstation equipped with an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X
CPU and an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU. The same environment
is used for all baseline algorithms to ensure consistent exper-
imental conditions. The actor and critic learning rates are set
to 1×10−6 and 1×10−3, respectively. We use an experience
replay buffer of size 106. We set the batch size to 256, the
discount factor γ=0.99, and soft-update coefficient τ=0.005.


--- Page 9 ---
9
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episode
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Reward
SU-HATD3
HADDPG
MATD3
MADDPG
(a) The reward under different algorithms.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episode
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Reward
Learning Rate=0.005
Learning Rate=0.05
Learning Rate=0.0005
(b) The reward under different learning rates.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Episode
-2000
-1000
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
Reward
N=10R=40
N=5R=40
N=5R=20
(c) The reward under different scenarios scale.
Fig. 3. Convergence analysis under different algorithms, learning rates, and scenario scales.
3
5
7
10
Number of UAVs
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
System Utility
SU-HATD3
HADDPG
MATD3
MADDPG
(a) The system utility under different number of
UAVs.
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of roadside sensors
1000
1500
2000
2500
System Utility
SUHATD3
HADDPG
MATD3
MADDPG
(b) The system utility under different number of
roadside sensors.
100
200
300
400
Computation frequency of UAVs
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
System Utility
SUHATD3
HADDPG
MATD3
MADDPG
(c) The system utility under different computa-
tion frequency of UAVs.
Fig. 4. System utility of various algorithms under different settings.
Gaussian exploration noise with a decaying variance is applied
during training.
The simulation environment emulates an urban intelligent
transportation scenario, where UAVs act as aerial edge servers
to execute DMI tasks of the roadside sensors. The scenario
area is a 1000×1000 m2 rectangular region, where UAVs are
randomly deployed at a fixed altitude of 50 m and roadside
sensors are also distributed within the same region. Each
roadside sensor collects sensing data and generates a DMI task
in every time slot. A complete summary of the parameters and
their corresponding values is presented in Table I. To assess its
advantages, a set of benchmark algorithms is also evaluated.
TABLE I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Symbol
Definition
Value (Unit)
N
Number of UAVs
[5,10]
R
Number of roadside sensors
[20,50]
U
Computation frequency of UAVs
[100,400] step/s
Tn
Computing resources of UAVs
106 step
vn,t
Speed of UAVs
[70, 150] m/s
sr
The amount of sensing data
[0, 24] KB
Smin
r
Minimum inference step
0
Smax
r
Maximum inference step
[400, 600] steps
Fmin
r
Minimum fidelity for DT
0
Fmax
r
Maximum fidelity for DT
[50, 150]
Pn,r
The transmission power of sensor
0.1 W
h0
The channel gain
1 db
• MADDPG is a policy-based reinforcement learning tech-
nique that adopts an architecture of centralized training
and distributed execution [33]. The algorithm allows each
agent to learn its own deterministic policy while utilizing
centralized training to acquire global information, thereby
promoting coordination among agents in partially observ-
able environments. However, MADDPG may encounter
challenges related to training stability and scalability as
the number of agents increases.
• MATD3 is an improved version of MADDPG [34]. The
algorithm introduces twin Q-values and delayed updates
to reduce Q-value estimation bias, improving training
stability and scalability. Compared to MADDPG, MATD3
better addresses instability and scalability issues in multi-
agent environments.
• HADDPG is simplified version of SU-HATD3, which
uses a single critic network. The algorithm maintains
the sequential update mechanism, the absence of double
Q-learning limits its performance in handling complex
environments. As a result, HADDPG typically shows
inferior convergence stability compared to more advanced
algorithms like SU-HATD3.
B. Performance Evaluation of the SU-HATD3 Algorithm
1) Convergence performance
Fig. 3(a) compares the performance of different algorithms
for solving the optimization problem. Reward aspect: MAD-
DPG has the smallest reward, MATD3 and HADDPG achieve
similar rewards. SU-HATD3 achieved the highest reward,
outperforming MADDPG, MATD3, and HADDPG by 39%,


--- Page 10 ---
10
12.56%, and 11.8%, respectively. Convergence aspect: MAD-
DPG converges the slowest, followed by MATD3, then HAD-
DPG, with SU-HATD3 achieving the fastest convergence. This
demonstrates that SU-HATD3 not only delivers high rewards
but also converges more efficiently compared to the baseline
algorithms.
In Fig. 3(b), the training process of the SU-HATD3 algo-
rithm is demonstrated for different learning rates (0.05, 0.005,
and 0.0005). It can be seen from Fig. 3(b) that the learning
rate affects the reward value. A large learning rate may cause
the reward to exceed the global optimum too soon, and a
small one can lead to slower training and potential stagnation.
When the learning rate is small, the convergence speed of
computing power becomes slow, which significantly increases
the convergence complexity of the network. Simulation results
show that the SU-HATD3 algorithm can achieve the best
performance with learning rate of 0.005.
Fig. 3(c) verifies the generalization of the SU-HATD3
algorithm in different scale scenarios. Reward aspect: under
the same number of UAVs, the reward also increases with
the R increase. This shows that in the dense roadside sensors
scenarios, the strategy can more fully schedule the computing
resources of UAV and prioritize to the roadside sensors that
can obtain higher rewards. For the same number of roadside
sensors, the system reward increases as the number of UAVs
grows. This indicates that with the increase in computing
resources, more DMI tasks can be performed. Convergence
aspect: as the scene size increases, it also convergence also
slows. In summary, the SU-HATD3 algorithm demonstrates
good convergence in scenarios of different scales, indicating
its strong generalization.
2) System Utility
Fig. 4(a) compares the system utility of four algorithms un-
der different numbers of UAVs. As the number of UAVs rises
from 3 to 10, the system utility improves for all algorithms.
This is because more UAVs provide additional computing
resources, which can be allocated to the DMI task. When the
number of UAVs reaches 10, HADDPG achieves a system
utility close to 2700. The SU-HATD3 outperforms HADDPG,
MATD3, and MADDPG, which achieve system utilities of
over 2400, 1750, and 1100, respectively. Overall, our proposed
algorithm consistently outperforms the baseline algorithms.
Fig. 4(b) compares the system utility of four algorithms
under different numbers of roadside sensors. As the number
of roadside sensors rises from 20 to 80, the system utility
improves for all algorithms. This occurs because the increase
in DMI tasks provides UAVs with more options. Among these
options, the number of low-cost and high-fidelity DMI tasks
also increases, which significantly enhances the overall system
utility. Overall, our proposed method outperforms the three
baseline algorithms in terms of system utility. This advantage
mainly stems from the SU-HATD3 algorithm ability to learn
effective strategies during training, which further enhances the
overall system utility.
Fig. 4(c) compares the system utility of four algorithms
under different UAV computational frequency. The system util-
ity increases as UAV computational frequency improves. This
is because higher computational frequency reduce the DMI
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Average Delay(s)
80.0
89.0
93.0
97.0
56.0
50.0
47.0
43.0
MADDPG
MATD3
HADDPG
SU-HATD3
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
Average Fidelity
Fig. 5. Comparison of the average fidelity and average delay for 5 UAVs and
40 roadside sensors under different algorithms.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
X
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Y
UAV 1 trajectory
UAV 2 trajectory
Sensors
Task Offloading(Initial position)
Task Offloading(Final position)
Initial position
Final position
Fig. 6.
UAV movement trajectory with N = 2, R = 40 (The start and end
points are marked with text and red stars, respectively).
task completion delay. Specifically, when the UAV computing
capability is set to 2000, SU-HATD3 outperforms MADDPG,
MATD3, and HADDPG by 150%, 33%, and 8%, respectively.
3) Comparison of different performances
Fig. 5 shows the performance of different metrics obtained
by various algorithms. In terms of fidelity, the SU-HATD3
algorithm is able to update higher fidelity DTs, which is crucial
under the computing resource limitations of UAVs. In terms
of delay, the SU-HATD3 algorithm can update DT with lower
delay, which is essential for addressing the challenge of UAV
trajectory planning.
4)Trajectory Results
Fig. 6 evaluates the effectiveness of the SU-HATD3 algo-
rithm by analyzing the UAV trajectories. Fig. 6 shows the
movement trajectories of 2 UAVs. It can be observed that
the initial position of the UAV is away from the roadside
sensors, and as the trajectory runs, the UAVs tends to move
towards the location regions where multiple roadside sensors
are located. This is because the reward function includes


--- Page 11 ---
11
the transmission delay term, and being close to the sensor
can significantly shorten the communication distance, reduce
the transmission delay, and yields a higher system utility.
Therefore, the UAV actively adjust its trajectory to move closer
to the roadside sensors dense region. In addition, the results
show that the UAV has few DMI task offloading when it is far
from the sensors. The number of DMI task offloading increases
significantly when UAVs is close to the roadside sensors.
VII. CONCLUSION
To achieve system utility maximization in the GAI-
empowered ITDT, we studied a joint optimization problem. In
this problem, UAVs execute DMI tasks that are offloaded from
the roadside sensors. Each DMI task can be offloaded to an
appropriate UAV , which then performs inference optimization
of all diffusion models and adjusts its trajectory to improve
ITDT fidelity and reduce ITDT update delay. In particular, we
consider the fidelity-delay tradeoff for GAI-empowered ITDT.
To address the resulting optimization challenge, we developed
the SU-HATD3 algorithm. The proposed algorithm tackles
the strong cooperation and coupling among heterogeneous
agents. The simulation results show that compared to the
baseline algorithms, the proposed algorithm has significant
advantages in system utility and convergence rate. In future
work, we plan to study the combination of three-dimensional
trajectory planning and communication resource optimization
to enhance the application of UAVs in ITS and better meet
the requirements of ITS systems in dynamic and large-scale
complex environments
REFERENCES
[1] M. Zahangir Alam, S. Rahman, M. Asif Bin Khaled, A. Islam, and
A. Jamalipour, “A graph-assisted digital-twin-driven multiagent shared
offloading for internet of vehicles,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 12, no. 11, pp. 17 349–17 363, 2025.
[2] L. Zhou, S. Leng, Z. Xiong, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and T. Q. S. Quek,
“Cooperative digital twins enhanced uav topology optimization for
multi-target tracking,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, pp. 1–
1, 2025.
[3] X. Huang, H. Yang, C. Zhou, M. He, X. Shen, and W. Zhuang,
“When digital twin meets generative ai: Intelligent closed-loop network
management,” IEEE Network, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 272–279, 2025.
[4] M. Xu, H. Du, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, S. Mao, Z. Han,
A. Jamalipour, D. I. Kim, X. Shen, V. C. M. Leung, and H. V. Poor,
“Unleashing the power of edge-cloud generative ai in mobile networks:
A survey of aigc services,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 1127–1170, 2024.
[5] R. Zhang, D. Meng, L. Bassett, S. Shen, Z. Zou, and H. X. Liu, “Robust
roadside perception: An automated data synthesis pipeline minimizing
human annotation,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 9,
no. 10, pp. 6232–6241, 2024.
[6] S. Sai, U. Mittal, and V. Chamola, “Dmdat: Diffusion model-based data
augmentation technique for vision-based accident detection in vehicular
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 74, no. 2,
pp. 2241–2250, 2025.
[7] B. Lu, Q. Miao, Y. Liu, T. S. Tamir, H. Zhao, X. Zhang, Y. Lv, and
F.-Y. Wang, “A diffusion model for traffic data imputation,” IEEE/CAA
Journal of Automatica Sinica, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 606–617, 2025.
[8] L. Yi, J. Song, Y. Huan, S. Liu, J. Wang, A. Tolba, J. Ding, and C. Li,
“Defending uavs against adversarial attacks using diffusion model,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, pp. 1–14, 2025.
[9] X. Tang, Q. Chen, W. Weng, C. Jin, Z. Liu, J. Wang, G. Sun, X. Li,
and D. Niyato, “Task assignment and exploration optimization for low
altitude uav rescue via generative ai enhanced multi-agent reinforcement
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, pp. 1–17, 2025.
[10] H. T. Kim and J. Park, “Heterogeneous multi-agent reinforcement
learning based on modularized policy network,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 284, p. 127856, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0957417425014782
[11] X. Tang, Q. Chen, W. Weng, B. Liao, J. Wang, X. Cao, and X. Li, “Dnn
task assignment in uav networks: A generative ai enhanced multiagent
reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 13 340–13 352, 2025.
[12] Y. Zhong, J. G. Kuba, X. Feng, S. Hu, J. Ji, and Y. Yang,
“Heterogeneous-agent reinforcement learning,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 25, no. 32, pp. 1–67, 2024. [Online]. Available:
http://jmlr.org/papers/v25/23-0488.html
[13] M. S. Irfan, S. Dasgupta, and M. Rahman, “Toward transportation digital
twin systems for traffic safety and mobility: A review,” IEEE Internet
of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 14, pp. 24 581–24 603, 2024.
[14] S. Dasgupta, M. Rahman, and S. Jon, “Harnessing digital twin technol-
ogy for adaptive traffic signal control: Improving signalized intersection
performance and user satisfaction,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal,
vol. 11, no. 22, pp. 36 596–36 618, 2024.
[15] A. Rudskoy, I. Ilin, and A. Prokhorov, “Digital twins in the intelligent
transport systems,” Transportation Research Procedia, vol. 54, pp.
927–935, 2021, international Scientific Siberian Transport Forum -
TransSiberia 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S235214652100332X
[16] K. Kuˇsi´c, R. Schumann, and E. Ivanjko, “A digital twin in transportation:
Real-time synergy of traffic data streams and simulation for virtualizing
motorway dynamics,” Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 55, p.
101858, 2023.
[17] T. Li, Q. Long, H. Chai, S. Zhang, F. Jiang, H. Liu, W. Huang, D. Jin,
and Y. Li, “Generative ai empowered network digital twins: Architecture,
technologies, and applications,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 57, no. 6,
Feb. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3711682
[18] P. Singh, B. Hazarika, K. Singh, W.-J. Huang, and T. Q. Duong,
“Digital twin-assisted adaptive federated multi-agent drl with genai for
optimized resource allocation in iov networks,” in 2025 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2025, pp. 01–06.
[19] H. Bilal, A. Rehman, M. S. Aslam, I. Ullah, W.-J. Chang, N. Kumar,
and A. M. Almuhaideb, “Hybrid trafficai: A generative ai framework
for real-time traffic simulation and adaptive behavior modeling,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, pp. 1–17, 2025.
[20] K. Duran, H. Shin, T. Q. Duong, and B. Canberk, “Gentwin: Generative
ai-powered digital twinning for adaptive management in iot networks,”
IEEE Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1053–1063, 2025.
[21] J. Huang, S. E. Bibri, and P. Keel, “Generative spatial artificial
intelligence for sustainable smart cities: A pioneering large flow model
for urban digital twin,” Environmental Science and Ecotechnology,
vol. 24, p. 100526, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2666498425000043
[22] L. Zhou, S. Leng, Q. Wang, T. Q. Quek, and M. Guizani, “Cooperative
digital twins for uav-based scenarios,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 40–46, 2025.
[23] B. Jiang, J. Du, C. Jiang, Z. Han, A. Alhammadi, and M. Debbah, “Over-
the-air federated learning in digital twins empowered uav swarms,” IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 17 619–
17 634, 2024.
[24] J. Tang, J. Nie, J. Bai, J. Xu, S. Li, Y. Zhang, and Y. Yuan, “Uav-assisted
digital-twin synchronization with tiny-machine-learning-based semantic
communications,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 11, no. 17, pp.
28 437–28 451, 2024.
[25] L. Luo, F. Tang, H. Chen, S. Zhang, X. Chen, and M. Zhao, “Building
digital twin networks for heterogeneous uav clusters: A low-latency
agent gateway selection method,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive
Communications and Networking, pp. 1–1, 2025.
[26] X. Liu, Z. Li, L. Lei, G. Shen, S. Cai, and X. Liu, “Dynamic data-driven
digital twin network construction and calibration for aav swarms,” IEEE
Internet of Things Journal, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 19 397–19 413, 2025.
[27] H. Du, Z. Li, D. Niyato, J. Kang, Z. Xiong, H. Huang, and S. Mao,
“Diffusion-based reinforcement learning for edge-enabled ai-generated
content services,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 23,
no. 9, pp. 8902–8918, 2024.
[28] G. Xie, Z. Xiong, X. Zhang, R. Xie, S. Guo, M. Guizani, and H. Vin-
cent Poor, “Gai-iov: Bridging generative ai and vehicular networks for
ubiquitous edge intelligence,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 12 799–12 814, 2024.
[29] F. Li, H. Yao, J. Du, C. Jiang, and Y. Qian, “Stackelberg game-based
computation offloading in social and cognitive industrial internet of


--- Page 12 ---
12
things,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 16, no. 8,
pp. 5444–5455, 2020.
[30] J. Du, J. Xu, A. Sun, J. Kang, Y. Hu, F. Richard Yu, and V. C. M.
Leung, “Profit maximization for multi-time-scale hierarchical drl-based
joint optimization in mec-enabled air-ground integrated networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 1591–1606, 2025.
[31] T. Wen, X. Wang, and Q. Chen, “A happo based task offloading
strategy in heterogeneous air-ground collaborative mec networks,” in
2025 IEEE/CIC International Conference on Communications in China
(ICCC), 2025, pp. 1–6.
[32] H. Zhang, J. Du, C. Jiang, J. Wang, F. Bader, and M. Debbah, “Task
offloading in uav-assisted mobile cloud-edge computing networks: An
aop-aware happo approach,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technol-
ogy, vol. 74, no. 9, pp. 14 745–14 759, 2025.
[33] P. Qin, Y. Fu, Y. Xie, K. Wu, X. Zhang, and X. Zhao, “Multi-agent
learning-based optimal task offloading and uav trajectory planning for
agin-power iot,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 7,
pp. 4005–4017, 2023.
[34] Z. Ji, S. Wu, and C. Jiang, “Cooperative multi-agent deep reinforce-
ment learning for computation offloading in digital twin satellite edge
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 41,
no. 11, pp. 3414–3429, 2023.
