--- Page 1 ---
Hierarchical adaptive control for real-time dynamic
inference at the edge
1st Francesco Daghero
MMMI Software Engineering
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
fdag@mmmi.sdu.dk
2nd Mahyar Tourchi Moghaddam
MMMI Software Engineering
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
mtmo@mmmi.sdu.dk
3rd Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard
MMMI Software Engineering
University of Southern Denmark
Odense, Denmark
mbkj@mmmi.sdu.dk
©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
Accepted as a paper at the IEEE RAGE 2026 Workshop.
Abstract—Industrial systems increasingly depend on Machine
Learning (ML), and operate on heterogeneous nodes that must
satisfy tight latency, energy, and memory constraints. Dynamic
ML models, which reconfigure their computational footprint
at runtime, promise high energy efficiency and lower average
latency for modest accuracy tradeoffs; however, their deployment
is complex due to the additional hyperparameters they rely on.
These hyperparameters, controlling the accuracy versus average
latency tradeoff, are often tuned on a calibration dataset that
must match the test time distribution, an assumption that rarely
holds in real-world scenarios, leading to suboptimal operational
conditions, possibly below static models. We propose a two-
tier adaptive architecture that co-optimizes model and system
decisions. At the global level, a constraint-driven scheduler
configures and deploys, for each edge node, a cascade of classifiers
composed of lightweight specialized models and a generalist
fallback, satisfying latency and memory constraints. At the node
level, a fast local controller tracks data drifts and hardware
resources, adaptively enabling or disabling specialized predictors
(SP) to preserve high energy efficiency and avoid latency-
constraint violations under varying conditions. This design allows
longer operating times without forcing a global redeployment
step, and enables efficient execution in case of an unreachable
remote global controller. We evaluate the approach on two vision
datasets under controlled distribution mismatch scenarios, show-
ing average per-inference reductions of latency up to 2.45x and
energy up to 2.86x, with less than 4% accuracy drop compared to
static baselines. Our contributions are: (1) a budgeted SP-cascade
formulation that preserves worst-case latency constraints; (2)
a hierarchical controller that maintains efficiency under data
and resource changes; and (3) an experimental evaluation on
embedded hardware.
Index Terms—Edge AI, Dynamic Inference, Self-Adaptive
Systems, Software Architecture, Cyber-Physical Systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Industrial systems increasingly rely on Machine Learning
(ML) for real-time perception and control [1], [2]. These
tasks must satisfy strict latency constraints and are therefore
often executed on edge nodes with intermittent or no cloud
connectivity. In this setting, systems must preserve timing
predictability while remaining energy-efficient, since edge
nodes are often battery-operated. Dynamic inference tech-
niques [3] improve efficiency by adapting the computational
graph depending on the input.
Fig. 1: Generic dynamic inference scheme.
As shown in Figure 1, inputs traverse a cascade of models
of increasing complexity, and a policy decides whether to
execute the next model or exit. Both the policy and the
cascade are tuned on a validation set and assume the test
distribution and the compute budget remain stable. In practice,
class distributions drift, and thermal throttling and background
tasks reduce the available resources. Dynamic inference can
then become inefficient and may violate latency constraints if
the selected cascade is too deep. Recalibrating the cascade is
time-consuming and can introduce unacceptable delays.
To address this challenge, we propose a two-tier self-
adaptive software architecture for dynamic inference on het-
erogeneous edge systems. At deployment time, a global sched-
uler selects, for each node and task, a cascade of inexpensive
one-vs-rest binary classifiers, named specialized predictors
(SPs), together with a multiclass fallback model (FB). The
number and order of SPs are optimized to minimize average
latency while satisfying worst-case latency constraints. At run-
time, a local controller (LC) monitors resource usage and class
frequencies to enable, disable, and reorder SPs to preserve
efficiency. A global controller (GC) runs at a lower frequency
and can deploy additional SPs or update the configuration
when needed, limiting the need for full redeployment. This de-
sign decouples coarse-grained configuration from fine-grained
model selection, enabling systems to remain responsive and
energy-efficient. Our work makes the following contributions:
• A budgeted dynamic inference formulation based on SP
cascades with an explicit worst-case latency constraint.
arXiv:2604.26470v1  [cs.LG]  29 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
• A hierarchical controller that maintains efficiency under
distribution mismatch and runtime resource variability.
• An evaluation on two vision datasets under controlled
mismatch scenarios, showing average per-inference re-
ductions of latency up to 2.45x and energy up to 2.86x
with less than 4% accuracy drop compared to static
baselines.
II. BACKGROUND
ML, and in particular Deep Learning (DL), has become
the core component of an increasing number of applications,
such as remote healthcare [4], and construction machinery [2].
However, the high computational demand of DL models has
traditionally led to a cloud-centric paradigm, offloading infer-
ence to remote high-performance nodes. While effective for
training, cloud inference is often suboptimal [5] for inference
in many industrial scenarios due to strict real-time latency
constraints and intermittent or absent connectivity. On the
other hand, near-sensor inference offers several advantages.
First, local computations ensure predictable and possibly lower
average and worst-case latency [5]. Second, no sensitive data
is transmitted to the cloud, enhancing security. Finally, it can
improve energy efficiency [5], as continuous transmission of
raw sensor data to the cloud is highly expensive in terms of
energy, rapidly draining battery-operated devices.
Edge devices, however, are highly heterogeneous and often
feature limited memory budgets and computational power.
Optimizing ML inference to run on such devices has therefore
been studied in-depth in recent years, often featuring limited
prediction quality drops for significant reductions in resource
usage [5]. Such approaches can be grouped in two main
families: static and dynamic [3]. Static techniques include
popular approaches such as quantization [6] and pruning [7]
and consists of changing the model either at training time
or post-training. Their main limitation lies in their static
nature, as they are unable to adapt to changes in the external
conditions, such as low battery or thermal throttling. Dynamic
inference techniques address this limitation by reconfiguring
the computational graph based on the input sample complexity.
Samples that are deemed “easy” (e.g., a clear and centered
subject in an image classification task) require only a subset
of the computational budget to be correctly labeled. On the
other hand, “complex” inputs (e.g., a blurry image) require
the full compute budget to avoid misclassification. The core
of dynamic inference is the discrimination policy used to
determine the input complexity, as it controls the accuracy
vs latency tradeoff. A conservative decision improves the
accuracy, but increases the energy and latency cost. On the
other hand, an underestimation may lead to a misclassification
and thus to a degradation of the prediction quality. Moreover,
the discrimination policy must be lightweight to avoid over-
shadowing the energy gains from the reduced computations.
A standard example of dynamic inference is the Big-
Little [8], where the cascade of models consists of two models:
an inexpensive model (Little) and an expensive but more
accurate model (Big).
Algorithm 1 Big-Little inference
1: Input: sample x, Little model fL, Big model fB, thresh-
old τ
2: p ←fL(x)
(class probabilities)
3: if max(p) ≥τ then
4:
ˆy ←arg max p
5: else
6:
ˆy ←arg max fB(x)
7: end if
8: Return: ˆy
Algorithm 1 reports an overview of the inference mech-
anism, shown in a more general form in Figure 1. The
Little model is evaluated first on the input, and its output
probabilities are used to decide whether to invoke, on the same
input, the Big model. The discrimination policy in this case is
named Max and compares the largest probability with a user-
defined threshold τ. As long as most inputs require only the
Little model, significant energy and average latency savings
can be achieved. On the other hand, the worst case latency
of the inference increases, as it now includes an execution of
the Little and Big model. Real-time systems have to consider
this additional complexity layer when leveraging dynamic
inference. Our work addresses the variability in the resources
and in the data distributions, balancing energy efficiency with
latency deadlines.
III. RELATED WORK
Several works have explored dynamic inference to im-
prove the energy-accuracy tradeoff. Early-exit networks add
intermediate classifiers inside the backbone model, sharing a
subset of layers and introducing one or more “exit” points
in the computational graph. This can reduce computation
by reusing intermediate activations, but may lead to sharper
accuracy drops [3]. BranchyNet [9] augments CNNs with
multiple exit branches and uses the entropy of the softmax
output as a confidence estimate to decide whether to stop
early. This approach yields speedups ranging from 2x to 6x
on tasks running on CPUs and GPUs. The authors of [10]
select exit positions during training to satisfy latency budgets,
yielding 0.87% accuracy improvements with a 37.14% average
latency reduction. At runtime, thresholds (τ) are lowered when
latency constraints are violated. In [11], the authors propose an
optimization algorithm to select the optimal threshold values
on a validation set, given a set of latency budgets. Aside
from early-exit models, cascade of classifiers such as the Big-
Little [8] have widely been explored in the literature. In [12],
the authors propose cascades of models with increasing com-
putational cost and accuracy, reporting up to 37% latency
reductions without accuracy drops on CIFAR-10. The authors
of [13] analyze cascades of increasingly complex classifiers
and study the effects of threshold selection and stopping
policies, showing 3.1x latency improvements at iso-accuracy
and evaluating cascades with mild data distribution shifts.


--- Page 3 ---
Fig. 2: Dynamic Inference-aware architecture overview.
Differently from early-exits, our adaptive cascade is not
fixed after deployment and can be reconfigured and updated
dynamically to adjust to changes in external conditions.
Moreover, it adds no complexity to training, since SPs can
be trained independently without architectural modifications
for parameter sharing. Our work is orthogonal to threshold
selection approaches. Instead of only tuning thresholds, we
adapt at the granularity of models (e.g., enabling/disabling
SPs) because, on unseen data, lowering a threshold does not
necessarily preserve a hard worst-case latency constraint.
IV. METHODOLOGY
Figure 2 shows an overview of our hierarchical architecture
for dynamic inference. A fast on-device Local Controller (LC)
adapts the active cascade at inference-time granularity, while a
slower Global Controller (GC) computes (and, when needed,
updates) a budget-feasible configuration and can deploy ad-
ditional SPs. At initialization, the GC selects, for each node
(hosting one task in our setting), a cascade configuration that
balances accuracy and average latency under memory and
worst-case latency constraints. At runtime, the LC uses on-
device measurements to react to distribution shifts and re-
source variability without requiring continuous communication
with the GC. The following subsections detail the dynamic
inference mechanism and the two controllers.
A. Dynamic Inference
Fig. 3: Dynamic cascaded inference with four classes and two
SPs.
We decompose the multiclass problem of our classification
tasks into multiple sub-tasks. Given a set of labels C =
{C1, . . . , CN}, we train N specialized predictors (SPc), each
with the purpose of estimating whether an input x belongs
to class c. Due to the lower complexity of the subtask,
these binary models are significantly smaller than the full
multiclass model in both memory and computational cost and
can be designed independently depending on the specific label
complexity. In this work, we keep the SP architecture identical
for a task, leaving sub-task-specific architecture as future work.
At task scheduling time, the GC evaluates a subset (D) of
these predictors in a predefined order (o) for each task t, that
we represent as follows:
Ot = {SP 0, . . . , SP D, FB}
(1)
with D ≤|C| and FB being the original multiclass model.
This ordering is selected according to the deployment and
latency constraints, as we detail in Section IV-B.
At inference time, the cascade of the deployed models is
evaluated as follows. Each SP i employs two thresholds thr−
and thr+ to determine its decision:
di(x) =





P i
c(x) > thr+
Accept c
P i
c(x) < thr−
Reject c
thr−≤P i
c(x) ≤thr+ Undecided c
(2)
where P i
c(x) is the predicted probability by the SP in the
cascade at position i for the for class c. An accepted decision
ends the inference early. A reject forces the execution of
the following SP, or eventually the multiclass model FB.
Intuitively, in both of these cases, the classifier is confident
enough in its prediction that x does or does not belong to
class c. If undecided, i.e., we are close to a random prediction
of 0.5, we invoke FB. The intuition is that the other SPs in
the pipeline are unlikely to give highly confident and correct
probabilities, and therefore executing them is suboptimal.
This inference pipeline has an expected inference cost
(Einf) in multiply-and-accumulate (MAC) operations of:
Einf =
D
X
i=0
1(SP i) ∗ESP i + 1(FB) ∗EF B
(3)
where ESP i and EF B are respectively the computational costs
of SP i and FB and 1(X) is 1 if model X has been executed.
Due to the inexpensive nature of each SP, this approach
leads to consistent savings as long as the FB is rarely invoked.
However, SPs are generally not as accurate as the FB; as a con-
sequence, increasing D trades off accuracy for higher energy
efficiency and lower average latency. Conversely, the worst
case latency increases together with D, as a real-time system
must consider a full invocation of the inference pipeline as the
upper bound. In terms of memory, the overhead introduced
due to storing multiple predictors is generally negligible, as
these binary classifiers are orders of magnitude smaller than
the FB model. Finally, thr−and thr+ are selected empirically
depending on the task, possibly leveraging heuristic-based
approaches that are orthogonal to this work. Figure 3 shows
an example with C = 4 and D = 2, where only the SP
for classes 3 and 1 are deployed. Following Equation 2, the
input traverses the cascade until an early exit is triggered


--- Page 4 ---
or the FB model is run. This design is flexible: small one-
vs-rest SPs can be enabled or disabled on demand, unlike
heavyweight multiclass models in a fixed cascade, adapting to
increase in the timing pressure due to change in the available
resources. Finally, under distribution shift, the cascade can also
be re-ordered, continuously adapting to maintain high energy
efficiency and low average latency by maximizing the early
exits.
B. Global Controller
The GC implements two core functions in the proposed
architecture, providing both the initial task scheduling and
online adaptation.
1) Task Scheduling and Model deployment: In our setting,
each edge node hosts at most one ML task, and the role
of the GC is to select a node-feasible dynamic-inference
configuration. The GC follows a two-stage, heuristic selection
procedure.
First, it builds a set of candidate SP cascades for a task
using a beam search that retains only a limited number
of high-quality orders per depth, minimizing a score based
on the expected MACs per inference (Equation 2) on the
validation set. Second, it filters out cascades that exceed a user-
defined accuracy drop w.r.t. the fallback model and removes
configurations that violate node-level memory constraints or
the task’s worst-case latency constraint. Finally, among the
remaining feasible candidates, the GC selects the configuration
with the minimum score and deploys the corresponding set and
ordering of SPs.
2) Online Update: At runtime, the GC receives updates
from each node, tracking changes in hardware conditions (e.g.,
temperature and battery lifetime) and task-level signals (e.g.,
predicted class frequency), as shown in Figure 4.
The SP selector takes the task SPs from the local storage
and determines if deploying a new SP can improve the energy
efficiency while maintaining an acceptable accuracy drop. For
instance, in the case of class distributions diverging from the
validation set, it focuses first on the SPs trained on high-
frequency classes. Once a set of candidate SPs has been found,
the Feasibility Checker verifies that adding a model to the
cascade does not violate the node and latency constraints.
In case adding an SP is deemed feasible, the GC transmits
the new SP to the node, where it is stored for future use.
Notably, this approach delays a forced full reconfiguration of
the cascade and, as long as it is performed with low frequency,
it is lightweight on the node’s battery.
C. Local Controller
The LC, shown in Figure 4, monitors node-level resources,
such as CPU availability, memory, and temperature. It also
keeps statistics of the task deployed on the same node, with
online updates after each inference. Specifically, the LC com-
putes the exponential moving average (EMA) of the predicted
classes, providing an updated estimate of the predicted class
distribution, and is used by the GC and LC to reconfigure the
SP at runtime.
The LC can perform three actions. First, it can disable
an SP if the corresponding class frequency is lower than a
threshold τ. Second, it can re-enable a locally available SP
(i.e., it was either deployed at scheduling time or sent later by
the GC) if its class frequency is larger than τ. Third, the LC
sorts the enabled SPs according to the EMA.
To provide timing robustness, the LC enforces a simple per-
inference safety check. Given Dt and Lk denoting respectively
the latency constraint of task t, and the end-to-end inference
latency of the sample k (including the LC status update), if
Lk > Dt, the LC reduces the active cascade (e.g., disabling
the last enabled SPs) until the worst-case latency of the active
configuration fits within Dt. In practice, we reserve a fixed
budget TLC for LC actuation and enforce:
TLC +
X
SP ∈A
T(SP) + T(FB) ≤Dt,
(4)
where A is the set of enabled SPs. This mechanism ensures
that adaptation-induced latency spikes remain bounded by
design, while the EMA-driven logic preserves efficiency under
distribution mismatch.
In general, SPs may be aggressively enabled in low-battery
mode, as they reduce the average energy per inference, while
the sorting mechanism is used to make the system more
resilient to test-time class distribution drifts. Intuitively, an
SP executed on a class that rarely appears due to class drifts
wastes computations and energy, while also increasing the
possibility of deadline misses. Therefore, our EMA-based
control will first move such SP towards the end of the cascade,
eventually switching it off entirely.
V. RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
We deploy the LC and dynamic models on a Raspberry Pi
4B, and run the GC on an Asus NUC (quad-core Intel i7,
16 GB RAM). We measure Raspberry Pi energy consumption
with an inline USB power meter. We evaluate on the Soil Clas-
sification Dataset (SCD) [14] and CIFAR-10 [15]. For SCD
(5097 images, 7 classes, imbalanced), we use an 80/10/10%
train/val/test split, while for CIFAR-1.0, we split the training
set into 80/20% train/val and use the standard test set. We
enforce per-inference latency constraints of 0.05 s for SCD
and 0.1 s for CIFAR-10.
SPs are LeNet binary classifiers, while FB models are
MobileNetV2 (width 0.5 for SCD, 1 for CIFAR-10). Table II
reports the models’ parameters and MACs. We train all
models with PyTorch 2.5 on the NUC and run the inference
with ONNX Runtime on the Raspberry Pi. Due to the class
imbalance of the tasks, we report the results using the balanced
accuracy.
B. GC Scheduling Trade-offs
Figure 5 reports the Pareto frontier between accuracy and
compute (MACs), which we use to select runtime configu-
rations that satisfy the latency constraints while minimizing
on-device cost. Following the GC procedure in Section IV-B,


--- Page 5 ---
Fig. 4: Framework runtime overview.
TABLE I: Deployment results
Base
Mismatch Minor
Mismatch Major
Dataset
Method
SP Order
Latency[ms]
Energy[mJ]
Latency[ms]
Energy[mJ]
Latency[ms]
Energy[mJ]
SCD
Static
14.24
18.13
14.24
18.13
14.24
18.13
Dynamic
6, 2, 5
5.66
6.31
4.05
4.07
9.81
11.81
Ours
6, 2, 5
5.82
6.32
3.98
3.99
5.96
6.54
CIFAR-10
Static
33.65
43.88
33.65
43.88
33.65
43.88
Dynamic
3, 4
30.35
38.62
27.41
34.91
30.14
38.62
Ours
3, 4
28.32
36.28
24.22
30.65
28.28
36.28
TABLE II: Baseline static models
Dataset
Model
MAC[M]
Params[K]
B.Acc[%]
SCD
SP
0.65
61.24
80.8
MobileNetV2 w0.5
31.64
696.65
90.5
CIFAR-10
SP
0.65
61.24
74.5
MobileNetV2 w1
94.54
2236.68
90.8
(a) SCD
(b) CIFAR-10
Fig. 5: GC scheduling results at different accuracy versus
MAC tradeoffs.
we generate candidate cascades, prune those violating the
memory/worst-case latency constraints or exceeding the target
accuracy drop, and select the feasible order that minimizes
the expected MACs. We repeat this process for each target
accuracy drop in [0, 10]% (step 1%), obtaining the Dynamic
Model points. The FB model (red) provides the static reference
point, i.e., the MobileNet architectures in Table II.
Concerning SCD, we obtain an increase in balanced ac-
curacy of 0.1% with a reduction of MACs of 25.98% w.r.t.
FB. The binary classifier for the yellow soil becomes even
more accurate than the FB model on its target class, causing
the cascade of two models to become more accurate than the
single static one. If we allow an accuracy drop of 3.52%, the
MAC reduction we obtain is 94.57%.
Concerning CIFAR-10, the accuracy versus MAC curve is
steeper due to the higher task complexity. A drop of 2.78%
accuracy reduces the MACs by up to 45.66%, while a drop of
6.44% yields savings of 98.28% w.r.t. the FB.
C. Deployment Results
For the on-device experiments, we select the most efficient
configuration in Figure 5 that introduces at most a 4% accuracy
drop with respect to the FB model. These orders allow us
to benchmark ordering with D > 1, where our LC and GC
can fully apply optimizations such as SP sorting. Moreover,
to emulate an actual continuous data stream, we iterate over
each test set three times.
All workloads execute inside a Docker container, limited to
a single CPU core for easier comparisons. With this compute
budget, the execution time of a single SP is 0.44 ms.
We evaluate three scenarios that capture stationary condi-
tions (Base) and distribution shifts that change the frequency
of the early-exit classes (Mismatch Minor/Major). Table I
reports average latency and energy per inference when running
only the FB model (Static), a dynamic cascade without LC and
GC adaptation (Dynamic) and our approach (Ours).
Base uses the original test set as a steady-state reference.
For SCD, our approach reduces average latency by 2.45× vs.
the static configuration, while non-adaptive dynamic inference
achieves 2.52×. Energy follows the same trend. Our approach
and dynamic inference yield up to 2.86× and 2.87× savings
vs. static. For CIFAR-10, our approach improves latency by
1.18× and 1.07× over static and dynamic baselines, respec-
tively. It reduces energy by up to 1.20× vs. static.
The mismatch behavior differs across datasets. CIFAR-10
has a uniform class frequency and a larger test set, so our
solution can update the moving average and adapt the cascade
order. For SCD, the deployed order already includes the three
most frequent classes in decreasing order. No changes are
then needed at runtime, as the order is already optimal for
the label distribution. The remaining overhead introduced by
LC and GC is mainly due to their Python implementation,
while inference relies on the optimized ONNX Runtime.


--- Page 6 ---
Mismatch Minor augments by five times the samples of
the class corresponding to the last SP in the cascade. This
is a corner case for non-adaptive dynamic inference, where
the efficiency of the deployed order diminishes. For SCD, we
obtain a latency reduction of 3.57× and energy reduction of
4.54× w.r.t. static. We slightly outperform dynamic inference,
reducing the average latency by 0.07 ms and energy by
0.08 mJ. For CIFAR-10, we reduce latency by 1.39× and
energy by 1.43× vs. static. We also outperform dynamic
inference, with latency and energy reductions of 1.13×.
Mismatch Major replicates by the same factor a class not
included in the deployed order (class 0 in our experiment).
For SCD, our solution yields a speedup of 2.38× and an
energy reduction of 2.77× w.r.t. static. Dynamic inference
deteriorates, yielding lower savings in latency (1.45×) and
energy (1.53×). For CIFAR-10, we achieve a speedup of
1.19× and an energy reduction of 1.21× vs. static.
Overall, stronger test-time divergence increases the benefit
of closed-loop adaptation. Our framework is the only method
among the baselines that can adjust the deployed cascade
online to recover efficiency under distribution shift.
D. Self-Adaptation Analysis
Fig. 6: SCD Mismatch Major inference overview.
Figure 6 shows the first iteration on the test of the SCD
Mismatch Major scenario detailed in Table I. We report the
latency per inference with a moving average smoothing for
easier readability.
As expected, the Static baseline remains constant over the
entire duration at approximately 14 ms. The classic dynamic
solution reduces the average latency, but it suffers from differ-
ent class distributions. It also causes sharp peaks in inference
latency, matching a static solution after 600 samples.
Our framework fully handles the mismatch. After 180
inferences, the LC (orange vertical line) detects a significant
change in the class distribution and disables the least invoked
SP in the deployed order to reduce the average inference
latency. At 200 inferences, our GC (blue vertical line) is
triggered and offloads the SP corresponding to the augmented
class 0 to the node. Across the entire execution, our framework
performs consistently better or close to the standard dynamic
inference approach. At the node level, for the Mismatch Major
scenario, we reduce the total energy used by the Raspberry Pi
by 58% with respect to a static solution and by 39% with
respect to the Dynamic baseline.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work introduces an adaptive software architecture for
dynamic inference based on a hierarchical control loop. A
global controller (GC) and local controller (LC) jointly adapt
the deployed model configuration to satisfy resource and
latency constraints while reducing the average latency and
energy per inference.
We validate the approach on two vision workloads (SCD
and CIFAR-10) and show that dynamic adaptation can substan-
tially improve efficiency with limited accuracy loss compared
to static baselines.
Future work will extend the controllers to additional drift
sources (e.g., lighting changes or sensor degradation) and
broader model families.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Supported by Next-Generation AI (Forskningsreserven).
This work is supported by Digital Research Centre Denmark
(DIREC).
REFERENCES
[1] A. Luckow et al., “Deep learning in the automotive industry: Applica-
tions and tools,” in IEEE Big Data.
IEEE, 2016.
[2] K. You et al., “Deep learning technology for construction machinery
and robotics,” Automation in construction, vol. 150, p. 104852, 2023.
[3] M. Sponner et al., “Adapting neural networks at runtime: Current trends
in at-runtime optimizations for deep learning,” ACM Computing Surveys,
pp. 1–40, 2024.
[4] T. Shaik et al., “Remote patient monitoring using artificial intelligence:
Current state, applications, and challenges,” Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 13, no. 2, 2023.
[5] M. G. S. Murshed et al., “Machine learning at the network edge: A
survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 54, no. 8, Oct. 2021.
[6] B. Rokh, A. Azarpeyvand, and A. Khanteymoori, “A comprehensive
survey on model quantization for deep neural networks in image clas-
sification,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology,
vol. 14, 2023.
[7] T. Hoefler, D. Alistarh, T. Ben-Nun, N. Dryden, and A. Peste, “Sparsity
in deep learning: Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training
in neural networks,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2021.
[8] E. Park, D. Kim, S. Kim, Y.-D. Kim, G. Kim, S. Yoon, and S. Yoo,
“Big/little deep neural network for ultra low power inference,” in IEEE
CODES+ISSS, 2015, pp. 124–132.
[9] S. Teerapittayanon et al., “Branchynet: Fast inference via early exiting
from deep neural networks,” in IEEE ICPR, 2016.
[10] L. Zhu, M. Che, J. Chang, Z. Xu, and T. Wei, “Sample-adaptive multi-
branch network for efficient inference under time constraints,” Journal
of systems architecture, 2025.
[11] X. Tan, H. Li, L. Wang, X. Huang, and Z. Xu, “Empowering adaptive
early-exit inference with latency awareness,” in AAAI 2021.
[12] X. Wang, Y. Luo, D. Crankshaw, A. Tumanov, F. Yu, and J. E. Gonzalez,
“Idk cascades: Fast deep learning by learning not to overthink,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1706.00885, 2017.
[13] L. Lebovitz, L. Cavigelli, M. Magno, and L. K. Muller, “Efficient
inference with model cascades,” Transactions on Machine Learning
Research, 2023.
[14] F. Sheth et al., “An advanced artificial intelligence framework integrating
ensembled convolutional neural networks and vision transformers for
precise soil classification with adaptive fuzzy logic-based crop recom-
mendations,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol.
158, p. 111425, 2025.
[15] A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton et al., “Learning multiple layers of features
from tiny images,” 2009.
