--- Page 1 ---
Meta-optimization of maximally-localized Wannier functions
Sabyasachi Tiwari,1, 2 Bruno Cucco,1, 2 Viet-Anh Ha,1, 2 and Feliciano Giustino1, 2, ∗
1Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
2Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
Maximally-localized Wannier functions are quantum wavefunctions resembling atomic orbitals that are used to de-
scribe electrons in condensed matter.1 Since their introduction in 1997,2 these functions have become ubiquitous in ab
initio materials simulations, including applications in linear-scaling methods,3 strongly-correlated electron systems,4
quantum transport,5 electron-phonon interactions,6 and topological materials.7 Despite their widespread adoption
in a vast software ecosystem,8 Wannier functions have not yet attained their fullest potential in the presence of
entangled bands, as their optimization remains challenging and labor-intensive.
Here, we introduce a universal
meta-optimization method that leverages workflow abstraction and machine learning techniques like differential evo-
lution and Bayesian optimization to generate globally optimized Wannier functions without human intervention.
We demonstrate this approach through three applications: (i) autonomous interpolation of entangled band struc-
tures with millielectronvolt accuracy starting from coarse Brillouin zone grids, (ii) thousand-fold acceleration of
fully ab initio Boltzmann transport calculations via the use of minimal coarse Brillouin zone grids, and (iii) ultra-
fast high-throughput calculations of high-precision Wannier functions for large materials libraries. This work brings
calculations that previously required supercomputers within the reach of personal computers.
Introduction
Wannier functions offer a localized representation of elec-
trons in crystalline solids that is complementary to the
standard Bloch representation.1 If we denote by |nk⟩an
extended Bloch function with band index n and Bloch
wavevector k, Wannier functions are defined by the fol-
lowing generalized Fourier transform:
|Rm⟩=
X
n
Z dk
VBZ
e−ik·R Unmk |nk⟩.
(1)
In this expression, the integral is performed over the crys-
tal Brillouin zone (BZ), with volume VBZ, and R denotes
a vector of the crystal lattice. The unitary matrix Unmk
is arbitrary; by suitably choosing this matrix, one can ob-
tain Wannier functions |Rm⟩that are as localized as pos-
sible, known as maximally-localized Wannier functions
(MLWFs).2,9 The spatial localization of MLWFs forms
the basis for linear-scaling electronic structure methods,
whereby quantum-mechanical operators are conveniently
represented as sparse matrices.10,11
MLWFs are primarily employed in Wannier-Fourier in-
terpolation. This technique involves generating one-body
operators in the Bloch representation from their sparse
Wannier representation by inverting Eq. (1).9 In this ap-
proach, Bloch functions and associated operators are ini-
tially computed on a coarse BZ grid (BZc, for instance
10×10×10 k vectors). All relevant quantities are then
transformed into the MLWF representation via Eq. (1).
From this real-space representation, the inverse trans-
form is used to obtain Bloch operators on a fine BZ grid
(BZf, for instance 100×100×100 k vectors), in complete
∗fgiustino@oden.utexas.edu
analogy with Fourier interpolation with zero padding:
|nk⟩, k ∈BZc −−→|Rm⟩−−→|nk′⟩, k′ ∈BZf.
(2)
This operation achieves a reduction in computational
cost by several orders of magnitude, all the while ensur-
ing minimal interpolation error. As a result, calculations
of materials properties that were previously impossible
have become routine; for example, much of the recent
progress in electron-phonon physics has been enabled by
the adoption of MLWFs;6,12 similarly, the extensive data
on topological materials available today was generated
using MLWFs.13,14 During the past two decades, MLWFs
have been incorporated into all major density-functional
theory (DFT) packages,15–22 as well as many-body elec-
tronic structure codes,23–29 and have been used in thou-
sands of scientific studies.
The procedure to generate MLWFs, commonly referred
to as Wannierization, involves determining a set of uni-
tary matrices Unmk in Eq. (1) that minimize the spa-
tial extent of each Wannier function |Rm⟩. For a set of
bands that are separated from all other bands by finite
energy gaps, called a “composite” manifold, the matri-
ces U are square matrices with rank equal to the size of
the manifold (subscripts omitted for brevity); this sce-
nario is typical of valence electrons in semiconductors
and insulators.
Optimization is achieved by minimiz-
ing the Berry-phase spread functional,2 which is defined
as Ω= P
m⟨0m|r2|0m⟩−⟨0m|r|0m⟩2, where r is the
electron position and ⟨· · ·⟩denotes the integral over the
crystal. Minimization is performed via gradient descent,
with a starting point provided by the initial projections
U 0
nmk = ⟨nk|ϕm⟩; the |ϕm⟩represent localized trial func-
tions, for example atomic orbitals.
In the case of metals, and for conduction bands of semi-
conductors and insulators, composite sets of bands can-
not be identified (except in some rare cases); instead, one
arXiv:2604.02576v1  [physics.comp-ph]  2 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
finds a continuous spectrum of entangled bands.
The
Wannierization of entangled bands involves two steps:
first, identifying a subset of bands that best approximates
a composite manifold, a procedure referred to as “dis-
entanglement”; second minimizing the spread functional
within this manifold, as for composite bands.9 Since in
these cases there typically are more Bloch functions than
Wannier functions, the matrices U are rectangular.
Despite significant progress in Wannierization,30–32
all current strategies face diﬀiculties due to the presence
of numerous local minima in the Ω(U) landscape.
As a result, Wannierization often requires significant
human trial-and-error, especially for systems with highly
entangled bands,
complex unit cells,
or topological
obstructions.33
While
several
promising
approaches
have been developed to automate this process and
reduce reliance on chemical intuition,30–32 obtaining
high-quality MLWFs remains a labor-intensive task.34
Results
Meta-optimization of MLWFs
To systematically address this challenge, we make the
key observation that Wannierization can be viewed as a
functional mapping W from the space of all possible trial
matrices U 0 to the optimized matrix U, which locally
minimizes the MLWFs spread functional near U 0:
W : U 0
W
7−−−→W(U 0) = arg minU Ω(U)

U∼U 0 .
(3)
This viewpoint suggests that, by optimizing W over the
trial matrices U 0, one could generate improved MLWFs.
This corresponds to extending the local optimization into
a global search over trial matrices, a process we refer to
as meta-optimization.
Meta-optimization naturally allows for the incorpora-
tion of additional criteria beyond those captured by W
itself. For instance, one could require that the Wannier-
interpolated band structures are as accurate as possible,
enforce a specific number of MLWFs, or ensure that the
MLWFs be real-valued, as we demonstrate below.
To
achieve this, we introduce the loss function:
L(U 0) =
X
iαi ζi[W(U 0)]+
X
jλj θ

Nj −ηj[W(U 0)]
	
.
(4)
The first term in this expression includes the features ζi
to be optimized; for instance, ζi might represent quan-
tities such as spatial spread or band interpolation error.
The relative importance of these features is controlled
by the dimensionless weights αi in the loss function. The
second term in Eq. (4) imposes constraints on the fea-
tures ηj by introducing dimensionless penalties λj when-
ever a feature exceeds the specified bound Nj. Here, θ
is the Heaviside step function. For example, this term
might be used to enforce that the MLWFs spread re-
mains within a desired limit. Usually, λj ≫αi ensures
that such undesired solutions are not considered viable
during the optimization.
The minimization of the loss function L poses three
key challenges: (i) The mapping W is not explicitly de-
fined as a single function; rather, it consists of a series of
independent calculations, using both a DFT code and a
Wannierization code35 to generate initial projections and
related quantities. Furthermore, if the loss L includes the
band interpolation error among its features, evaluating
this error requires separate DFT calculations to estab-
lish the ground truth. (ii) The parameter space of W is
highly complex, as the trial matrices U0 are determined
by both continuous variables (e.g., energy disentangle-
ment window) and categorical labels (e.g., the selection
of trial atomic orbitals).
(iii) Standard gradient-based
optimization of L is not feasible, as its gradients are ei-
ther computationally prohibitive (e.g., for the band in-
terpolation error) or non-existent (e.g., with respect to
categorical labels).
To address challenge (i), we employ workflow abstrac-
tion, as shown Fig. 1.
The self-consistent DFT calcu-
lation, the non-self-consistent DFT step, and the Wan-
nierization process are all encapsulated within a single
function that encodes the mapping W. Similarly, Wan-
nier band interpolation and DFT band structure calcu-
lations, which are necessary for evaluating the band in-
terpolation error (see Methods), are encapsulated into a
single abstract function.
To address challenges (ii) and (iii), we employ machine-
learning-inspired global optimizers that operate with-
out relying on gradients, such as Differential Evolution
(DE)36,37 and Bayesian Optimization (BO).38,39 DE and
BO are particularly effective at identifying the global
minimum of highly non-linear and non-differentiable ob-
jective functions, even within complex, multidimensional
landscapes with numerous local minima. In particular,
DE is a population-based evolutionary algorithm that it-
eratively refines a set of candidate solutions. At each gen-
eration, new candidates are created by a mutation step,
which involves adding the weighted difference between
two randomly selected vectors to a third vector. This is
followed by a crossover step, whereby the new and old
vectors are randomly combined, and the fittest vector is
selected.37 In this work, the DE vectors correspond to the
hyperparameters that are used to generate trial matrices
U 0 (for example, using the Wannier90 software35).
Being a meta-optimization approach, this method can
leverage the strengths of state-of-the-art Wannierization
techniques rather than replacing them; for example,
our approach can seamlessly be used with the selected
columns of the density matrix (SCDM) method30,31
or the projectability disentanglement method.32 The
method is illustrated schematically in Fig. 1, and the
associated code is provided as a Code Ocean capsule.40
The flexibility in the choice of loss function and meta-
optimizer can be used to fine-tune the method; for
example, in Supplementary Figure 1 we investigate
several possible loss functions, and in Supplementary
Figure 2 we compare the performance of DE and BO.38,39
Benchmarks for interpolation accuracy


--- Page 3 ---
3
Figure 2 illustrates the present methodology for three
prototypical materials across different dimensions: sili-
con in three dimensions, monolayer MoS2 in two dimen-
sions (2D), and a carbon nanotube (CNT) in one di-
mension. Figures 2(a)-(f) show the optimization process
for the conduction bands of silicon. Since the conduc-
tion band minimum does not reside at a high-symmetry
point, achieving accurate Wannier interpolation is noto-
riously challenging in this case.34 In the loss function,
we include both the band interpolation error [Eq. (6)
of Methods] and the spread, and we explore the space
of initial matrices U 0 by varying the bounds of the in-
ner and outer disentanglement energy windows as well as
the type of initial projections.35 Panels (a)-(b), (c)-(d),
and (e)-(f) show two-dimensional cross-sections of this
five-dimensional parameter space as meta-optimization
progresses.
Initially, candidate parameter vectors are
nearly uniformly distributed; over generations, they tend
to cluster near the global minimum. Concurrently, the
band interpolation error decreases (see Supplementary
Figure 1), until Wannier interpolation near the band ex-
trema reaches sub-meV precision [Fig. 2(h)]. This level
of accuracy, starting from a coarse 6×6×6 BZ grid, is un-
precedented. This optimization identifies the sp3d2 hy-
brid orbital as the optimal initial projection, unlike the
more common combination of s and d orbitals.34 This
result is consistent with the fact that silicon has both
sp3 and d orbital character in the conduction. Complete
details on band interpolation are provided in Supplemen-
tary Figure 3.
Figure 2(i) illustrates the quality of band interpola-
tion for monolayer MoS2. This system features a multi-
valley band structure, which poses significant challenges
to Wannier interpolation. Using as little as two Bloch
bands to generate Wannier functions, the present method
achieves again sub-meV accuracy in band interpolation;
importantly, this meta-optimization requires less than
30 min on a personal computer (PC). Complete details
on this test are reported in Supplementary Figure 4.
Figures 2(k)-(l) showcase the application of the present
method to a (5,5) armchair CNT. Generating MLWFs
for CNTs is notoriously diﬀicult due to the large num-
ber of bands, the diﬀiculty in identifying enough atomic
orbitals for initial projections, and the presence of nearly-
free electron states. To illustrate these challenges, Sup-
plementary Figure 5 shows the result of manual Wan-
nierization using carbon pz orbitals; this procedure leads
to poor band interpolation (when the z axis does not
follow the curvature of the tube) that is not suitable for
applications. In contrast, Fig. 2(l) demonstrates that the
present method achieves nearly perfect band interpola-
tion, even for nearly-free electron states. For example, we
achieve sub-meV precision throughout most of the BZ for
the bands crossing the charge neutrality level.
In Supplementary Figure 6 we report additional
benchmarks for prototypical semiconductors, including
AlSb, AlP, 3C-SiC, SrO, AlAs, and GaP. In all cases
the present method achieves much higher interpolation
accuracy than state-of-the-art manual Wannierization.34
Acceleration enabled by meta-optimized MLWFs
As a second application, Fig. 3 demonstrates how the
present method significantly accelerates carrier-mobility
calculations in semiconductors based on the ab initio
Boltzmann transport equation (aiBTE). The accelera-
tion is achieved by using very small grids for the coarse
BZ, and very few MLWFs, without sacrificing accuracy.
It is well-known that the use of MLWFs drastically
accelerates calculations of electron-phonon interactions
via Wannier-Fourier interpolation of the electron-phonon
matrix elements from a coarse BZ grid to an ultrafine
grid.12 The advantage of this method is that costly DFPT
calculations are performed only on the coarse grid.
However, even when employing Wannier-Fourier inter-
polation, aiBTE calculations carry two bottlenecks: (i)
the interpolation of electron-phonon coupling matrix el-
ements on ultradense BZ grids, and (ii) the computa-
tion of the resulting carrier scattering rates. Wannier-
Fourier interpolation of the electron-phonon matrix el-
ements has a complexity scaling as O(N 2
c ), where Nc
represents the size of the coarse BZ grid. For a coarse
BZ grid with N points in each direction, this leads to an
overall scaling of O(N 6) for 3D materials. In addition to
time complexity, the memory footprint is also substan-
tial. The electron-phonon matrix elements in the Wan-
nier representation form a five-dimensional array whose
size scales as N 2
c and N 2
b (Nb is the number of Wan-
nier functions). Consequently, reductions in Nc and Nb
simultaneously decrease computational time and mem-
ory requirements. For example, a four-fold reduction in
Nc theoretically yields a 4096-fold speedup in transport
calculations, while also significantly reducing storage re-
quirements. Similarly, the computation of carrier scat-
tering rates scales as O(N 2
b); thus, a five-fold reduction
in Nb can achieve an additional 25-fold speedup. A de-
tailed analysis of the scaling is provided in the Methods
Section.
We demonstrate these accelerations in Fig. 2(a),(b)
using silicon and monolayer MoS2. For silicon, we can
solve the aiBTE using a much smaller coarse BZ grid
with 4×4×4 points, achieving a 3600-fold speedup com-
pared to the standard 16×16×16 grid used in previous
work,34 with only a 8% error [Fig. 3(c)]. Similarly, for
MoS2, we can reduce the number of required MLWFs
from 10 to 2 (see Supplementary Figure 4), achieving a
45-fold speedup as compared to previous work,41 with an
error as low as 3% [Fig. 3(d)]. The ability of the present
method to achieve such a significant data compression
is rationalized in Supplementary Figure 7 via a singular
value decomposition of the matrix elements.42
As a result of the speedup enabled by meta-optimized
MLWFs, calculations that once required large super-
computers can now be performed on standard PCs. To
demonstrate this point, we repeated the state-of-the-art
calculations of Ref. 34, performed on the MareNostrum 4
supercomputer, using a local PC. As shown in Fig. 3(e),


--- Page 4 ---
4
a complete aiBTE calculation for silicon takes only
2 minutes and 20 seconds on the PC (with 48 Intel
Cascade Lake cores) when using the present method,
in contrast to 15 hours required on the supercomputer
(with 480 Intel Skylake cores).43
Large-scale automation enabled by meta-optimized ML-
WFs
As a third application, we demonstrate the present
method in autonomous high-throughput calculations of
MLWFs and carrier mobilities for large materials li-
braries.
Recently, the 2D Materials Cloud database44
was screened to identify 2D semiconductors with high
charge carrier mobility.41 Out of 5,619 layered com-
pounds, 258 candidate materials were found to be dy-
namically stable. Carrier mobilities were then computed
using the aiBTE for a reduced subset of 16 compounds
with the lowest effective masses.
Ideally, full-accuracy
aiBTE calculations would be needed for all 258 materi-
als; however, generating reliable MLWFs for such a large
library remains a significant challenge.
Supplementary Figure 8 presents high-throughput cal-
culations of MLWFs for a subset of 200 compounds from
this library, showing that the present method achieves
both predefined spatial localization and accurate band
interpolation without any manual intervention.
Op-
timized hyperparameters,
complete input files,
and
interpolated bands for all materials are available on
the Materials Cloud database.45 In Fig. 3(f), we show
the results of completely autonomous carrier mobility
calculations via the aiBTE for 56 of these compounds; in
panel (g), we compare our results to the state-of-the-art
calculations from Ref. 41. The agreement between our
results and prior work is excellent; at the same time,
our calculations are approximately 3000 times faster. In
particular, we are able to perform transport calculations
for all 56 compounds in the record time of 37 hours,
i.e., with less than 40 min per compound, on a local PC
[Fig. 3(h)]. This very significant acceleration opens the
way to high-throughput screening of carrier transport
using the full aiBTE. We emphasize, however, that
detailed convergence tests on the coarse grid are always
required for the most promising candidate materials.
Additional applications of meta-optimization
In addition to the acceleration of aiBTE calculations
demonstrated above, meta-optimization can be cus-
tomized for specific applications by designing more com-
plex loss functions in Eq. (4), as discussed in the Supple-
mentary Note 1. We demonstrate two such examples in
this section.
As our fourth example application, we use meta-
optimization to construct a minimal, nearest-neighbor
tight-binding Wannier Hamiltonian. To achieve this, in
the interpolation of the smooth Bloch Hamiltonian start-
ing from the Hamiltonian in the Wannier representation,
˜Hmn(k) = P
R exp(ik · R)Hmn(R), we only sum over
R = 0 and the first and second shell of lattice vectors
R ̸= 0 (shown in Fig. 4 (c). This truncated interpola-
tion is used to evaluate the band interpolation error E
in the loss function, and MLWFs are meta-optimized to
minimize this error.
In Fig. 4 we show the Wannier-interpolation of the
band structure of monolayer MoS2 over a wide energy
range; black lines are results from the present method,
blue disks are explicit DFT calculations. The key dif-
ference between this calculation and those in Fig. 2 and
Supplementary Figure 4 is that, here, we only retain the
first and second nearest-neighbors in the Wannier repre-
sentation, as shown in Fig 4.
In
Fig.
4(b)
we
show
the
spatial
decay
of
the
Hamiltonian
in
the
Wannier
representation,
|Hmn(R)|/max[|Hmn(R)|].
Blue disks correspond to
the Hamiltonian obtained in Fig. 2, while black disks
correspond to the present nearest-neighbor optimization.
The lines are guides to the eye. The shading indicates
the range of lattice vectors included in the nearest-
neighbor optimization.
We observe that the present
optimization leads to a faster decay and improved
Wannier interpolation.
In the fifth example application, we generate Wan-
nier functions that optimize the spatial localization of
the electron-phonon matrix elements.
We achieve this
by incorporating an objective function for these matrix
elements in the loss function. To this end we define the
loss function L3 as follows:
L[U 0] = α1 ξ1[W(U 0)] + α2ξ2[W(U 0)]+
λ θ

Ω0 −Ω[W(U 0)]
	
.
(5)
Here, the first term ξ1 = E/EH is the band interpolation
error, as defined in the Supplementary Note 1; the sec-
ond term ξ2 = ℓ/a0 represents the spatial decay of the
electron-phonon matrix elements, expressed via the de-
cay length of the exponential fit in real space (a0 is the
Bohr radius); the third term θ{Ω0 −Ω} is a constraint on
the spread of the MLWFs. This loss function guides the
optimization in a direction where both the band interpo-
lation error and the spatial decay of the electron-phonon
matrix elements are optimized.
We apply the loss function of Eq. (5) to obtain Wan-
nier functions for the conduction band of Si using a coarse
BZ grid with 63 points. In Fig. 5(a),(b) we show that the
spatial decay of the electron-phonon matrix elements im-
proves using the loss function in Eq. (5) as compared to
optimization performed without this feature.
Further-
more, in panel (c) we see that the mobility calculated us-
ing this additional feature is in better agreement with the
most converged result obtained using a denser coarse BZ
grid (163 points), the error being 3.6% at 300 K instead of
6.5%. Therefore, the present approach also enables the
calculation of maximally-localized electron-phonon ma-
trix elements, yielding higher calculation accuracy.
In the Supplementary Information we provide further
examples of these capability.
For example, in Supple-


--- Page 5 ---
5
mentary Figure 9 we demonstrate the generation of
purely real-valued MLWFs; this capability not only fur-
ther reduces computational complexity by an additional
factor of two (on top of the acceleration demonstrated
above), but also halves storage requirements and offers
interpretative advantages over complex-valued MLWFs.
In Supplementary Note 2 and Supplementary Figure 10,
we demonstrate the optimization of spread-balanced
Wannier functions.46 In Supplementary Figure 11, we
illustrate how meta-optimization also improves Wannier
interpolation for composite band manifolds. In Supple-
mentary Figure 12, we show how this method improves
the interpolation accuracy of the SCDM method.30,31
Discussion
We presented a meta-optimization framework to con-
struct MLWFs that deliver superior band interpolation
accuracy at reduced computational cost, and we demon-
strated the application of this method in a number of di-
verse areas, from ultrafast transport calculations to gen-
eration of accurate nearest-neighbor Wannier Hamiltoni-
ans.
The present method is general,
composable,
and
future-proof by design. It is not tied to any specific opti-
mization algorithm or codebase, and can be applied as a
meta-optimization layer on top of any current or future
electronic structure engine. In this sense, the present ap-
proach is not meant to replace any one Wannierization
method in particular, but to augment all of them by sys-
tematically identifying the optimal hyperparameters for
a given application.
Moreover, the meta-optimization framework is de-
signed as a modular layer that can operate on top of
existing Wannierization tools, including Wannier90 and
all its workflows. Since it generates hyper-parameters for
maximal localization, it can be readily integrated within
the wider Wannier ecosystem, for instance WannierBerri
and WannierTools.47,48
Additional applications can be envisioned in rapid data
generation for machine learning and AI49,50 to overcome
the dilemma of small data,51 sparse matrix representa-
tions for large scale quantum device simulations,52 and
high accuracy downfolded Hamiltonians for strongly
correlated
systems,53,54
quantum
algorithms,55
and
second-principles simulations.56 By realizing the full
potential of MLWFs with meta-optimization, it will
also become possible to perform advanced electronic
structure calculations on standard PCs instead of large
supercomputers, as demonstrated here in the context
of electron transport.
Looking ahead, we anticipate
that
the
integration
of
workflow
abstraction
with
multi-objective
meta-optimization
will
find
broader
applications in atomic-scale materials design.
Methods
We here summarize the key aspects of the methodology.
Details on the computational setup, such as software,
parameters, and loss functions are provided in the
Supplementary Information.
Loss function.
The loss function used for meta-
optimization is given by Eq. (4). The ζi represent objec-
tive functions to be optimized, such as for example the
spread Ωof MLWFs or the band interpolation error. Sim-
ilarly, the functions ηj are constrained to the values Nj
by adding the penalties λj to the loss function whenever
ηj exceeds the bound Nj (as determined by the Heaviside
step function θ). We define the band interpolation error
E as the root mean square deviation between DFT bands
and Wannier-interpolated bands within a given energy
window [µmin, µmax]:
E =


X
nk f µmax
nk
(1 −f µmin
nk
)
 εDFT
nk
−εW
nk
2
X
nk f µmax
nk
(1 −f µmin
nk
)


1/2
.
(6)
In this expression, εnk denotes the Kohn-Sham eigenvalue
for band n and wavevector k, the superscript “DFT”
refers to explicit DFT calculations, and the superscript
“W” refers to eigenvalues obtained by Wannier interpo-
lation.
We include a rectangular filter via the Fermi-
Dirac functions f µmin
nk
and f µmax
nk
, which are defined as
f µ
nk = {exp[(εnk −µ)/σ] + 1}−1; we use a broadening
parameter σ = 1 meV to avoid discontinuous jumps
in the loss function.
The sums are evaluated over all
bands and all k points included in the Wannierization
process. The bounds µmin and µmax are chosen depend-
ing on the specific application.
For example, accurate
calculations of phonon-limited carrier mobilities requires
highly-accurate band interpolation within a small energy
window of the order of 300-500 meV near the Fermi level
or band edges; while optical absorption calculations may
require an energy range in the multi-eV range around the
Fermi level. In the Supplementary Figure 1, we investi-
gate several possible loss functions.
Choice of meta-optimization algorithm. Our method can
utilize any global optimization algorithm since the meta-
optimization step is independent from the Wannieriza-
tion step, as shown in Fig 1. However, we employ DE for
meta-optimization for results shown in Fig. 2, 3 as well
as for most of the applications.37 Our choice is motivated
by the fact that DE is a robust global optimizer that does
not rely on gradients. We expect that other metaheuris-
tic optimization methods will produce similar results.57
For completeness, in Supplementary Figure 2 we report a
comparison between DE and Baysian optimization (BO)
which is a standard tool in machine learning.38,39 BO is a
probabilistic optimization technique that uses a surrogate
model, typically a Gaussian process, to guide the search
for the optimum by balancing exploration and exploita-
tion of the objective function. BO begins by randomly
sampling the parameter space to evaluate the loss func-
tion. Using these initial evaluations, BO creates a proba-
bilistic model of the loss function by defining a prior and
then updating it to form a posterior distribution. From


--- Page 6 ---
6
the posterior, an acquisition function is then constructed
to guide the selection of the next set of parameters to
evaluate. One potential disadvantage of BO is that, when
the loss function is not smooth (as in the present case
which involves categorical labels), BO may get stuck in a
local minimum. Supplementary Figure 2 shows how DE
offers superior performance than BO in the present prob-
lem of meta-optimization of MLWFs. For these calcula-
tions we employ the bayesopt function of the Bayesian-
Optimization Python library58.
For both the DE and
BO, we use the default hyperparamter settings as pro-
vided by the scipy59 and the Bayesian-Optimization58
libraries.
Scaling of electron-phonon calculations based on ML-
WFs: aiBTE as a representative example. aiBTE calcu-
lations involve two time-consuming steps: (i) The eval-
uation of electron-phonon matrix elements on fine BZ
grids using Wannier-Fourier interpolation, and (ii) the
evaluation of the carrier scattering rates starting from
these matrix elements and the electron and phonon band
structures. Details of these calculations are provided in
Refs. 60,61. The evaluation of electron-phonon matrix
elements on the fine BZ grid is performed via:12
gmnν(k, q) =
X
pp′
ei(k·Rp+q·Rp′)
X
m′n′κα
Umm′k+q gm′n′κα(Rp, Rp′) U †
n′nkuκα,qν.
(7)
In this expression, gm′n′κα(Rp, Rp′) are matrix elements
in the Wannier representation, with m′, n′ running over
the number of Wannier functions Nb, κ representing the
atom label, and α the Cartesian direction for the varia-
tion of the Kohn-Sham potential, and Rp, Rp′ the lattice
vectors of the unit cells where Wannier functions are lo-
cated. The unitary matrices Un′nk are used to transform
the Wannier matrix elements into the smooth Bloch rep-
resentation for the electron wavevector k,2 and the ma-
trices uκα,qν represent the atomic eigendisplacements for
the phonon mode ν with wavevector q. The summations
are over all atoms (κ), Cartesian directions (α), Wannier
functions (m′, n′), and lattice vectors (p, p′). The result-
ing matrix element gmnν(k, q) represents the probability
amplitude for an electron in state |nk⟩to scatter into
the state |mk + q⟩via the phonon qν. The scattering
rate needed in the solution of the Boltzmann transport
equation is given by:6,60,61
τ −1
nk =2π
¯h
X
mν
Z
dq
ΩBZ
|gmnν(k, q)|2
h
(nqν + 1 −f 0
mk+q)δ(εnk −εmk+q −¯hωqν)
+ (nqν + f 0
mk+q)δ(εnk −εmk+q + ¯hωqν)
i
,
(8)
where ¯h is the Planck constant, nqν is the Bose-Einstein
occupation for the phonon qν, f 0
nk is the Fermi-Dirac
occupation for the electronic state |nk⟩, and ωqν is the
phonon frequency. The functions δ(· · · ) are Dirac delta
functions.
From Eq. (7) we see that, if we keep the number of
k and q points in the fine BZ grids as well as the num-
ber of Wannier functions fixed, the number of complex
multiplications is proportional to the number of lattice
points Rp and Rp′ in the sums. These points belong to
Wigner-Seitz cells whose dimensions are (nearly) equal
to the number of k-points and q-points on the coarse BZ
grids. In the case of equal k- and q-grids with Nc points,
the total number of multiplications is proportional to N 2
c .
Furthemore, from Eq. (7) we also see that, for each k- and
q-point and for each lattice point Rp and Rp′, we need to
evaluate 2N 3
b products Umm′k+q gm′n′κα(Rp, Rp′) U †
n′nk.
Therefore, in the most general case, the scaling of the
electron-phonon Wannier interpolation with the coarse
grid size and with the number of Wannier functions is
O(N 2
c N 3
b).
In the specific case of aiBTE calculations, it is standard
practice to only evaluate Bloch states within a prede-
fined energy window centered at the Fermi level;61 this
choice is justified by the fact that the scattering rates
given by Eq. (8) are nonzero only in the vicinity of the
Fermi level. With this choice, the indices m, n in Eq. (7)
are constrained by the energy window and do not scale
with Nb, therefore the evaluation of the matrix elements
requires O(N 2
c N 2
b) products.
From Eq. (8) we see that, for each k-point in the fine
grid and for each electronic band n, we need to evaluate
the terms within the square brackets Nb times. There-
fore this operation should have a theoretical scaling with
respect to the number of Wannier functions of O(N 2
b).
However, as for the matrix elements, the use of an en-
ergy window centered at the Fermi level effectively makes
the scaling of the scattering rates independent of Nb. In
this case, what dictates the compute time is the size of
the fine BZ grid.
The above discussion focuses on the aiBTE case, but
the same scaling considerations apply more broadly to
calculations relying on Wannier-interpolated electron-
phonon matrix elements, including phonon-assisted op-
tics,62,63 phonon-mediated superconductivity,64 and po-
larons.65,66
Data Availability
All data presented in this manuscript are reported in
the Supplementary Tables and in the Materials Cloud
database.45
Code Availability
The codes used in this work, namely EPW, Quantum
ESPRESSO, Wannier90, and EPWpy are all open-source
software and are freely available from their respective
websites.
For reproducibility purposes, the metawann
source code and an example are available and executable
as a a Code Ocean capsule.40
Acknowledgments


--- Page 7 ---
7
This work was supported by the Computational Materi-
als Science program of the U.S. Department of Energy,
Oﬀice of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, through award
no. DE-SC0020129. Computational resources were pro-
vided by the National Energy Research Scientific Com-
puting Center (a DOE Oﬀice of Science User Facility sup-
ported under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231), the
Argonne Leadership Computing Facility (a DOE Oﬀice
of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-
AC02-06CH11357), and the Texas Advanced Computing
Center (TACC) at The University of Texas at Austin.
Author Contributions
S.T. and F.G. designed the project. S.T. wrote the EPWpy
library and the metawann code.
B.C. contributed to
the development and testing of EPWpy and metawann.
S.T, B.C., and V.-A.H. performed calculations and data
analysis. F.G. supervised the project. All authors con-
tributed to the writing of the manuscript.
Competing Interests
S.T.,
B.C.,
and F.G. are inventors on a pending
U.S. provisional patent application (No.
63/730,258,
filed 12/10/2024) entitled “Systems and methods for
generating Wannier functions,” relating to the meta-
optimization algorithm described in this work. The other
authors declare no competing financial or non-financial
interests.


--- Page 8 ---
8
[1] Marzari, N., Mostofi, A. A., Yates, J. R., Souza, I. & Van-
derbilt, D. Maximally localized wannier functions: The-
ory and applications. Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1419 (2012).
[2] Marzari, N. & Vanderbilt, D. Maximally localized gen-
eralized wannier functions for composite energy bands.
Phys. Rev. B 56, 12847 (1997).
[3] Goedecker, S. Linear scaling electronic structure meth-
ods. Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 1085 (1999).
[4] Georges, A., Kotliar, G., Krauth, W. & Rozenberg,
M. J. Dynamical mean-field theory of strongly correlated
fermion systems and the limit of infinite dimensions. Rev.
Mod. Phys. 68, 13 (1996).
[5] Calzolari,
A.,
Marzari,
N.,
Souza,
I.
&
Buon-
giorno Nardelli, M.
Ab initio transport properties of
nanostructures from maximally localized wannier func-
tions. Phys. Rev. B 69, 035108 (2004).
[6] Giustino, F. Electron-phonon interactions from first prin-
ciples. Rev. Mod. Phys. 89, 015003 (2017).
[7] Gresch, D. et al. Z2pack: Numerical implementation of
hybrid wannier centers for identifying topological mate-
rials. Phys. Rev. B 95, 075146 (2017).
[8] Marrazzo, A. et al.
Wannier-function software ecosys-
tem for materials simulations. Rev. Mod. Phys. tbd, tbd
(2024).
[9] Souza, I., Marzari, N. & Vanderbilt, D. Maximally local-
ized wannier functions for entangled energy bands. Phys.
Rev. B 65, 035109 (2001).
[10] Ordejón, P., Artacho, E. & Soler, J. M. Self-consistent
order-n density-functional calculations for very large sys-
tems. Phys. Rev. B 53, R10441 (1996).
[11] Skylaris, C.-K., Haynes, P. D., Mostofi, A. A. & Payne,
M. C.
Introducing ONETEP: Linear-scaling density
functional simulations on parallel computers. J. Chem.
Phys 122, 084119 (2005).
[12] Giustino, F., Cohen, M. L. & Louie, S. G.
Electron-
phonon interaction using wannier functions. Phys. Rev.
B 76, 165108 (2007).
[13] Zhang, T. et al. Catalogue of topological electronic ma-
terials. Nature 566, 475 (2019).
[14] Vergniory, M. G. et al. A complete catalogue of high-
quality topological materials. Nature 566, 480 (2019).
[15] Kresse, G. & Furthmüller, J. Eﬀiciency of ab-initio total
energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using
a plane-wave basis set. Comput. Mat. Sc. 6, 15 (1996).
[16] Giannozzi, P. et al. Advanced capabilities for materials
modelling with quantum ESPRESSO.
J. Phys.: Con-
dens. Matter 29, 465901 (2017).
[17] Gonze, X. et al. The abinitproject: Impact, environment
and recent developments.
Comput. Phys. Comm. 248,
107042 (2020).
[18] Sun, Q. et al. Recent developments in the PySCF pro-
gram package. J. Chem. Phys. 153, 024109 (2020).
[19] Wortmann, D. et al. FLEUR. Zenodo (2023).
[20] Mortensen, J. J. et al. GPAW: An open Python package
for electronic structure calculations. J. Chem. Phys. 160,
092503 (2024).
[21] García, A. et al. Siesta: Recent developments and appli-
cations. J. Chem. Phys. 152, 204108 (2020).
[22] Blaha, P. et al.
WIEN2k: An APW+lo program for
calculating the properties of solids. J. Chem. Phys. 152,
074101 (2020).
[23] Sangalli, D. et al. Many-body perturbation theory calcu-
lations using the yambo code. J. Phys. Condens. Matter
31, 325902 (2019).
[24] Poncé, S., Margine, E., Verdi, C. & Giustino, F. EPW:
Electron–phonon coupling, transport and superconduct-
ing properties using maximally localized wannier func-
tions. Comput. Phys. Commun. 209, 116 (2016).
[25] Marian, D., Marin, E. G., Perucchini, M., Iannaccone,
G. & Fiori, G.
Multi-scale simulations of two dimen-
sional material based devices: the nanotcad vides suite.
J. Comput. Electron. 22, 1327 (2023).
[26] Assmann, E. et al.
woptic: Optical conductivity with
wannier functions and adaptive k-mesh refinement. Com-
put. Phys. Comm. 202, 1 (2016).
[27] Gresch, D. et al. Z2pack: Numerical implementation of
hybrid wannier centers for identifying topological mate-
rials. Phys. Rev. B 95, 075146 (2017).
[28] Zhou, J.-J. et al. Perturbo: A software package for ab
initio electron–phonon interactions, charge transport and
ultrafast dynamics. Compu. Phys. Comm. 264, 107970
(2021).
[29] Ferrer, J. et al. Gollum: a next-generation simulation
tool for electron, thermal and spin transport.
New J.
Phys. 16, 093029 (2014).
[30] Damle, A., Lin, L. & Ying, L. Scdm-k: Localized orbitals
for solids via selected columns of the density matrix. J.
of Comput. Phys. 334, 1 (2017).
[31] Vitale, V. et al. Automated high-throughput wannieri-
sation. npj Comput. Mat. 6, 66 (2020).
[32] Qiao, J., Pizzi, G. & Marzari, N. Projectability disentan-
glement for accurate and automated electronic-structure
hamiltonians. npj Comput. Mat. 9, 208 (2023).
[33] Brouder, C., Panati, G., Calandra, M., Mourougane, C.
& Marzari, N. Exponential localization of wannier func-
tions in insulators. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 046402 (2007).
[34] Poncé, S. et al. First-principles predictions of hall and
drift mobilities in semiconductors.
Phys. Rev. Res. 3,
043022 (2021).
[35] Pizzi, G. et al. Wannier90 as a community code: new
features and applications. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 32,
165902 (2020).
[36] Price, K. Differential evolution: a fast and simple numer-
ical optimizer. In Proceedings of North American Fuzzy
Information Processing, 524 (1996).
[37] Storn, R. & Price, K. Differential evolution-a simple and
eﬀicient heuristic for global optimization over continuous
spaces. J. Glob. Optim. 11, 341 (1997).
[38] Močkus, J.
On bayesian methods for seeking the ex-
tremum. In Marchuk, G. I. (ed.) Optimization Techniques
IFIP Technical Conference Novosibirsk, July 1–7, 1974,
400–404 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,
1975).
[39] Mockus, J. The bayesian approach to global optimiza-
tion. In System Modeling and Optimization: Proceedings
of the 10th IFIP Conference New York City, USA, August
31–September 4, 1981, 473 (Springer, 2005).
[40] Tiwari, S.
Code ocean capsule for atomistic simula-
tions. https://codeocean.com/capsule/2837024/tree
(2025). December 21, 2025.
[41] Ha, V.-A. & Giustino, F. High-throughput screening of
2d materials identifies p-type monolayer ws2 as potential
ultra-high mobility semiconductor. npj Comput. Mat. 10,
229 (2024).
[42] Luo, Y., Desai, D., Chang, B. K., Park, J. & Bernardi, M.
Data-driven compression of electron-phonon interactions.
Phys. Rev. X 14, 021023 (2024).
[43] Poncé, S. et al. First-principles predictions of Hall and


--- Page 9 ---
9
drift mobilities in semiconductors.
Materials Cloud,
https://archive.materialscloud.org/record/2021.94
(2021).
[44] Talirz, L. et al.
Materials cloud, a platform for open
computational science. Scientific Data 7, 299 (2020).
[45] Tiwari,
S.
Materials
cloud
dataset.
https://doi.org/10.24435/materialscloud:c2-f4 (2025).
[46] Fontana, P. F., Larsen, A. H., Olsen, T. & Thyge-
sen, K. S. Spread-balanced wannier functions: Robust
and automatable orbital localization. Phys. Rev. B 104,
125140 (2021).
[47] Tsirkin, S. S. High performance wannier interpolation of
berry curvature and related quantities with wannierberri
code. npj Computational Materials 7, 33 (2021).
[48] Wu, Q., Zhang, S., Song, H.-F., Troyer, M. & Soluyanov,
A. A. Wanniertools : An open-source software package
for novel topological materials. Computer Physics Com-
munications 224, 405 – 416 (2018).
[49] Butler, K. T., Davies, D. W., Cartwright, H., Isayev, O.
& Walsh, A. Machine learning for molecular and mate-
rials science. Nature 559, 547 (2018).
[50] Merchant, A. et al. Scaling deep learning for materials
discovery. Nature 624, 80 (2023).
[51] Xu, P., Ji, X., Li, M. & Lu, W.
Small data machine
learning in materials science.
npj Comput. Mat. 9, 42
(2023).
[52] Afzalian, A. Ab initio perspective of ultra-scaled cmos
from 2d-material fundamentals to dynamically doped
transistors. npj 2D Mat. and App. 5, 5 (2021).
[53] Chang, Y. et al. Downfolding from ab initio to interacting
model hamiltonians: comprehensive analysis and bench-
marking of the DFT+cRPA approach. npj Comput. Mat.
10 (2024).
[54] Nomura, Y. & Arita, R.
Ab initio downfolding for
electron-phonon-coupled systems: Constrained density-
functional perturbation theory. Phys. Rev. B 92, 245108
(2015).
[55] Alvertis, A. M., Khan, A. & Tubman, N. M. Ground
states of strongly-correlated materials on quantum com-
puters using ab initio downfolding (2024).
[56] Zubko, P. et al.
Negative capacitance in multidomain
ferroelectric superlattices. Nature 534, 524 (2016).
[57] Talbi, E.-G. Metaheuristics. Wiley Series on Parallel and
Distributed Computing (Wiley-Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ,
2009).
[58] Nogueira, F.
Bayesian Optimization:
Open source
constrained global optimization tool for Python (2014–
). URL https://github.com/bayesian-optimization/
BayesianOptimization.
[59] Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms
for Scientific Computing in Python.
Nat. Methods 17,
261–272 (2020).
[60] Poncé, S., Margine, E. R. & Giustino, F. Towards pre-
dictive many-body calculations of phonon-limited carrier
mobilities in semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 97, 121201
(2018).
[61] Lee, H. et al. Electron–phonon physics from first prin-
ciples using the epw code. npj Comput. Mater. 9, 156
(2023).
[62] Tiwari, S., Kioupakis, E., Menendez, J. & Giustino, F.
Unified theory of optical absorption and luminescence in-
cluding both direct and phonon-assisted processes. Phys.
Rev. B 109, 195127 (2024).
[63] Noffsinger, J., Kioupakis, E., Van de Walle, C. G., Louie,
S. G. & Cohen, M. L. Phonon-assisted optical absorp-
tion in silicon from first principles. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
167402 (2012).
[64] Margine, E. R. & Giustino, F.
Anisotropic Migdal-
Eliashberg theory using Wannier functions. Phys. Rev.
B 87, 024505 (2013).
[65] Sio, W. H., Verdi, C., Poncé, S. & Giustino, F. Polarons
from first principles, without supercells. Phys. Rev. Lett.
122, 246403 (2019).
[66] Sio, W. H. & Giustino, F. Polarons in two-dimensional
atomic crystals. Nat. Phys 19, 629–636 (2023).


--- Page 10 ---
10
Select hyperparameters
Test loss 
ℒ(U0) 
Build U0 from DFT data 
and hyperparameters 
            Optimize Ω(U)
 starting from U0
Compute
loss function ℒ(U0)
2
3
1
4
5
Mapping Ⱳ
Input 
hyperparameters
Output
loss function
Fail
Pass
End
Start
Differential 
Evolution
一
Bayesian 
Optimization
Input 
Crystal structure
Output 
Meta-optimized MLWFs
FIG. 1.
Meta-optimization of Wannier functions via global optimization.
Schematic flowchart of the present method.
The
procedure starts with a standard DFT band structure calculation for a given crystal (in this work Quantum ESPRESSO16 is
used).
At Step 1, the DE or BO algorithm selects the hyperparameters needed to construct U 0.
In this manuscript, the
hyperparameters are the energies of the inner and outer disentanglement windows and the type of initial projections, which are
required in input by the Wannier90 code.35 Steps 2:4 implement the mapping U 0 7→W(U 0): in Step 2, the hyperparameters
are used to build U 0 using data from the DFT calculation; in Step 3, local optimization of the Berry-phase spread functional1
is performed using Wannier90; in Step 4, the loss function is computed. This step uses MLWFs obtained at Step 3, as well
as band structures from separate DFT calculations for the ground truth. In Step 5, the loss function is tested; if the test
fails, the procedure is repeated for a new DE generation or BO iteration.
The mapping W (yellow box) is encapsulated
within a single Python function, and is optimized by calling the procedure differential_evolution of the SciPy library or
BayesianOptimization of the bayes_opt package (green box). The complete workflow is implemented in the metaWann code
provided in code ocean capsule.40


--- Page 11 ---
11
10
12
14
16
18
Inner window (eV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Projection
Generations 140-150
e
Loss function
(meV)
0
50
100
150
200
250
Projection
Generations 100-110
c
0
50
100
150
200
250
Projection
Generations 1-10
a
20
30
40
50
60
Outer window (eV)
f
d
b
0.0
0.2
0.4
Energy (eV)
g
i
k
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
Error
(meV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
Energy (eV)
j
h
l
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
1
5
Error
(meV)
-5
0
5
Energy (eV)
-L
Γ
L
Wavevector
1
5
Error
(meV)
10-3
10-1
10-1
FIG. 2. Wannier interpolation of entangled band structures with millielectronvolt accuracy. (a)-(f) 2D slices of the 5D hyper-
parameter space explored by the DE meta-optimizer, for the conduction bands of silicon. The first, second, and third rows
show data for DE generations 1:10, 100:110, and 140:150, respectively. Each disk corresponds to a single Wannierization, with
red/blue indicating low/high loss function [colorbar in panel (e)]. We consider 285 types of initial projections, corresponding to
hydrogenic orbitals with s, p, d, f angular momenta, and a 6×6×6 coarse grid. We employ a DE population of 60 candidates,
and evolve the system over 150 DE generations. (g) Meta-optimized MLWF of silicon, as obtained in (a)-(f). (h) Conduction
bands of silicon: black lines are from Wannier interpolation using the MLWF shown in (g); disks are explicit DFT calculations.
The underlying panel is the absolute value of the band interpolation error (red line). (i) Meta-optimized MLWFs for monolayer
MoS2: Comparison between DFT bands (disks) and Wannier-interpolated bands (black lines) near the conduction band bottom,
and associated band interpolation error (red line). Such a low interpolation error refers to an energy window within 300 meV of
the band bottom. A typical MLWF is shown in (j). Green and yellow atoms represent Mo and S, respectively. In this case we
employ a 24×24 coarse grid and 2 bands, a DE population of 30 candidates, and 50 DE generations. (k), (l) Meta-optimized
MLWF of a (5,5) CNT and corresponding Wannier interpolation of band structures (disks: DFT, black lines: Wannier, red
line: band interpolation error). In this case, the band interpolation error is evaluated over the two bands crossing the charge
neutrality level (zero of the energy axis). For this case we employ a coarse one-dimensional BZ grid of 12 points, a DE population
of 30 candidates, and 50 DE generations.


--- Page 12 ---
12
500
1500
2500
3500
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
c
200
300
400
Temperature (K)
1
5
10
15
Error
(in %)
50
150
250
350
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
d
200
300
400
Temperature (K)
1
5
10
15
Error
(in %)
16
8
6
4
Size N of coarse BZ grid
101
102
103
104
105
Time (min)
Measured
Theoretical
a
10
8
4
2
Number of bands Nb
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Time (min)
Measured
Theoretical
b
101
102
103
104
105
106
Time (min)
Present
Ref. 34
HPC
PC
Silicon
e
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
0
4
8
12
No. of Materials
f
h
SiH
h-Sb
Tl2O
GeSe
ZrSe2
TiNBr
TiNCl
GeS2
h-Bi
MoS2
HfSe2
SnTe
WS2
WSe2
WTe2
BiTeSe
1
10
100
1000
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
Ref. 41
Present
g
103
104
105
106
107
Time (min)
Present
Ref. 41
HPC
PC
2D materials
FIG. 3. Acceleration of aiBTE calculations of carrier transport using the evolutionary meta-optimizer. (a) Timing of aiBTE
calculations of the electron mobility in silicon, for different choices of the coarse BZ grid N×N×N; measured times (blue) are
compared to ideal scaling time (brown). The inset shows a ball-stick model of silicon. (b) Total electron-phonon interpolation
time of aiBTE calculations of the electron mobility in monolayer MoS2, for different choices of the number of Wannierized
bands Nb; measured times (blue) are compared to theoretical scaling times (brown), normalized to the values at Nb = 10.
The inset shows a ball-stick model of monolayer MoS2. The calculated mobilities from panels (a) and (b) are reported in
Supplementary Table 2 for completeness.
(c) Calculated temperature-dependent electron mobility of silicon, for different
choices of the coarse BZ grid corresponding to the bar plot in panel (a), and relative error with respect to the densest grid
(N = 16). The linear grid size N is indicated next to each curve. The corresponding band structures and Wannier functions
are shown in Supplementary Figure 3. The square indicates the value from Ref. 34. (d) Calculated temperature-dependent
electron mobility of monolayer MoS2, for different choices of the number of bands corresponding to the bar plot in panel (b),
and relative error with respect to the highest number of bands (Nb = 10). The corresponding band structures and Wannier
functions are shown in Supplementary Figure 4. The square indicates the value from Ref. 41. (e) Speedup in calculations of the
electron mobility of silicon. We compare the present runtime on a PC (48 Cascade lake cores, blue) with the runtime of Ref. 34
on the MareNostrum 4 supercomputer (with 480 Skylake cores, gray). Timing data is normalized to a single core in both
cases. (f) Computed electron mobilities of 56 2D materials from the 2D Materials Cloud Database, shown as histogram. All
values are reported in Supplementary Table 3, and the optimized hyperparameters are reported in Supplementary Table 1. (g)
Comparison of mobilities of 2D materials calculated with the present method (blue) with state-of-the-art aiBTE calculations
for the 16 compounds reported in Ref. 41 (gray). (h) Speedup in high-throughput calculations of the carrier mobility of 2D
materials. The gray bar refers to the average runtime over the 16 compounds reported in (g), from Ref. 41 (using the Frontera
supercomputer, normalized to a single core). The blue bar is the average runtime over the 56 compounds in (f), using the
present method on a PC.


--- Page 13 ---
13
Γ
M
K
Γ
Wavevector
-1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Energy (eV)
a
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
R ( ˚A)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
log(|H(R)|)(arb. units)
b
Simple optimized
NN optimized
c
FIG. 4. Building extreme tight-binding Hamiltonians with meta-optimization. (a) Wannier-interpolation of the band structure
of monolayer MoS2 over a wide energy range. Black lines are results from the present method, blue disks are explicit DFT
calculations. For this calculation, we employ an energy window in the loss function that extends from 0.8 eV below the valence
band maximum to 0.5 eV above the conduction band minimum, 14 MLWFs, and a coarse BZ grid with 6×6 points. The key
difference between this calculation and those in Fig.2 and Fig.S4 is that, here, we only retain the first and second nearest-
neighbors in the Wannier representation. Specifically, in the interpolation of the smooth Bloch Hamiltonian starting from the
Hamiltonian in the Wannier representation, ˜Hmn(k) = ∑
R exp(ik · R)Hmn(R), we only sum over R = 0 and the first and
second shell of lattice vectors R ̸= 0. This truncated interpolation is used to evaluate the band interpolation error E in the
loss function, and MLWFs are meta-optimized to minimize this error. (b) Spatial decay of the Hamiltonian in the Wannier
representation, |Hmn(R)|/max[|Hmn(R)|]. Blue disks correspond to the Hamiltonian obtained in Fig. S4 (“simple optimized”),
while black disks correspond to the present nearest-neighbor optimization (“NN optimized”). The lines are guides to the eye.
The shading indicates the range of lattice vectors included in the nearest-neighbor optimization. We observe that the present
optimization leads to a faster decay and improved Wannier interpolation. (c) Schematic illustration of the nearest-neighbors
retained in (a) and (b).
0
5
10
15
20
|Re| ( ˚A)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
log(|g(Re,0)|) (arb. units)
a
E-P optimized
No optimization
0
5
10
15
20
|Rp| ( ˚A)
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
log(|g(0,Rp)|) (arb. units)
b
c
No
Opt.
Opt.
500
1000
1500
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
FIG. 5. Maximally-localized electron-phonon matrix elements. Spatial decay of the electron-phonon matrix element for the
conduction bands of silicon, as a function of (a) the length of the electronic Wigner-Seitz vector (|Re|) and (b) the length of the
phonon Wigner-Seitz vector (|Rp|). Brown disks correspond to calculation without including the term ξ2 in the loss function,
while green circles are obtained by including this feature. Solid lines are the corresponding exponential fits. (c) Electron mobility
at 300 K, obtained using electron-phonon-optimized Wannier functions (green) and standard Wannier functions (brown). The
value on top of each bar is the relative error with respect to calculations using a dense coarse BZ grid.


--- Page 14 ---
14
Meta-optimization of maximally-localized Wannier functions
Supplementary Materials
Sabyasachi Tiwari,1, 2 Bruno Cucco,1, 2 Viet-Anh Ha,1, 2 and Feliciano Giustino1, 2, ∗
1Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
2Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
Contents
Supplementary Note 1
Software
Calculation parameters
Meta-optimization hyper-parameters
Loss function
Sensitivity of results to the choice of loss function
Supplementary Note 2
Generation of Wannier functions with minimal spread variance
Supplementary Table 1
Optimized disentanglement energy windows and types of initial projections
Supplementary Table 2
Computed electron mobilities of silicon and monolayer MoS2 vs. coarse grid size and bands
Supplementary Table 3
Computed electron mobilities of 2D materials from the 2D Materials Cloud database
Supplementary Figure 1
Sensitivity of results to the choice of loss function
Supplementary Figure 2
Choice of meta-optimization algorithm
Supplementary Figure 3
In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for silicon
Supplementary Figure 4
In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for monolayer MoS2
Supplementary Figure 5
In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for (5,5) CNT
Supplementary Figure 6
Interpolation accuracy across six representative materials
Supplementary Figure 7
Singular value decomposition analysis of the Wannier representation
Supplementary Figure 8
Statistics on MLWFs meta-optimization for the Materials Cloud 2D database
Supplementary Figure 9
Constructing purely real-valued Wannier functions with meta-optimization
Supplementary Figure 10
Spread-balanced Wannier functions
Supplementary Figure 11
Meta-optimization for composite bands
Supplementary Figure 12
Composing meta-optimization with the SCDM method
Supplementary File 1
Input files and band structure plots for meta-optimized MLWFs of 200 compounds
in the Materials Cloud 2D database
Supplementary File 2
A tutorial to run the metaWann code on code-ocean
Supplementary Data
All input and output files are available on the Materials cloud archive.
∗fgiustino@oden.utexas.edu


--- Page 15 ---
15
2
Note S1
Software. All calculations are performed using density functional theory (DFT) within the Generalized Gradient
approximation (GGA) for the exchange and correlation functional. We employ planewaves and pseudopotentials, as
implemented in the Quantum ESPRESSO materials simulation suite1,2 for both ground-state calculations and density
functional perturbation theory calculations.3,4 Maximally-localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) are computed using
the Wannier90 code,5 which is invoked in library mode from the EPW code.6,7 Transport calculations are performed
using EPW.6,8 We employ optimized norm-conserving (ONCV) pseudopotentials.9,10
All computational workflows are automated by using the EPWpy library, which is publicly available through its GitLab
repository11 or its own website.12 The metawann code calls Quantum ESPRESSO, EPW, and Wannier90 through the EPWpy
library, and its executable is provided as Code Ocean capsule.13 In the meta-optimization, we employ the differential
evolution (DE) algorithm implemented in the SciPy library as differential_evolution.14 A self-contained example
of calculation workflow to find meta-optimized MLWFs for MoS2 as in Fig. 1 in the main text is provided as a Code
Ocean capsule.13
Calculation parameters. We use a planewave kinetic energy cutoff of 60 Ry for all compounds except silicon and GaN.
For silicon we use 40 Ry for compatibility with Ref. 15, while for GaN we use 80 Ry. We employ the experimental
lattice parameters for silicon and GaN; optimized lattice parameters for monolayer MoS2 in the presence of spin-orbit
coupling; experimental lattice parameters for the (5,5) carbon nanotube (CNT); and lattice parameters from the
Materials Cloud 2D Database for all other materials.16 Ground-state calculations are performed using a 203 Brillouin
zone (BZ) grid for silicon, 83 BZ grid for GaN, and a 122 BZ grid for all 2D materials. In all calculations, we set the
energy convergence threshold to 10−13 Ry. Mobility calculations using the ab initio Boltzmann transport equation
(aiBTE) are performed using fine BZ grids with 603 k and q points for silicon, 1002 points for monolayer MoS2,
and 1202 points for all other 2D materials. The coarse BZ grids employed in Wannierization for silicon, monolayer
MoS2, and the CNT are indicated in the caption of Fig. 2 of the main text. The coarse BZ grids employed for the
2D materials in Fig. 3(f) and 3(g) of the main text are 6×6 for electrons and 3×3 for phonons. For the benchmark
semiconductor set shown in Figure S6, comprising of AlSb, AlP, 3C-SiC, SrO, AlAs, and GaP, we use the same
pseudopotentials and input parameters as reported in Ref. 15.
Meta-optimization hyper-parameters. To perform meta-optimization of MLWFs, we chose as hyper-parameters the
inner and outer disentanglement energy windows and the type of initial projections. The outer disentanglement window
is specified in Wannier90 by the input parameters dis_win_min and dis_win_max, the inner window is specified by
dis_froz_min and dis_froz_max. All four parameters are stored as real variables and varied independently by the
DE optimizer, with the constraint that the inner window should be contained within the outer window.
Unlike the energy windows, the types of initial projection are specified in Wannier90 as categorical labels. We employ
hydrogenic wavefunctions and associated hybrid orbitals, which are specified by the angular momentum quantum
number l = 0, 1, 2, 3 for s, p, d, f orbitals, and l = −5, −4, −3, −2, −1 for hybrid orbitals. For each of these choices,
several options for the magnetic quantum number are possible, see the Wannier90 documentation at Ref. 17 for more
information. In order to handle categorical labels, we assign an integer index to each of the possible choices allowed
by the Wannier90 code, for a total of 285 unique possibilities per atom. In this work, these trial local orbitals are
located at each atomic site of the crystal. The integer index is then passed to the DE optimizer as a continuous
variable via step-wise mapping. In order to perform the optimization, the only parameter that we specify in input is
the convergence criterion for the loss function. The search over hyperparameters is performed automatically.
Other hyper-parameter choices can be used to further fine-tune the present method for specific applications.
In
fact, any input parameter from the Wannier90 code or related Wannierization tools, whether a numerical value or
categorical label, can serve as a hyper-parameter.
Sensitivity of results to the choice of loss function. In Figure
S1 we investigate the impact of the choice of loss
function on the meta-optimization, for the Wannierization of the conduction bands of silicon.
We consider the
following loss functions:
L1: We set ζ1 = E/EH (EH is the Hartree energy), η1 = Ω/Nb, N1 = Ωmax with Ωmax = 5 Å2, α1 = 1, and λ1 = 106.
With this choice, one minimizes the band interpolation error while enforcing an upper bound of Ωmax on the
average spread of Wannier functions.
L2: We set ζ1 = E/EH; , ζ2 = Ω/Ωmax with Ωmax = 5 Å2, we sweep the parameters α1, and α2 from 0.1 to 0.9
with α1 + α2 = 1.0. We do not use constraints. This choice strikes a balance between the optimization of band
interpolation and the localization of MLWFs.
Figure S1(a) and (b) show the band interpolation error and the mean spread as a function of DE generation, re-
spectively, for various choices of the above weights. For comparison, the black lines and disks in the same panels
correspond to the loss function L1, where the MLWF spread is included via a constraint. As expected, by placing more


--- Page 16 ---
16
3
weight on the band interpolation error (see for example brown curves, for α1 = 0.9 and α2 = 0.1) the interpolation
quality in panel (a) improves at the expense of the spread in panel (b). The trend reverses as α1 decreases and α2
increases. In comparison, the loss function L1 delivers the smallest interpolation error, at the cost of a slightly larger
yet still near-optimal spread for applications.
In Figure S1(c) we also show the correlation between band interpolation error and spread, for all DE generations
and all the loss functions shown in panels (a) and (b). The data are reported as a “density of (hyperparameter)
configurations”. This plot shows that, when the interpolation error is small, the spread tends to also be small, but
the converse is not true. In other words, MLWFs which are able to closely reproduce DFT bands tend to also be
more localized. This is somewhat unexpected, and highlights the usefulness of placing the emphasis on the band
interpolation error in the meta-optimization of MLWFs.
The present analysis indicates how meta-optimization is very versatile and can easily be fine-tuned to leverage the
vast gauge freedom in the choice of Wannier functions.
Note S2: Generation of Wannier functions with minimal spread variance
We show that we can obtain spread-balanced MLWFs as obtained in Ref. 18 by simply adding the variance of the
spread to our loss function. To this end, we define the loss function L4 as follows:
L[U 0] = α1 ξ1[W(U 0)] + α2ξ2[W(U 0)],
(S1)
where ξ1 = E/EH is the band interpolation error, and ξ2 = Var(Ω/Ωmax) is the variance of the spread. We use this
loss function with the parameters α1 = α2 = 0.5.
Using Eq. S1 we generate MLWFs for the conduction bands of Si, with a coarse BZ grid of 63 points. In Figure S10(a)
we show the minima of the variance of the spread as a function of generation in differential evolution. At convergence,
the variance vanishes exactly (within numerical precision), leading to highly symmetric MLWFs even in the case of
entangled bands [see inset of panel (b)]. For completeness, panel (b) also shows the median spread, which coincides
with the spread of each MLWF at convergence. In Figure S10(c) we see that the use of ultra-symmetric MLWFs leads
to a further improvement in mobility calculations as compared to much denser coarse BZ grids, with an error under
1%.
We emphasize that the purpose of this example is simply to illustrate the exceptional flexibility of our approach: with
only a modest change in the loss function, we can reproduce advanced optimization algorithms that normally require
modifications to the source code. Importantly, we do not view this method as a substitute for current approaches, but
rather as a complementary tool that can augment those efforts by adding an additional layer of global optimization.
For example, the present framework could be adapted to use ASE19 as the Wannierization engine.


--- Page 17 ---
17
4
TABLE S1. Optimized disentanglement energy windows and types of initial projections. We report the lower (dis_froz_min)
and upper (dis_froz_max) bounds of the frozen window in the Wannierization process, the lower (dis_win_min) and upper
(dis_win_max) bounds of the disentanglement window, and the types of projections (angular momentum number l and
magnetic number mr), for all compounds discussed in the main text (complete data for the 200 compounds reported in
Figure S7 are provided in Supplementary File 1). In all cases, the Wannierization procedure starts from 60 bands, and all
valence bands lying more than 5 eV away from the valence band top are excluded. All energies are referred to the valence band
top.
Compound
dis_froz_min dis_froz_max dis_win_min dis_win_max Projection
eV
eV
eV
eV
Test systems
Silicon
6.63
9.40
-3.36
29.06 l = −4, mr = 2, 4; l = 2, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5
l = −5, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5; l = −2, mr = 2
Monolayer MoS2
-5.56
-0.78
-15.56
6.37 l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 4; l = −4, mr = 4
(5,5) CNT
-11.67
5.60
-15.52
24.79 l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6; l = −4, mr = 1, 2;
l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4;
l = −5, mr = 2, 4, 6;
l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 6, 7;
l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6;
l = 2, mr = 1, 4;
l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 5;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7;
l = 3, mr = 3, 5;
l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5, 7;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6;
l = 2, mr = 1, 4, 5;
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3
GaN
9.05
12.61
2.20
27.15 l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 1, 5;
3C-SiC
9.78
16.92
1.78
68.07 l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 5; l = 3, mr = 5, 6, 7;
AlAs
3.46
11.57
0.035
32.77 l = −3, mr = 1, 2, 3; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 6, 7;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5;
AlP
5.33
10.14
-2.67
27.38 l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4, 7; l = −5, mr = 2, 5, 6;
AlSb
5.02,
9.81,
0.74,
23.57 l = 3, mr = 2, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 7;
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
SrO
8.21
14.56
3.21
36.33 l = −5, mr = 1, 4, 5, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 6;
GaP
5.00
11.64
2.81
28.10 l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7;
l = 1, mr = 1, 2, 3;
56 Compounds from 2D Materials Cloud database
Ag2Br2
-8.15
-2.26
-19.49
8.50 l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 7; l = 2, mr = 2, 3, 5;
l = −5, mr = 3, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5;
AgO4Cl
-8.27
-2.07
-25.81
9.92 l = −3, mr = 2, 3, 4; l = −4, mr = 3;
l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 5;
Al2O2Cl2
-8.02
0.87
-25.49
22.54 l = −5, mr = 3, 5, 6; l = −5, mr = 1, 4;
l = −4, mr = 1;
As4
-10.59
-0.94
-24.56
13.52 l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 5, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 7;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7; l = 3, mr = 4, 7;
Ba2H2I2
-8.12
-1.93
-20.49
7.83 l = −3, mr = 1, 2; l = −3, mr = 1, 4;
l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4;
Bi2
-5.07
-1.40
-11.76
6.02 l = −4, mr = 2, 3, 5; l = −3, mr = 1, 2, 4;
Bi2O2Cl2
-12.80
-4.32
-22.90
8.37 l = 3, mr = 1, 4; l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5;
l = −4, mr = 1;
Bi2O2I2
-11.97
-4.29
-20.80
8.09 l = 3, mr = 2, 4, 5, 6, 7; l = −4, mr = 1;
l = 3, mr = 4, 6;
Bi2TeSe2
-5.77
-2.48
-19.75
5.60 l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5, 7; l = −3, mr = 2, 3, 4;
l = −1, mr = 1;
BiTeCl
-6.46
-4.12
-24.07
11.32 l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4; l = −2, mr = 2;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5, 6;
BiTeI
-6.45
-3.26
-19.05
17.00 l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 7;
l = 3, mr = 3, 6, 7;
Ca2H2Br2
-7.01
1.61
-22.16
11.53 l = −5, mr = 3, 4, 6; l = 3, mr = 2, 3;
l = −3, mr = 1, 2, 3;
Ca2H2I2
-11.13
-0.82
-17.87
8.29 l = −3, mr = 2, 3, 4; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 6;
l = 2, mr = 2;
CaI2
-12.13
-0.06
-19.16
8.28 l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 7; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 6, 7;


--- Page 18 ---
18
5
Compound
dis_froz_min
dis_froz_max
dis_win_min
dis_win_max
Projection
eV
eV
eV
eV
CdBr2
-12.9
-2.84
-22.38
7.29
l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5, 7; l = 3, mr = 6;
CdCl2
-8.42
-0.44
-25.57
9.57
l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 4, 7;
CdI2
-11.29
-2.14
-24.18
8.51
l = −5, mr = 2, 3, 4; l = −3, mr = 1, 3, 4;
Cu2Br2
-5.13
0.15
-16.14
11.98
l = 3, mr = 2, 4, 5; l = −4, mr = 2, 3, 5;
Cu2I2
-6.15
0.11
-18.08
17.35
l = −5, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; l = 3, mr = 5, 7;
Cu2I2
-4.76
0.52
-15.86
13.68
l = 3, mr = 3, 4, 7; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 5, 6;
FeBr2
-8.58
-0.97
-16.36
18.48
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 6, 7; l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4;
FeCl2
-7.42
0.03
-18.39
19.14
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 6, 7;
FeI2
-9.80
-2.85
-15.67
12.10
l = −3, mr = 1, 2, 4; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6;
Ga2S2
-9.11
-3.57
-20.59
13.03
l = 3, mr = 3, 4, 5, 6, 7; l = −5, mr = 1;
Ga2S2
-11.13
-3.12
-20.21
15.18
l = −5, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5, 6; l = 3, mr = 2, 6, 7;
Ga2Se2
-8.98
-3.10
-23.52
12.05
l = −5, mr = 4, 6; l = −4, mr = 2, 5;
Ga2Te2Cl2
-11.48
-3.68
-21.27
8.18
l = −4, mr = 3; l = −2, mr = 1, 2;
l = 2, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5;
Ge2S2
-13.59
0.72
-24.64
18.40
l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 7; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 6, 7;
Ge2Se2
-10.47
-1.03
-17.83
10.22
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
GeI2
-11.52
-0.87
-24.88
18.77
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4; l = 2, mr = 1, 3, 5;
GeI2
-12.61
-2.76
-24.77
16.7
l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
HfSe2
-10.00
-3.25
-22.08
6.69
l = −4, mr = 3, 5; l = 3, mr = 2, 4, 5, 6;
In2O2Br2
-9.27
-3.24
-17.39
7.24
l = 3, mr = 7; l = −3, mr = 2, 3, 4;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 6;
In2Se2
-10.25
-4.14
-24.57
13.97
l = −2, mr = 1, 2, 3; l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5;
MgBr2
-9.56
-0.48
-23.53
16.26
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 5; l = 3, mr = 2, 4, 6, 7;
MgCl2
-13.50
0.25
-27.23
19.62
l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4, 6; l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 4, 6, 7;
MgI2
-15.50
-1.44
-19.39
12.04
l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6; l = 2, mr = 1, 3, 4, 5;
MoSe2
-15.18
-1.59
-17.59
11.19
l = 3, mr = 3, 4, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5, 7;
NaCN
-11.40
-0.11
-21.10
22.56
l = 3, mr = 3, 5, 6, 7; l = 3, mr = 2;
l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 5;
P2
-13.78
-0.03
-17.6
17.54
l = −5, mr = 1, 3; l = 3, mr = 4, 5, 6;
l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 6, 7; l = 3, mr = 3, 4, 5, 7;
P4
-12.73
-1.90
-19.91
17.41
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7;
l = −4, mr = 2, 4; l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 5, 6, 7;
Pb2Br2F2
-11.08
-3.44
-25.57
7.76
l = −4, mr = 5; l = 2, mr = 1, 2;
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
Pb2Cl2F2
-12.75
-2.76
-26.05
7.51
l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 5; l = −2, mr = 1;
l = 3, mr = 1, 7;
Pb2O2
-7.65
-0.53
-19.01
20.32
l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4; l = 3, mr = 3, 4, 5, 6;
PbF4
-10.44
1.80
-24.82
9.39
l = 1, mr = 1, 2; l = 2, mr = 1, 5;
PbI2
-10.00
0.66
-23.19
11.47
l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 6, 7; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 6;
Rb2Cl2
-12.65
0.02
-18.30
12.95
l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 2;
Sb2
-5.59
-0.49
-18.30
9.55
l = −5, mr = 2, 3, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 5, 7;
Si2H2
-8.37
-1.30
-19.19
8.39
l = −5, mr = 1, 4, 6; l = 2, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5;
Sn2Te2
-4.96
-1.31
-16.32
5.04
l = 3, mr = 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 5, 6;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 4, 6; l = −4, mr = 3;
Ti2N2Br2
-7.24
-4.31
-17.65
8.84
l = −5, mr = 4, 5, 6; l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 4, 5, 7;
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 6, 7;
Ti2N2Cl2
-7.41
-3.23
-19.05
5.97
l = 3, mr = 1, 4, 5, 7; l = 3, mr = 2, 3, 6, 7;
l = 3, mr = 5, 7;
Tl2O
-13.15
0.87
-20.79
23.15
l = −4, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; l = 3, mr = 4, 5, 6, 7;
l = −5, mr = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
WS2
-7.02
-1.28
-16.39
5.58
l = 1, mr = 1; l = 3, mr = 1, 3, 6;
l = 3, mr = 4, 5, 6, 7;
WTe2
-4.62
-1.20
-21.38
7.16
l = −5, mr = 1, 5; l = 3, mr = 2, 4, 7;
l = −1, mr = 2;
ZrSe2
-13.08
-4.53
-16.91
8.45
l = 3, mr = 1, 2, 3, 6, 7; l = 3, mr = 4, 5, 6, 7;


--- Page 19 ---
19
6
TABLE S2. Computed electron mobilities of silicon and monolayer MoS2 vs. coarse grid size and bands. Room-temperature
electron mobilities in silicon and monolayer MoS2, as computed via the aiBTE and reported in Fig. 3(a) and (b) of the main
text, respectively. In the case of silicon, we vary the size N of the coarse BZ grid (Nc = N 3) and we keep the number of
Wannier functions fixed to Nb = 12. In the case of monolayer MoS2, we vary the number of bands Nb while keeping the coarse
BZ grid size fixed to Nc = 242. In the last row we report data from Refs. 15 and 20, respectively.
Silicon
Monolayer MoS2
N
Mobility
Nb
Mobility
cm2V−1s−1
cm2V−1s−1
4
1285
2
174
6
1320
4
174
8
1393
8
178
16
137815
10
16920


--- Page 20 ---
20
7
TABLE S3. Computed electron mobilities of 2D materials from the Materials Cloud 2D database. Room-temperature mobilities
of 56 compounds form the 2D Materials Cloud database, calculated using the aiBTE and reported in Fig. 3(f) and (g) of the
main text. To identify compounds, we also provide their MC2D identity code.16
Compound
MC2D Identity Code
Mobility (cm2V−1s−1)
Compound
MC2D Identity Code
Mobility (cm2V−1s−1)
Ag2Br2
mc2d-1
18
Ge2Se2
mc2d-160
33
AgO4Cl
mc2d-2
4
GeI2
mc2d-155
12
Al2O2Cl2
mc2d-8
28
GeI2
mc2d-156
22
As4
mc2d-10
65
HfSe2
mc2d-171
13
Ba2H2I2
mc2d-17
15
In2O2Br2
mc2d-54
19
Bi2
mc2d-18
373
In2Se2
mc2d-201
83
Bi2O2Cl2
mc2d-26
18
MgBr2
mc2d-36
23
Bi2O2I2
mc2d-28
33
MgCl2
mc2d-90
20
Bi2TeSe2
mc2d-21
334
MgI2
mc2d-179
14
BiTeCl
mc2d-27
48
MoSe2
mc2d-205
92
BiTeI
mc2d-29
47
NaCN
mc2d-76
7
Ca2H2Br2
mc2d-43
10
P2
mc2d-221
38
Ca2H2I2
mc2d-80
7
P4
mc2d-220
137
CaI2
mc2d-81
5
Pb2Br2F2
mc2d-49
7
CdBr2
mc2d-30
13
Pb2Cl2F2
mc2d-107
5
CdCl2
mc2d-82
8
Pb2O2
mc2d-216
18
CdI2
mc2d-85
6
PbF4
mc2d-140
2
Cu2Br2
mc2d-46
6
PbI2
mc2d-183
16
Cu2I2
mc2d-134
14
Rb2Cl2
mc2d-121
7
Cu2I2
mc2d-133
18
Sb2
mc2d-237
44
FeBr2
mc2d-33
1
Si2H2
mc2d-167
26
FeCl2
mc2d-89
4
Sn2Te2
mc2d-252
142
FeI2
mc2d-144
2
Ti2N2Br2
mc2d-58
88
Ga2S2
mc2d-152
147
Ti2N2Cl2
mc2d-114
67
Ga2S2
mc2d-151
59
Tl2O
mc2d-219
55
Ga2Se2
mc2d-153
137
WS2
mc2d-234
195
Ga2Te2Cl2
mc2d-109
11
WTe2
mc2d-256
125
Ge2S2
mc2d-159
13
ZrSe2
mc2d-248
12


--- Page 21 ---
21
8
0
50
100
150
200
DE Generations
0
5
10
15
20
25
Interp. error (meV)
a
b
c
L2 : α1 = 0.1, α2 = 0.9
L2 : α1 = 0.3, α2 = 0.7
L2 : α1 = 0.5, α2 = 0.5
L2 : α1 = 0.7, α2 = 0.3
L2 : α1 = 0.9, α2 = 0.1
L1
0
50
100
150
200
DE Generations
1
2
3
4
Spread ( ˚A2)
0
50
100
150
Interpolation Error (meV)
0
5
10
15
Spread ( ˚A2)
10-3
10-2
10-1
No. of conﬁgurations (normalized)
Figure S1. Systematic analysis of loss function L1 and L2. (a) Interpolation error for the conduction bands of silicon, as a
function of DE generation. Data correspond to the loss function L2, for different values of the weights α1 and α2, as well as to
the loss function L1 (black). (b) MLWF mean spread as a function of DE generation, for the same dataset as in panel (a) with
same color coding. (c) Cross-correlation between the band interpolation error and the MLWF spread for the data reported in
panels (a) and (b).


--- Page 22 ---
22
9
0
100
200
300
400
500
Generations
0
5
10
15
20
Interp. error (meV)
(DE)
a
0
100
200
300
400
500
Iterations/12
0
5
10
15
20
Interp. error (meV)
(BO)
d
0
100
200
300
400
500
Generations
2
3
4
5
Spread ( ˚A2)
b
0
100
200
300
400
500
Iterations/12
2
3
4
5
Spread ( ˚A2)
e
0.0
0.2
0.4
Energy (eV)
c
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
1
5
Error
(meV)
0.0
0.2
0.4
Energy (eV)
f
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
1
5
Error
(meV)
Figure S2. Choice of meta-optimization algorithm. We compare the performance of the DE meta-optimizer and the BO meta-
optimizer to find MLWFs for the conduction bands of silicon. In this comparison we employ the loss function L1 described in
the Computational Methods. Panels (a)-(c) in the first row corresponds to the DE meta-optimizer, while panels (d)-(f) in the
second row are for the BO meta-optimizer. (a) and (b) show the band interpolation error E and the Wannier mean spread Ωas
a function of DE generation. The black lines indicate the interpolation error and the spread for the candidate with the lowest
loss function up to this generation, similar to Figure S1(a) and (b). Panel (c) is the resulting band interpolation (disks: DFT
bands; black lines: Wannier interpolated bands). (d), (e) and (f) report the same information as in (a), (b) and (c), this time
for the BO meta-optimizer. To perform a meaningful comparison between the two methods at equal computational cost, we
scale the horizontal axis by an empirical factor of 12, so that the timing of the calculations in (a),(b),(d),(e) are approximately
the same for the same value of the horizontal coordinate. It is seen that DE achieves lower band interpolation error and lower
spread than BO; accordingly, DE delivers superior band interpolation, compare panels (c) and (f).


--- Page 23 ---
23
10
L
Γ
X
X’
G
Wavevector
-10
-5
0
5
10
Energy (eV)
a
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
b
c
d
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
Figure S3. In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for silicon. (a) Wannier-interpolation of the band structure of silicon
over a wide energy range. Black lines are results from the present method, blue disks are explicit DFT calculations. For
this calculation we employ an energy window that extends from 2.0 eV below the valence band maximum to 2.0 eV above
the conduction band minimum in the loss function, 16 MLWFs, and a coarse BZ grid with 6×6×6 points. We show bands
along the XX’ segment (which is not a high-symmetry line) to demonstrate how interpolation with meta-optimized Wannier
functions respects crystal symmetry. (b)-(d) Wannier interpolation of the conduction band bottom of silicon (top panels) and
interpolation error (bottom panels), starting from a coarse BZ grid size N ×N ×N with N = 4 for panel (b), N = 8 for (c),
and N = 10 for (d). It is seen that the case N = 4 already provides very good band interpolation, with a maximum error of
5 meV. The interpolation of conduction bands is achieved using an energy window of 0.5 eV from the conduction band bottom
and 12 MLWFs. Representative MLWFs are shown as insets.


--- Page 24 ---
24
11
Γ
M
K
Γ
Wavevector
-1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Energy (eV)
a
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
b
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
c
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
d
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
Γ
M
K
Γ
Wavevector
-1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Energy (eV)
e
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
f
Γ
M
K
Γ
Wavevector
-1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
Energy (eV)
g
Wavevector
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
Energy (eV)
h
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
0.3MK
K
0.95Γ
Wavevector
1
5
10
Error
(meV)
Figure S4. In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for monolayer MoS2. (a) Wannier-interpolation of the band structure
of monolayer MoS2 over a wide energy range. Black lines are results from the present method, blue disks are explicit DFT
calculations. For this calculation we employ an energy window that extends from 0.8 eV below the valence band maximum to
0.5 eV above the conduction band minimum in the loss function, 24 MLWFs, and a coarse BZ grid with 6×6×1 points. (b)-(d)
Wannier interpolation of the conduction band bottom of monolayer MoS2 (top panels) and interpolation error (bottom panels),
starting from a coarse BZ grid size N ×N with N = 6 for panel (b), N = 8 for (c), and N = 12 for (d). The interpolation
of conduction bands is achieved using an energy window of 0.3 eV starting from the conduction band bottom, and 8 MLWFs.
It is seen that the case N = 6 already provides very good band interpolation, with a maximum error of 5 meV within the
optimization window. In comparison, previous work used coarse grids as dense as N = 24 to achieve sub-meV accuracy in the
band interpolation error.20 Representative MLWFs are shown as inset, and consist of combination of Mo-d orbitals and S-p
orbitals, as expected. (e)-(h) These panels illustrate the use of meta-optimization to achieve Wannier interpolation of selected
bands. In (e), we target the two lowest conduction bands of monolayer Mo2 [the meaning of lines and disks is the same as in
panel (a)]. In panel (f) we zoom near the bottom of the conduction band, and show the band interpolation error corresponding
to a coarse grid with N = 24. These data are the same as in Fig. 2(i) of the main text. The inset shows the resulting MLWF;
these Wannier functions are more delocalized than in panels (b)-(d) because they describe a narrower energy range. Panels
(g) and (h) report show interpolation of the two topmost valence bands of monolayer MoS2, using the same convention as for
(e),(f).


--- Page 25 ---
25
12
-7.5
-5.0
-2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Energy (eV)
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
-X
Γ
X
Wavevector
1
10
20
Error
(meV)
-X
Γ
X
Wavevector
-X
Γ
X
Wavevector
Figure S5. In-depth analysis of MLWFs meta-optimization for (5, 5) CNT. (a) Wannier-interpolation of the band structure of a
(5,5) CNT over a wide energy range. This system contains 20 C atoms per unit cell.21 Black lines are results from the present
method, blue disks are explicit DFT calculations. For this calculation we employ an energy window of ±5 eV from the charge
neutrality level in the loss function, 63 MLWFs, and a coarse BZ grid with 12 points. The band interpolation error is also shown
as a red line, for the two bands crossing the charge neutrality level (zero of the energy axis). (b) In this panel we show the
result of manual Wannierization (without meta-optimization) starting from pz orbitals on each C atom as initial projections (in
this case, the pz orbitals are all oriented along the same z axis). This strategy leads to poor band interpolation, as seen from
the appearance of spurious bands that cross the charge neutrality level. In addition, the resulting MLWFs shown in (e) appear
largely asymmetric. However, we should point out that it is possible to achieve good band interpolation by manually setting the
initial projections to be pz orbitals oriented radially around the CNT axis (i.e., with the z axis of each projection pointing in the
direction perpendicular to the tube surface). (c) In this panel we show how meta-optimization offers significant flexibility. In
this case, we set the initial projections to C-pz orbitals, and we optimize the disentanglement windows. Despite the sub-optimal
choice of initial projections, meta-optimization is able to achieve good band interpolation. This flexibility makes the present
method suitable for use in combination with Wannierization techniques that focus on the choice of initial projections.22,23
Representative MLWFs are reported below each panel: (d), (g) (h), and (i) correspond to panel (a); (e) corresponds to panel
(b); (f) corresponds to panel (c). In all cases we recognize C-pz orbitals oriented perpendicular to the CNT surface, but the
MLWFs obtained from meta-optimization appear more symmetric and more localized.


--- Page 26 ---
26
13
AlSb
AlP
3C-SiC
SrO
AlAs
GaP
0
50
100
150
200
Interp. Error (meV)
b
a
Meta-optimization
Manual-optimization
0.2Γ
X
0.4W
Wavevector
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Energy (eV)
Figure S6.
Interpolation accuracy across six representative materials.
(a) Interpolation error between DFT and Wannier-
interpolated conduction bands within 300 meV of the band extrema, for six prototypical semiconductors. Green bars corre-
spond to Wannier functions generated using the present meta-optimization framework, while gray bars correspond to manual
Wannierization using initial projections, disentanglement windows, and other hyperparameters reported in Ref. 15. All errors
are evaluated using a coarse 4 × 4 × 4 Brillouin-zone sampling grid. (b) Representative comparison of band interpolation for
GaP. Open circles denote DFT results, while solid lines show Wannier interpolation obtained using the present method (green)
and manual Wannierization procedure.15 (gray). The proposed approach achieves meV-level interpolation accuracy.


--- Page 27 ---
27
14
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
No. of principal values/
Total no. of principal values
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Principal values/
Max principal values
a
b
c
4x4x4
16x16x16
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
No. of principal values/
Total no. of principal values
10-3
10-2
10-1
100
Principal values/
Max principal values
4x4x4
16x16x16
10
20
30
40
|Rmax
e
| ( ˚A)
10-1
10-0
101
102
103
Interp. Error (meV)
4x4x4
16x16x16
Figure S7.
Singular value decomposition analysis of the Wannier representation. (a) Singular values of the Hamiltonian in the
in the Wannier representation, for the conduction bands of silicon. The decomposition of Hmn(Re) is performed by creating a
matrix with mn and Re as indices. Black refers to the Wannierization parameters reported in Ref.15, for a 163 coarse grid; green
refers to a representation obtained from a 43 grid via meta-optimization, using the L1 loss function. The horizontal axis marks
the boundary between values that are within 1% of the largest principal value (above) from values that differ by more than
1% from the maximum value (below). The horizontal axis is the number of the principal value, referred to the total number of
singular values in each case. (b) Singular values of the electron-phonon matrix elements in the Wannier representation, for the
conduction bands of silicon.24 The symbols and colors have the same meaning as in panel (a). Both quantities in (a) and (b) are
normalized to their respective maximum values and sorted in descending order. We consider two Wannier representations: (i)
a calculation using the parameters of Ref. 15, with a BZ grid containing 163 points; (ii) a calculation using meta-optimization
with a grid of 43 points. The principal values are ordered by magnitude along the horizontal axis. Now we ask how many
principal values lie within 1% of the maximum principal value. For the Hamiltonian, we find that this fraction is as low as 11%
for the 163 grid, and as high as 35% for the 43 grid. For the electron-phonon matrix elements, this value is as low as 7% for the
163 grid, and as high as 37% for the 43 grid. These data indicate that the meta-optimized Wannier representation on the 43 grid
compresses information more eﬀiciently than the one obtained from the denser grid. Stated otherwise, the representation on the
163 grid contains redundant information that increases computational cost without improving calculation accuracy. From this
point of view, the present meta-optimization can also be understood as a strategy to optimize the descriptive power (in terms
of significant singular values) of a given Wannier representation. (c) Band interpolation error as a function of the maximum
length of the Wigner-Seitz vectors, |Rmax
e
|. We calculate the band structure for a given k point by diagonalizing the truncated
Wannier Hamiltonian ∑
Re H(Re) exp(ik · Re), where Re is restricted to |Re| ≤|Rmax
e
|. The black line corresponds to the 163
coarse grid via manual Wannierization. The green line is for the 43 coarse grid using the present method. The intercept between
the horizontal green line starting at the green dot and the black line indicates the range of Wigner-Seitz vectors required with
manual Wannierization to mach the accuracy of meta-optimization. This figure shows that, for a radial cutoff of 10 Å, manual
Wannierization yields an error of 140 meV, while meta-optimization yields an error below 5 meV. Conversely, to reduce the
error below 5 meV, manual Wannierization necessitates more shells of Wigner-Seitz vectors, up to 30 Å.


--- Page 28 ---
28
15
0
5
10
15
20
Interp. error (meV)
0
4
8
12
No. of materials
a
0
2
4
6
8
Spread ( ˚A2)
0
5
10
15
No. of materials
b
0
10
20
30
40
Time (min)
0
10
20
30
40
50
No. of materials
c
Figure S8.
Statistics on MLWFs meta-optimization for the Materials Cloud 2D database. Panels (a)-(c) summarize the results
of MLWFs meta-optimization for 200 compounds of the Materials Cloud 2D database.16 These 200 compounds correspond to a
subset of the 258 dynamically-stable systems reported in the database; the complete list with all input files and band structure
plots is provided in Supplementary File 1. Calculations are performed using a 6×6 coarse BZ grid, an energy window of ±1 eV
from the band edges in the loss function, and loss function L1 of the Computational Methods. We set an upper bound of
20 meV to the interpolation error, and stop DE iterations when the error and spread fall below 20 meV and 10 2, respectively.
(a) Histogram of the band interpolation error E for all compounds in this dataset. The average error over all compounds is
5 meV. (b) Histogram of the mean MLWF spread Ω/Nb for all compounds in this dataset. The average spread per Wannier
function over all compounds is 2.1 Å2. (c) Runtime required to generate meta-optimized MLWFs. The average runtime over
all compounds is 5 min, which is significantly lower than what would be required by manual Wannierization. In total, the
Wannierization procedure for all 200 compounds takes 15 hours on a PC with 36 cores. All input files necessary to reproduce
these calculations, as well as band structure plots, are provided in Supplementary File 1.


--- Page 29 ---
29
16
Γ
M
K
Γ
Wavevector
-1.0
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
Energy (eV)
a
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
R ( ˚A)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Im(H(R))(arb. units)
b
c
Figure S9. Constructing purely real-valued Wannier functions with meta-optimization. (a) Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MoS2 over a wide energy range. Black lines are results from the present method, blue disks are explicit
DFT calculations. For this calculation we employ an energy window that extends from 1.0 eV below the valence band maximum
to 1.0 eV above the conduction band minimum in the loss function, 11 MLWFs, and a coarse BZ grid with 6×6 points. The
key difference between this calculation and those in Figure S4 is that, here, we require MLWFs to be purely real-valued
(barring an inconsequential overall complex phase). To achieve this, we add one additional feature in the loss function L1 of
the Computational Methods, ζ2 = maxn,r |Im wn(r)/Re wn(r)|, with a weight α2 = 0.5, where wn(r) is the value of the n-th
MLWF at position r in the unit cell. (b) Imaginary part of the Hamiltonian in the Wannier representation; for each lattice
vector R, we report the maximum value of Im Hmn(R) over the band indices. Blue disks correspond to the Wannierization
performed in Figure S4; red disks are for an intermediate step of the present meta-optimization,; black disks show the final
Wannier Hamiltonian returned by the meta-optimizer, with vanishing imaginary components. The lines are guides to the eye.
(c) Isosurface plot of the real-valued MLWF corresponding to the black disks in (b).Calculations reported in this figure are
performed without SOC, since real-valuedness cannot be guaranteed in these cases owing to the topological obstruction


--- Page 30 ---
30
17
0
100
200
DE Generations
-0.01
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Spread variance ( ˚A2)
a
b
c
0
100
200
DE Generations
2
3
4
5
6
Median spread ( ˚A2)
No
Opt.
Opt.
500
1000
1500
Mobility (cm2V-1s-1)
Figure S10. Spread-balanced Wannier functions. (a) Variance of MLWF spread for the conduction bands of silicon, as a function
of generation in differential evolution. We report the minimum over the DE population at each generation. (b) Median spread
of MLWFs as a function of generation. We report the median for the sample that minimized the variance in (a). The inset
shows two representative MLWFs in real-space. (c) Mobility obtained using spread-balanced (green) and standard (brown)
MLWFs. The value on top of each bar is the relative error with respect to calculations using a dense coarse BZ grid.


--- Page 31 ---
31
18
M
Γ
A
H
K
Γ
Wavevector
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
Energy (eV)
a
b
c
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
Energy (eV)
0.3M
Γ
A
Wavevector
0
10
20
Error
(meV)
Figure S11. Meta-optimization for composite bands. (a) Band structure of wurtzite GaN. Circles are DFT values; red lines
are from manual Wannierization, starting from N-p orbitals as initial projections; black lines are from meta-optimization. (b)
Same band structure as in (a), this time magnified near the valence band maximum. (c) Band interpolation error for manual
Wannierization (red lines) and for meta-optimization (black lines).


--- Page 32 ---
32
19
L
Γ
X W
K
Γ
0
1
2
3
4
5
Energy (eV)
a
b
c
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Energy (eV)
0.55ΓX
X
Wavevector
1
10
20
30
Error
(meV)
Figure S12. Composing meta-optimization with the SCDM method. (a) Conduction bands of silicon: circles are DFT bands; red
curves are the results of Wannier interpolation using the SCDM method, starting from a course BZ grid with 63 points; black
curves are obtained by performing meta-optimization on the hyperparameters of the SCDM method. (b) Same as in panel (a),
this time magnified near the band minimum. (c) Band interpolation error, using the same color code as in panels (a) and (b).
The interpolation error decreases by more than an order of magnitude when using the present method. In the SCDM method,
one needs to manually choose the disentanglement windows, the disentanglement function used for smearing, the chemical
potential for this function, and its variance.25 Using meta-optimization, we automatically optimize disentanglement windows,
chemical potential, and variance. This example highlights the potential of enhancing the performance of the SCDM method
without modifying the SCDM code base.


--- Page 33 ---
33
20
Supplementary references
[1] Giannozzi, P. et al. QUANTUM ESPRESSO: a modular and open-source software project for quantum simulations of
materials. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 21, 395502 (2009).
[2] Giannozzi, P. et al. Advanced capabilities for materials modelling with quantum ESPRESSO. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter
29, 465901 (2017).
[3] Baroni, S., de Gironcoli, S., Dal Corso, A. & Giannozzi, P. Phonons and related crystal properties from density-functional
perturbation theory. Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 515–562 (2001).
[4] Gonze, X. & Lee, C. Dynamical matrices, born effective charges, dielectric permittivity tensors, and interatomic force
constants from density-functional perturbation theory. Phys. Rev. B 55, 10355–10368 (1997).
[5] Pizzi, G. et al. Wannier90 as a community code: new features and applications. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 32, 165902
(2020).
[6] Lee, H. et al. Electron–phonon physics from first principles using the epw code. npj Comput. Mater. 9, 156 (2023).
[7] Poncé, S., Margine, E., Verdi, C. & Giustino, F. EPW: Electron–phonon coupling, transport and superconducting prop-
erties using maximally localized wannier functions. Comput. Phys. Commun. 209, 116 (2016).
[8] Poncé, S., Margine, E. R. & Giustino, F. Towards predictive many-body calculations of phonon-limited carrier mobilities
in semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 97, 121201 (2018).
[9] Schlipf, M. & Gygi, F. Optimization algorithm for the generation of oncv pseudopotentials. Comput. Phys. Commun. 196,
36–44 (2015).
[10] Hamann, D. R. Optimized norm-conserving vanderbilt pseudopotentials. Phys. Rev. B 88, 085117 (2013).
[11] EPWpy GitLab repository. https://gitlab.com/epwpy. Last accessed: 2025-02-09.
[12] EPWpy website. https://epwpy.org/. Last accessed: 2025-02-09.
[13] Tiwari, S. Code ocean capsule for atomistic simulations. https://codeocean.com/capsule/2837024/tree (2025). De-
cember 21, 2025.
[14] Virtanen, P. et al. SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python. Nat. Methods 17, 261–272
(2020).
[15] Poncé, S. et al. First-principles predictions of hall and drift mobilities in semiconductors. Phys. Rev. Res. 3, 043022 (2021).
[16] Talirz, L. et al. Materials cloud, a platform for open computational science. Scientific Data 7, 299 (2020).
[17] Wanier90 user manual.
[18] Fontana, P. F., Larsen, A. H., Olsen, T. & Thygesen, K. S. Spread-balanced wannier functions: Robust and automatable
orbital localization. Phys. Rev. B 104, 125140 (2021).
[19] Larsen, A. H. et al. The atomic simulation environment—a python library for working with atoms. J. Phys.: Condens.
Matter 29, 273002 (2017).
[20] Ha, V.-A. & Giustino, F. High-throughput screening of 2d materials identifies p-type monolayer ws2 as potential ultra-high
mobility semiconductor. npj Comput. Mat. 10, 229 (2024).
[21] Saito, R., Dresselhaus, G. & Dresselhaus, M. S. Physical Properties of Carbon Nanotubes (Imperial College Press, 1998).
[22] Qiao, J., Pizzi, G. & Marzari, N. Projectability disentanglement for accurate and automated electronic-structure hamilto-
nians. npj Comput. Mat. 9, 208 (2023).
[23] Vitale, V. et al. Automated high-throughput wannierisation. npj Comput. Mat. 6, 66 (2020).
[24] Luo, Y., Desai, D., Chang, B. K., Park, J. & Bernardi, M. Data-driven compression of electron-phonon interactions. Phys.
Rev. X 14, 021023 (2024).
[25] Damle, A., Lin, L. & Ying, L. Scdm-k: Localized orbitals for solids via selected columns of the density matrix. J. of
Comput. Phys. 334, 1 (2017).


--- Page 34 ---
34
Meta-optimization of maximally-localized Wannier functions
Supplementary File 1
Sabyasachi Tiwari,1, 2 Bruno Cucco,1, 2 Viet-Anh Ha,1, 2 and Feliciano Giustino1, 2
1Oden Institute for Computational Engineering and Sciences,
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
2Department of Physics, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA
Material
Page number
Ag2Br2
1
Ag2F4
2
AgNO2
3
AgO4Cl
4
As4
5
Au2Br2
6
Au2Se2
7
Ba2H2I2
8
Bi2
9
Bi2O2Br2
10
Bi2O2Cl2
11
Bi2O2I2
12
Bi2Se3
13
Bi2Te2S
15
Bi2Te2S
15
Bi2Te2Se
16
Bi2Te3
17
Bi2TeSe2
18
BiTeCl
19
BiTeI
20
C2
21
Ca2H2Br2
22
Ca2H2I2
23
CaI2
24
CdBr2
25
CdCl2
26
CdI2
27
CdOCl
28
Cd
29
Ce2Si2I2
30
CoI2
31
CoO2
32
Co
33
Cr2O2Br2
34
Cr2O2Cl2
35
Cr2S2Br2
36
CrBr2
37
CrI2
38
CrSe2
39
Cu2Br2
40


--- Page 35 ---
35
2
Cu2I2
42
Cu2I2
42
Fe2O2Cl2
43
Fe2O4
44
Fe2S2
45
Fe2Se2
46
Fe2Te2
47
FeBr2
48
FeCl2
49
FeI2
50
Ga2Ge2Te2
51
Ga2S2
52
Ga2Se2
53
Ga2Te2
54
Ga2Te2Cl2
55
Ge2S2
56
Ge2Se2
57
GeI2
59
GeI2
59
Hf2N2Cl2
60
Hf2N2I2
61
Hf3Te2
62
HfS2
63
HfSe2
64
HfTe2
65
HgI2
66
In2O2Br2
67
In2Se2
68
In2Se3
69
K2Ag2Se2
70
K2Tl2O2
71
KTlCl4
72
La2Br2
73
La2Cl2
74
La2PBr2
75
LaBr2
76
LaI2
77
Li2
78
LiAlTe2
79
LiBH4
80
Lu2CCl2
81
Lu2H2Cl2
82
Lu2O2Br2
83
Lu2O2I2
84
MgBr2
85
MgCl2
86
MgI2
87
MnBr2
88
MnCl2
89
MnI2
90


--- Page 36 ---
36
3
Mn
91
Mo2Te4
92
MoS2
93
MoSe2
94
MoTe2
95
Na2PdH2
96
NaCN
97
Nb2CS2
98
NbF4
99
NbS2
101
NbS2
101
NbSe2
103
NbSe2
103
NbTe2
104
NiBr2
105
NiO2
106
OsOCl2
107
P4
108
Pb2Br2F2
109
Pb2Cl2F2
110
Pb2I2F2
111
Pb2O2
112
PbF4
113
PbI2
114
PbTe
115
Pd2Cl4
116
Pd2S4
117
PtO2
118
PtSe2
119
Rh2Te2Cl2
120
RuOCl2
121
Sb2
122
Sb2Te2I2
123
Sb2Te2Se
124
Sb2Te3
125
Sb2TeSe2
127
Sb2TeSe2
127
Sc2CCl2
128
Sc2Cl2
129
Sc2H2Cl2
130
Sc2NCl2
131
Sc2O2Br2
132
Si2H2
133
SiTe2
134
Sn2O2
136
Sn2O2
136
SnF4
137
SnS2
138
SnSe2
139
Sr2Br2F2
140


--- Page 37 ---
37
4
Sr2H2Br2
141
Sr2H2I2
142
Sr2I4
143
Ta2CS2
144
TaS2
145
TaSe2
147
TaSe2
147
Ti2N2Br2
148
Ti2N2Cl2
149
Ti2N2I2
150
Ti2O2Br2
151
Ti2O2Cl2
152
Ti2PTe2
153
TiBr2
154
TiCl2
155
TiS2
156
TiSe2
157
TiTe2
158
Tl2F2
159
Tl2O
160
Tl2S
161
V2O2Br2
162
VBr2
163
VCl2
164
VI2
165
VOBr2
166
VOCl2
167
VS2
168
VSe2
169
VTe2
170
W2N3
171
W2Te4
172
WSe2
173
WTe2
174
Y2C2Br2
175
Y2C2I2
176
Y2Cl2
177
Y2Ga2I2
178
Y2O2Cl2
179
ZnBr2
180
ZnCl2
182
ZnCl2
182
ZnI2
183
Zr2Br2
184
Zr2Cl2
185
Zr2I4
186
Zr2N2Br2
188
Zr2N2Br2
188
Zr2N2Cl2
189
Zr2N2I2
191


--- Page 38 ---
38
5
Zr2N2I2
191
Zr2Si2Te2
192
ZrCl2
193
ZrNBr
194
ZrNCl
195
ZrS2
196
ZrSe2
197
ZrTe2
198
ZrTiSe4
199
ZrTiTe4
200


--- Page 39 ---
39
6
1
Material: Ag2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ag2Br2-8d1e37cd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.346656325933 0.75 0.955708745437
Ag 0.653343674092 0.25 0.044291254563
Br 0.16499993786 0.75 0.074643011433
Br 0.835000062165 0.25 0.925356988567
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9483276003
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9383820684
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2735469759
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ag2Br2-8d1e37cd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.346656325933 0.75 0.955708745437
Ag 0.653343674092 0.25 0.044291254563
Br 0.16499993786 0.75 0.074643011433
Br 0.835000062165 0.25 0.925356988567
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 40 ---
40
7
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9483276003
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9383820684
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2735469759
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 107.868
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.034603085522756
dis_froz_max = 0.5533445018493228
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.14514569256894
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'


--- Page 41 ---
41
8
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Ag: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -7.5482582992785785
/


--- Page 42 ---
42
9
Figure S13: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ag2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ag2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
2
Material: Ag2F4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ag2F4-0e6bc072/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.0 0.0 2e-12
Ag 0.50000000001 0.500000000008 2e-12


--- Page 43 ---
43
10
F 0.208666670263 0.282595009866 0.972262450237
F 0.291333329728 0.782595009857 0.972262450237
F 0.708666670253 0.217404990143 0.027737549761
F 0.791333329737 0.717404990134 0.027737549761
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.2415312183
0.0
3e-16
-4e-16
5.8886547087
4e-16
0.0
0.0
21.4065767397
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ag2F4-0e6bc072/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.0 0.0 2e-12
Ag 0.50000000001 0.500000000008 2e-12
F 0.208666670263 0.282595009866 0.972262450237
F 0.291333329728 0.782595009857 0.972262450237
F 0.708666670253 0.217404990143 0.027737549761
F 0.791333329737 0.717404990134 0.027737549761
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 44 ---
44
11
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.2415312183
0.0
3e-16
-4e-16
5.8886547087
4e-16
0.0
0.0
21.4065767397
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 107.868
amass(2) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.655535219816496
dis_froz_max = -3.1397116632171675
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -23.458647133787515
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ag: l= -5, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'F: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -6.359739229179786
/


--- Page 45 ---
45
12
Figure S14: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ag2F4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ag2F4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 0 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
3
Material: AgNO2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/AgNO2-5306dd58/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.541910072382 0.510782014307 0.98765954048
N 0.488751495733 0.941440411861 0.002996589744
O 0.341136601982 0.059209271106 0.048478153186


--- Page 46 ---
46
13
O 0.61420118007 0.08256830279 0.96086571659
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.391325465332
0.0
2e-16
0.8951243110955315
4.849938680501507
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.135084994982
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/AgNO2-5306dd58/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.541910072382 0.510782014307 0.98765954048
N 0.488751495733 0.941440411861 0.002996589744
O 0.341136601982 0.059209271106 0.048478153186
O 0.61420118007 0.08256830279 0.96086571659
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 47 ---
47
14
3.391325465332
0.0
2e-16
0.8951243110955315
4.849938680501507
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.135084994982
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 107.868
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.725471433486242
dis_froz_max = -0.8774140720991062
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.149244533443536
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Ag: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'N: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2'
dis_froz_min = -10.11117398389843
/


--- Page 48 ---
48
15
Figure S15: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer AgNO2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer AgNO2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
4
Material: AgO4Cl
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/AgO4Cl-4a65934f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.49999999999 0.49999999999 1e-12
O 0.673465421047 0.326534578933 0.039992852648


--- Page 49 ---
49
16
O 0.326534578933 0.673465421047 0.039992852648
O 0.673465421047 0.673465421047 0.960007147354
O 0.326534578953 0.326534578953 0.960007147349
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.8441267659
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.8441267659
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.7521320843
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/AgO4Cl-4a65934f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ag 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.49999999999 0.49999999999 1e-12
O 0.673465421047 0.326534578933 0.039992852648
O 0.326534578933 0.673465421047 0.039992852648
O 0.673465421047 0.673465421047 0.960007147354
O 0.326534578953 0.326534578953 0.960007147349
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 50 ---
50
17
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.8441267659
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.8441267659
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.7521320843
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 107.868
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.658478616355689
dis_froz_max = -1.2203204583056548
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.338036563513157
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ag: l= 3, mr= 3,4,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -2, mr= 1,3'
dis_froz_min = -11.47846933575923
/


--- Page 51 ---
51
18
Figure S16: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer AgO4Cl. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer AgO4Cl over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
5
Material: As4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/As4-f2a2058a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
As 74.922 As_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
As 0.5 0.569865792767 0.946505332931
As 0.5 0.430134207254 0.053494667069
As 0.0 0.930133828742 0.946505328927
As 0.0 0.069866171237 0.053494671073


--- Page 52 ---
52
19
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6938042436
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.7193977781
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.453442519
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/As4-f2a2058a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
As 74.922 As_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
As 0.5 0.569865792767 0.946505332931
As 0.5 0.430134207254 0.053494667069
As 0.0 0.930133828742 0.946505328927
As 0.0 0.069866171237 0.053494671073
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6938042436
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.7193977781
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.453442519


--- Page 53 ---
53
20
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 74.922
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.296948778017294
dis_froz_max = -1.4662493865646313
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -16.027152612593998
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-24'
proj(1) = 'As: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,6'
dis_froz_min = -12.982598713307086
/


--- Page 54 ---
54
21
Figure S17: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer As4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer As4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
6
Material: Au2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Au2Br2-ebd90d82/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Au 196.967 Au_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Au 0.749999616641 0.749999616641 0.0
Au 0.250000383405 0.250000383405 0.0


--- Page 55 ---
55
22
Br 2.4e-11 0.499999999988 0.916762405596
Br 0.499999999988 2.4e-11 0.083237594404
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.263342158351
0.0
3e-16
0.1152103946140156
4.261785180431534
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0358498142
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Au2Br2-ebd90d82/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Au 196.967 Au_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Au 0.749999616641 0.749999616641 0.0
Au 0.250000383405 0.250000383405 0.0
Br 2.4e-11 0.499999999988 0.916762405596
Br 0.499999999988 2.4e-11 0.083237594404
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 56 ---
56
23
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.263342158351
0.0
3e-16
0.1152103946140156
4.261785180431534
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0358498142
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 196.967
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.2398215202797
dis_froz_max = 1.3664994932937953
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.735586887114724
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Au: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.487322613236733
/


--- Page 57 ---
57
24
Figure S18: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Au2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Au2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
7
Material: Au2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Au2Se2-f2bf3d17/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Au 196.967 Au_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Au 0.5 0.608285826109 0.999999951211
Au 0.0 0.108285932287 6.9232e-08


--- Page 58 ---
58
25
Se 0.0 0.435128848482 0.056464896229
Se 0.0 0.781443089473 0.943535083328
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.740108771
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.2960218054
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.5678790387
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Au2Se2-f2bf3d17/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Au 196.967 Au_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Au 0.5 0.608285826109 0.999999951211
Au 0.0 0.108285932287 6.9232e-08
Se 0.0 0.435128848482 0.056464896229
Se 0.0 0.781443089473 0.943535083328
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 59 ---
59
26
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.740108771
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.2960218054
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.5678790387
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 196.967
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.668049013457408
dis_froz_max = -0.22825221884535907
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -21.245335157658943
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Au: l= -3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -12.52758120177839
/


--- Page 60 ---
60
27
Figure S19: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Au2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Au2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 12 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
8
Material: Ba2H2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ba2H2I2-2e181a2a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ba 137.328 Ba_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ba 0.0 0.5 0.055062588698
Ba 0.5 0.0 0.9449374113
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 61 ---
61
28
H 0.5 0.5 1e-12
I 0.5 0.0 0.113957382061
I 0.0 0.5 0.88604261794
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.5961832246
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.5961832246
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.3639234978
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ba2H2I2-2e181a2a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ba 137.328 Ba_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ba 0.0 0.5 0.055062588698
Ba 0.5 0.0 0.9449374113
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12
H 0.5 0.5 1e-12
I 0.5 0.0 0.113957382061
I 0.0 0.5 0.88604261794
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 62 ---
62
29
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.5961832246
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.5961832246
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.3639234978
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 137.328
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.069893117888691
dis_froz_max = -1.170116176962095
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.113844391537228
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Ba: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,6'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 3, mr= 1,7'
proj(3) = 'I: l= -4, mr= 3,5'
dis_froz_min = -10.71522102716171
/


--- Page 63 ---
63
30
Figure S20: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ba2H2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ba2H2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
9
Material: Bi2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2-89a9ace6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.459697977257
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.540302022743
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0


--- Page 64 ---
64
31
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2974468664
0.0
3e-16
-2.148723433200015
3.7216981577000565
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6662769578
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2-89a9ace6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.459697977257
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.540302022743
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2974468664
0.0
3e-16
-2.148723433200015
3.7216981577000565
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6662769578
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw


--- Page 65 ---
65
32
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.587559519178171
dis_froz_max = -0.3697716318927182
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.7627805549952
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -9.430485088267048
/


--- Page 66 ---
66
33
Figure S21: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
10
Material: Bi2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2Br2-9456e585/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.500000000013 0.050048632036
Bi 0.500000000013 0.0 0.949951367967
Br 0.500000000013 0.0 0.112781317778


--- Page 67 ---
67
34
Br 0.0 0.500000000013 0.88721868222
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9323184065
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9323184065
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6724158506
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2Br2-9456e585/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.500000000013 0.050048632036
Bi 0.500000000013 0.0 0.949951367967
Br 0.500000000013 0.0 0.112781317778
Br 0.0 0.500000000013 0.88721868222
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 68 ---
68
35
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9323184065
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9323184065
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6724158506
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.552223668770235
dis_froz_max = -0.8187124823202439
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.99764830447704
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= -5, mr= 4'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 2,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -17.289685337203434
/


--- Page 69 ---
69
36
Figure S22: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
11
Material: Bi2O2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2Cl2-0f240d53/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.500000000013 0.051186668654
Bi 0.500000000013 0.0 0.948813331345
Cl 0.500000000013 0.0 0.106985261628


--- Page 70 ---
70
37
Cl 0.0 0.500000000013 0.893014738375
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8875324013
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8875324013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2772052667
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2Cl2-0f240d53/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.500000000013 0.051186668654
Bi 0.500000000013 0.0 0.948813331345
Cl 0.500000000013 0.0 0.106985261628
Cl 0.0 0.500000000013 0.893014738375
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 71 ---
71
38
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8875324013
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8875324013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2772052667
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.404325802038612
dis_froz_max = -3.0506417323063184
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.91732626316754
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 3, mr= 7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -5, mr= 5'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.215654139440723
/


--- Page 72 ---
72
39
Figure S23: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2O2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2O2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
12
Material: Bi2O2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2I2-000ce1ea/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.5 0.047334015067
Bi 0.5 0.0 0.952665984932
I 0.5 0.0 0.119333324866


--- Page 73 ---
73
40
I 0.0 0.5 0.880666675137
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0267008388
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0267008388
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.2985482455
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2O2I2-000ce1ea/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.5 0.047334015067
Bi 0.5 0.0 0.952665984932
I 0.5 0.0 0.119333324866
I 0.0 0.5 0.880666675137
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 74 ---
74
41
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0267008388
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0267008388
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.2985482455
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.134351642951218
dis_froz_max = -1.192929383233388
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.53617380737888
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 2, mr= 1,3'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6'
dis_froz_min = -9.18424551345227
/


--- Page 75 ---
75
42
Figure S24: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2O2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2O2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
13
Material: Bi2Se3
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Se3-640d941f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927257705989
Bi 1e-11 0.999999999972 0.072742294013
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.131268724209
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999999999


--- Page 76 ---
76
43
Se 1e-11 0.999999999972 0.868731275789
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1571147163
0.0
3e-16
-2.0785573582001935
3.6001669509003924
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.028163862
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Se3-640d941f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927257705989
Bi 1e-11 0.999999999972 0.072742294013
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.131268724209
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999999999
Se 1e-11 0.999999999972 0.868731275789
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 77 ---
77
44
4.1571147163
0.0
3e-16
-2.0785573582001935
3.6001669509003924
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.028163862
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 5.97613794254559
dis_froz_max = -3.2737915134963327
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.258439930647878
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 3,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -16.31774796756652
/


--- Page 78 ---
78
45
Figure S25: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2Se3. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2Se3 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
14
Material: Bi2Te2S
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2S-2489356c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.065511006929
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.934488993071
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.8680226735050001


--- Page 79 ---
79
46
Te 0.0 0.0 0.131977326495
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2535585781
0.0
3e-16
-2.1267792892000634
3.683689785100148
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.1371775344
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2S-2489356c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.065511006929
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.934488993071
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.8680226735050001
Te 0.0 0.0 0.131977326495
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 80 ---
80
47
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2535585781
0.0
3e-16
-2.1267792892000634
3.683689785100148
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.1371775344
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.389585753076927
dis_froz_max = -0.3597960681459287
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.10946812263411
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-25'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,6'
proj(3) = 'S: l= 2, mr= 1,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.555925229949615
/


--- Page 81 ---
81
48
Figure S26: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2Te2S. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2Te2S over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
15
Material: Bi2Te2S
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2S-ace96a17/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.916840359628
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.074901514347
Te 0.0 0.0 0.141797499085


--- Page 82 ---
82
49
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.996911275928
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.869549351012
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2688654517
0.0
3e-16
-2.134432725899812
3.6969459264996485
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.1423439373
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2S-ace96a17/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.916840359628
Bi 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.074901514347
Te 0.0 0.0 0.141797499085
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.996911275928
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.869549351012
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 83 ---
83
50
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2688654517
0.0
3e-16
-2.134432725899812
3.6969459264996485
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.1423439373
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.228492679804303
dis_froz_max = -0.7294583574310738
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.122369838262983
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-25'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(3) = 'S: l= -4, mr= 3,4'
dis_froz_min = -11.404246595900185
/


--- Page 84 ---
84
51
Figure S27: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2Te2S. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2Te2S over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
16
Material: Bi2Te2Se
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2Se-7c8a82a8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.930765126604
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.069234873398
Te 0.0 0.0 0.13447398676


--- Page 85 ---
85
52
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.865526013234
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 4e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3027290791
0.0
3e-16
-2.1513645395998164
3.7262726881997237
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.3357123894
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te2Se-7c8a82a8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.930765126604
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.069234873398
Te 0.0 0.0 0.13447398676
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.865526013234
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 4e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 86 ---
86
53
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3027290791
0.0
3e-16
-2.1513645395998164
3.7262726881997237
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.3357123894
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.824978906558991
dis_froz_max = -0.9057145531415918
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.73057568379082
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= -4, mr= 2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 5,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.465526390149329
/


--- Page 87 ---
87
54
Figure S28: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2Te2Se. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2Te2Se over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
17
Material: Bi2Te3
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te3-8a1489eb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.075125073321
Bi 0.999999999964 0.999999999974 0.924874926681
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.861873116027
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999999999


--- Page 88 ---
88
55
Te 0.999999999964 0.999999999974 0.138126883971
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3900839089
0.0
3e-16
-2.1950419544999864
3.8019241899000398
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.6406742794
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2Te3-8a1489eb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.075125073321
Bi 0.999999999964 0.999999999974 0.924874926681
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.861873116027
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999999999
Te 0.999999999964 0.999999999974 0.138126883971
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 89 ---
89
56
4.3900839089
0.0
3e-16
-2.1950419544999864
3.8019241899000398
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.6406742794
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.21300865689535
dis_froz_max = -2.460899413193692
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.462163730136076
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= -5, mr= 1,2'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.755700651085043
/


--- Page 90 ---
90
57
Figure S29: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2Te3. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2Te3 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
18
Material: Bi2TeSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2TeSe2-ffb825a5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078950408381
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.921049591618
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 3e-12


--- Page 91 ---
91
58
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.864912726804
Se 0.0 0.0 0.135087273194
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2328808458
0.0
3e-16
-2.116440422999847
3.6657823437997874
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.367860391
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Bi2TeSe2-ffb825a5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078950408381
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.921049591618
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 3e-12
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.864912726804
Se 0.0 0.0 0.135087273194
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 92 ---
92
59
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2328808458
0.0
3e-16
-2.116440422999847
3.6657823437997874
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.367860391
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.239956335338029
dis_froz_max = -2.42622012864176
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -18.296583337349727
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= 3, mr= 3,6'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -7.924267409155396
/


--- Page 93 ---
93
60
Figure S30: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Bi2TeSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Bi2TeSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
19
Material: BiTeCl
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/BiTeCl-b80c0334/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.997877993383
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.073776556095
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.928345450522


--- Page 94 ---
94
61
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2798064679
0.0
3e-16
-2.139903234000163
3.706421124400271
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.4743897465
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/BiTeCl-b80c0334/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.997877993383
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.073776556095
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.928345450522
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2798064679
0.0
3e-16
-2.139903234000163
3.706421124400271
3e-16


--- Page 95 ---
95
62
0.0
0.0
23.4743897465
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.402258780671065
dis_froz_max = -1.5926351568923067
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -27.154528099050506
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= -4, mr= 1,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 2,3'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -13.394299798109492
/


--- Page 96 ---
96
63
Figure S31: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer BiTeCl. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer BiTeCl over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
20
Material: BiTeI
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/BiTeI-2b9c407f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.005060890456
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.077134015913
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.917805093631


--- Page 97 ---
97
64
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3906838389
0.0
3e-16
-2.1953419196001054
3.802443744600138
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8973109889
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/BiTeI-2b9c407f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Bi 208.98 Bi_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Bi 0.0 0.0 0.005060890456
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.077134015913
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.917805093631
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3906838389
0.0
3e-16
-2.1953419196001054
3.802443744600138
3e-16


--- Page 98 ---
98
65
0.0
0.0
23.8973109889
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 208.98
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.927086845498094
dis_froz_max = -1.5301782905778407
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.058840424746094
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Bi: l= -5, mr= 2,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 3,4'
proj(3) = 'I: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.042425227392322
/


--- Page 99 ---
99
66
Figure S32: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer BiTeI. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer BiTeI over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
21
Material: C2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/C2-fdcf3c57/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
C 12.011 C_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
C 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5.187e-09
C 0.0 0.0 0.999999994813


--- Page 100 ---
100
67
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.465969748447
0.0
2e-16
-1.2329848741736946
2.135592447096972
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.0000002075
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/C2-fdcf3c57/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
C 12.011 C_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
C 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5.187e-09
C 0.0 0.0 0.999999994813
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.465969748447
0.0
2e-16
-1.2329848741736946
2.135592447096972
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.0000002075


--- Page 101 ---
101
68
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 12.011
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 43.2220934901925
dis_froz_max = 1.025546730386805
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.912587757275247
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-1'
proj(1) = 'C: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -10.91572690381187
/


--- Page 102 ---
102
69
Figure S33: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer C2. Wannier-interpolation of the band structure
of monolayer C2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present method, black
solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over which
optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The k-grid
employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
22
Material: Ca2H2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ca2H2Br2-be4e15ee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.500000000013 0.0 0.948662833079
Ca 0.0 0.500000000013 0.051337166918
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 103 ---
103
70
H 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 1e-12
Br 0.0 0.500000000013 0.894059692784
Br 0.500000000013 0.0 0.105940307217
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8291583253
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8291583253
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2623900008
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ca2H2Br2-be4e15ee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.500000000013 0.0 0.948662833079
Ca 0.0 0.500000000013 0.051337166918
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12
H 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 1e-12
Br 0.0 0.500000000013 0.894059692784
Br 0.500000000013 0.0 0.105940307217
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 104 ---
104
71
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8291583253
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8291583253
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2623900008
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 40.078
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.11506047687196
dis_froz_max = -1.0041138234009361
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.07444789100628
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Ca: l= -5, mr= 1,5,6'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(3) = 'Br: l= 2, mr= 3,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.292895623792766
/


--- Page 105 ---
105
72
Figure S34: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ca2H2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ca2H2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
23
Material: Ca2H2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ca2H2I2-ea27af09/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.0 0.500000000013 0.048388076993
Ca 0.500000000013 0.0 0.951611923009
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 106 ---
106
73
H 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 1e-12
I 0.500000000013 0.0 0.113588656705
I 0.0 0.500000000013 0.886411343292
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9864948799
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9864948799
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4263688575
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ca2H2I2-ea27af09/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.0 0.500000000013 0.048388076993
Ca 0.500000000013 0.0 0.951611923009
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12
H 0.500000000013 0.500000000013 1e-12
I 0.500000000013 0.0 0.113588656705
I 0.0 0.500000000013 0.886411343292
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 107 ---
107
74
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9864948799
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9864948799
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4263688575
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 40.078
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.489007799857806
dis_froz_max = -0.982737848923029
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.46959195813607
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Ca: l= -5, mr= 1,3'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -4, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(3) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -14.680906807957259
/


--- Page 108 ---
108
75
Figure S35: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ca2H2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ca2H2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
24
Material: CaI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CaI2-587dfd82/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076207499783
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.923792500217


--- Page 109 ---
109
76
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.487772689009
0.0
3e-16
-2.2438863444545616
3.886525155073284
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5642492454
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CaI2-587dfd82/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ca 40.078 Ca_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ca 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076207499783
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.923792500217
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.487772689009
0.0
3e-16
-2.2438863444545616
3.886525155073284
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5642492454


--- Page 110 ---
110
77
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 40.078
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.624904421907118
dis_froz_max = -1.2939550000491842
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.72986884984003
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ca: l= -4, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.601014680266225
/


--- Page 111 ---
111
78
Figure S36: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CaI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CaI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
25
Material: CdBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdBr2-86d0155d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999999996
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.069252934203
Br 0.999999999961 0.999999999971 0.930747065801


--- Page 112 ---
112
79
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0074265411
0.0
2e-16
-2.003713270499987
3.4705331884999984
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1765732999
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdBr2-86d0155d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999999996
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.069252934203
Br 0.999999999961 0.999999999971 0.930747065801
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0074265411
0.0
2e-16
-2.003713270499987
3.4705331884999984
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1765732999


--- Page 113 ---
113
80
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 112.414
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.27492069193798
dis_froz_max = -2.224237241626656
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.479400432010905
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Cd: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -12.998436144489277
/


--- Page 114 ---
114
81
Figure S37: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CdBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CdBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
26
Material: CdCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdCl2-2574b30f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999999999
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.936509436561
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.06349056344


--- Page 115 ---
115
82
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.884536183721
0.0
2e-16
-1.9422680920103286
3.3641070170673735
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.8876628797
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdCl2-2574b30f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999999999
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.936509436561
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.06349056344
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.884536183721
0.0
2e-16
-1.9422680920103286
3.3641070170673735
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.8876628797


--- Page 116 ---
116
83
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 112.414
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.091568674118037
dis_froz_max = -1.9842119462116634
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -27.27169043491228
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Cd: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -16.283811171469946
/


--- Page 117 ---
117
84
Figure S38: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CdCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CdCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
27
Material: CdI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdI2-36b834d1/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.074697790562
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.925302209438


--- Page 118 ---
118
85
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2765437739
0.0
3e-16
-2.13827188690023
3.7035955486003704
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.4828509546
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdI2-36b834d1/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.074697790562
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.925302209438
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2765437739
0.0
3e-16
-2.13827188690023
3.7035955486003704
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.4828509546


--- Page 119 ---
119
86
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 112.414
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.700402334698014
dis_froz_max = -2.1279829778241552
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.814388299626906
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Cd: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.99099328396725
/


--- Page 120 ---
120
87
Figure S39: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CdI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CdI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
28
Material: CdOCl
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdOCl-8332db45/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.98441602817


--- Page 121 ---
121
88
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.078928537263
O 0.0 0.0 0.936655434567
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.727295342601
0.0
2e-16
-1.8636476712995496
3.2279324540992826
2e-16
0.0
0.0
16.9516437113
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CdOCl-8332db45/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.98441602817
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.078928537263
O 0.0 0.0 0.936655434567
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 122 ---
122
89
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.727295342601
0.0
2e-16
-1.8636476712995496
3.2279324540992826
2e-16
0.0
0.0
16.9516437113
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 112.414
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 7
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.58528510431001
dis_froz_max = 1.6063072593602148
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.813533471460048
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Cd: l= 3, mr= 3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,5,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 5'
dis_froz_min = -8.43842310241744
/


--- Page 123 ---
123
90
Figure S40: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CdOCl. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CdOCl over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
29
Material: Cd
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cd-OH2-80d52d80/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.0 0.0 2e-12
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.914371794385
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.085628205616


--- Page 124 ---
124
91
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.954450196666
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.045549803331
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5698799123
0.0
2e-16
-1.784939956100017
3.0916066925000067
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.1669234369
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cd-OH2-80d52d80/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cd 112.414 Cd_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cd 0.0 0.0 2e-12
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.914371794385
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.085628205616
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.954450196666
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.045549803331
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 125 ---
125
92
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5698799123
0.0
2e-16
-1.784939956100017
3.0916066925000067
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.1669234369
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 112.414
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 17
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.128664928488115
dis_froz_max = -0.037370392981003864
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.33824646827589
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Cd: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -1, mr= 1,2'
dis_froz_min = -12.806529546040256
/


--- Page 126 ---
126
93
Figure S41: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cd. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cd over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
30
Material: Ce2Si2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ce2Si2I2-81247342/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ce 140.116 Ce_r.upf
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ce 0.0 0.0 0.068278052694


--- Page 127 ---
127
94
Ce 0.0 0.0 0.931721947306
Si 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.001571026761
Si 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.998428973239
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.145064298081
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.854935701919
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1516036348
0.0
3e-16
-2.0758018173998902
3.5953942140998474
3e-16
0.0
0.0
28.2829421851
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ce2Si2I2-81247342/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ce 140.116 Ce_r.upf
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ce 0.0 0.0 0.068278052694
Ce 0.0 0.0 0.931721947306
Si 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.001571026761
Si 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.998428973239
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.145064298081
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.854935701919
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 128 ---
128
95
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1516036348
0.0
3e-16
-2.0758018173998902
3.5953942140998474
3e-16
0.0
0.0
28.2829421851
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 140.116
amass(2) = 28.086
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 21.786981776371213
dis_froz_max = 2.3956820739407885
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.97312389382513
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Ce: l= 2, mr= 2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Si: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,6'
proj(3) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.903705334226576
/


--- Page 129 ---
129
96
Figure S42: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ce2Si2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ce2Si2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 13 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
31
Material: CoI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CoI2-63ba67df/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.499999999997 0.500000000018 0.0
Co 0.0 0.0 0.0


--- Page 130 ---
130
97
I 0.665818828252 5.144e-09 0.081023813079
I 0.165818794619 0.500000005133 0.081023818294
I 0.334181171756 0.999999994878 0.918976186921
I 0.834181205381 0.499999994867 0.918976181706
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.714538308149
0.0
4e-16
3.47039488e-07
3.8711709606319844
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.871847
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CoI2-63ba67df/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.499999999997 0.500000000018 0.0
Co 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.665818828252 5.144e-09 0.081023813079
I 0.165818794619 0.500000005133 0.081023818294
I 0.334181171756 0.999999994878 0.918976186921
I 0.834181205381 0.499999994867 0.918976181706
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 131 ---
131
98
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.714538308149
0.0
4e-16
3.47039488e-07
3.8711709606319844
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.871847
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 58.933
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.432121718812795
dis_froz_max = 2.149765057802865
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.509712441886885
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Co: l= -4, mr= 1'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.423690892668615
/


--- Page 132 ---
132
99
Figure S43: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CoI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CoI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
32
Material: CoO2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CoO2-d418ddcd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.940508326579


--- Page 133 ---
133
100
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.059491673421
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.812579010574
0.0
2e-16
-1.4062895052606
2.4357648733232273
2e-16
0.0
0.0
15.731212625
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CoO2-d418ddcd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.940508326579
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.059491673421
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 134 ---
134
101
2.812579010574
0.0
2e-16
-1.4062895052606
2.4357648733232273
2e-16
0.0
0.0
15.731212625
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 58.933
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 42.50152760096886
dis_froz_max = 2.151079110503101
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -23.2655989807697
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Co: l= -5, mr= 2,4,6'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.127009559361078
/


--- Page 135 ---
135
102
Figure S44: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CoO2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CoO2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
33
Material: Co
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Co-OH2-4acee3e7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.5 0.5 0.0


--- Page 136 ---
136
103
H 0.841567364116 0.841567364116 0.102278206429
H 0.158432635866 0.158432635866 0.897721793571
O 0.832184383571 0.832184383571 0.053514635333
O 0.167815616411 0.167815616411 0.946485364667
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.167076686105
0.0
2e-16
1.6650785741363663
2.6940467846015284
2e-16
0.0
0.0
19.8275244855
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Co-OH2-4acee3e7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Co 58.933 Co_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Co 0.5 0.5 0.0
H 0.841567364116 0.841567364116 0.102278206429
H 0.158432635866 0.158432635866 0.897721793571
O 0.832184383571 0.832184383571 0.053514635333
O 0.167815616411 0.167815616411 0.946485364667
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 137 ---
137
104
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.167076686105
0.0
2e-16
1.6650785741363663
2.6940467846015284
2e-16
0.0
0.0
19.8275244855
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 58.933
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 19
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 22.298398150036466
dis_froz_max = 2.589693811225623
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.608990091324745
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Co: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 5,6'
dis_froz_min = -1.6998960863162917
/


--- Page 138 ---
138
105
Figure S45: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Co. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Co over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
34
Material: Cr2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2O2Br2-6e4a9497/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.25000000003 0.249991534631 0.961702733761


--- Page 139 ---
139
106
Cr 0.74999999997 0.750008465369 0.038297266239
Br 0.74999999997 0.249958593674 0.876947366532
Br 0.25000000003 0.750041406352 0.123052633468
O 0.25000000003 0.749993466127 0.982033163636
O 0.74999999997 0.250006533899 0.017966836364
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.308864134833
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.88155025783
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.9060284476
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2O2Br2-6e4a9497/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.25000000003 0.249991534631 0.961702733761
Cr 0.74999999997 0.750008465369 0.038297266239
Br 0.74999999997 0.249958593674 0.876947366532
Br 0.25000000003 0.750041406352 0.123052633468
O 0.25000000003 0.749993466127 0.982033163636
O 0.74999999997 0.250006533899 0.017966836364
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 140 ---
140
107
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.308864134833
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.88155025783
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.9060284476
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 18.65002873626987
dis_froz_max = 0.9315910630416981
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.825719070655175
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -5, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 2, mr= 3,4'
dis_froz_min = -8.748912991262149
/


--- Page 141 ---
141
108
Figure S46: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cr2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cr2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
35
Material: Cr2O2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2O2Cl2-df4da646/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.75 0.750006034494 0.039512713246


--- Page 142 ---
142
109
Cr 0.25 0.249993965454 0.960487286754
Cl 0.25 0.750017520721 0.118033104366
Cl 0.75 0.249982479254 0.881966895634
O 0.25 0.749995149745 0.981153928471
O 0.75 0.250004850229 0.018846071529
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.210264713428
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.881020430171
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6400675505
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2O2Cl2-df4da646/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.75 0.750006034494 0.039512713246
Cr 0.25 0.249993965454 0.960487286754
Cl 0.25 0.750017520721 0.118033104366
Cl 0.75 0.249982479254 0.881966895634
O 0.25 0.749995149745 0.981153928471
O 0.75 0.250004850229 0.018846071529
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 143 ---
143
110
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.210264713428
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.881020430171
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6400675505
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.77774816247907
dis_froz_max = 0.9925001969427338
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.240362885441343
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -5, mr= 3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -3, mr= 1,2,3'
dis_froz_min = -6.317630998552155
/


--- Page 144 ---
144
111
Figure S47: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cr2O2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cr2O2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
36
Material: Cr2S2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2S2Br2-1ca7a41b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.249999999986 0.749999999995 0.9538256242100001


--- Page 145 ---
145
112
Cr 0.750000000014 0.249999999984 0.04617437579
S 0.249999999986 0.249999999984 0.974623834736
S 0.750000000014 0.749999999995 0.025376165264
Br 0.750000000014 0.749999999995 0.873322775725
Br 0.249999999986 0.249999999984 0.126677224275
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.545839513296
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.735576908276
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.3388464637
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cr2S2Br2-1ca7a41b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.249999999986 0.749999999995 0.9538256242100001
Cr 0.750000000014 0.249999999984 0.04617437579
S 0.249999999986 0.249999999984 0.974623834736
S 0.750000000014 0.749999999995 0.025376165264
Br 0.750000000014 0.749999999995 0.873322775725
Br 0.249999999986 0.249999999984 0.126677224275
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 146 ---
146
113
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.545839513296
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.735576908276
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.3388464637
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 32.066
amass(3) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.10756380430495
dis_froz_max = 1.6873911257000804
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.11195353589913
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.319985727774316
/


--- Page 147 ---
147
114
Figure S48: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cr2S2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cr2S2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
37
Material: CrBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrBr2-eb0c8520/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.749999022963 0.749977304241 0.999992213189
Cr 0.250000611449 0.250022606589 7.866496e-06


--- Page 148 ---
148
115
Br 0.437759331827 0.8150748063 0.914971698708
Br 0.937778133764 0.315035850659 0.914969408537
Br 0.062222002023 0.684964592275 0.085030529276
Br 0.562240697965 0.184924779943 0.085028283794
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.548771593344
0.0
4e-16
0.6284930135196501
4.089583210540372
3e-16
0.0
0.0
17.912429
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrBr2-eb0c8520/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.749999022963 0.749977304241 0.999992213189
Cr 0.250000611449 0.250022606589 7.866496e-06
Br 0.437759331827 0.8150748063 0.914971698708
Br 0.937778133764 0.315035850659 0.914969408537
Br 0.062222002023 0.684964592275 0.085030529276
Br 0.562240697965 0.184924779943 0.085028283794
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 149 ---
149
116
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.548771593344
0.0
4e-16
0.6284930135196501
4.089583210540372
3e-16
0.0
0.0
17.912429
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.759366282222292
dis_froz_max = 0.18001925689858922
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.54855187424777
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -9.519015240040032
/


--- Page 150 ---
150
117
Figure S49: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CrBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CrBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
38
Material: CrI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrI2-ed83a9a9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.507522615293 0.0 0.998154716759
Cr 0.993865330824 0.500000000013 0.001966668923


--- Page 151 ---
151
118
I 0.627143893438 0.500000000013 0.089139516783
I 0.12378919698 0.0 0.08969188101
I 0.37723401103 0.500000000013 0.910520011811
I 0.874203660335 0.0 0.910979261818
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
7.79689012326933
0.0
-0.0047265973434193
-2e-16
3.94158925151
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.320163767425
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrI2-ed83a9a9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.507522615293 0.0 0.998154716759
Cr 0.993865330824 0.500000000013 0.001966668923
I 0.627143893438 0.500000000013 0.089139516783
I 0.12378919698 0.0 0.08969188101
I 0.37723401103 0.500000000013 0.910520011811
I 0.874203660335 0.0 0.910979261818
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 152 ---
152
119
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
7.79689012326933
0.0
-0.0047265973434193
-2e-16
3.94158925151
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.320163767425
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.412906423043257
dis_froz_max = 1.0745278932529185
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.769210727290357
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -5.07277552829019
/


--- Page 153 ---
153
120
Figure S50: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CrI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CrI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
39
Material: CrSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrSe2-62216b81/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.749999959995 0.749999869973 0.0
Cr 0.249999959995 0.249999869973 0.0


--- Page 154 ---
154
121
Se 0.909708574305 0.250000127006 0.912133962151
Se 0.590291285672 0.250000022999 0.087866037849
Se 0.409708622469 0.750000127009 0.912134006025
Se 0.090291237508 0.750000022995 0.087865993975
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.667670849549
0.0
3e-16
6.092291751e-07
3.4547891790749463
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.614264
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/CrSe2-62216b81/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cr 51.996 Cr_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cr 0.749999959995 0.749999869973 0.0
Cr 0.249999959995 0.249999869973 0.0
Se 0.909708574305 0.250000127006 0.912133962151
Se 0.590291285672 0.250000022999 0.087866037849
Se 0.409708622469 0.750000127009 0.912134006025
Se 0.090291237508 0.750000022995 0.087865993975
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 155 ---
155
122
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.667670849549
0.0
3e-16
6.092291751e-07
3.4547891790749463
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.614264
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 51.996
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.006754674818163
dis_froz_max = 0.850362902511252
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.511538271500209
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Cr: l= 3, mr= 4,6'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -3.5058797321821737
/


--- Page 156 ---
156
123
Figure S51: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer CrSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer CrSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
40
Material: Cu2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2Br2-9f3d31a9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cu 0.499999999974 0.499999999974 1e-12
Br 0.499999999974 0.0 0.930298888172
Br 0.0 0.499999999974 0.069701111825


--- Page 157 ---
157
124
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8624237614
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8624237614
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2479556249
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2Br2-9f3d31a9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cu 0.499999999974 0.499999999974 1e-12
Br 0.499999999974 0.0 0.930298888172
Br 0.0 0.499999999974 0.069701111825
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8624237614
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8624237614
2e-16


--- Page 158 ---
158
125
0.0
0.0
23.2479556249
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 63.546
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.706272506221534
dis_froz_max = -1.4237655405981169
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -16.697222680450757
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-9'
proj(1) = 'Cu: l= 2, mr= 3,4'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.93490729575736
/


--- Page 159 ---
159
126
Figure S52: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cu2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cu2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
41
Material: Cu2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2I2-18ab7a38/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.0 0.0 0.970939794469
Cu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.029059781374
I 0.0 0.0 0.07996348212
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.920036942037


--- Page 160 ---
160
127
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.16187536504
0.0
3e-16
-2.080937682520008
3.604289793528899
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.9157613166
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2I2-18ab7a38/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.0 0.0 0.970939794469
Cu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.029059781374
I 0.0 0.0 0.07996348212
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.920036942037
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.16187536504
0.0
3e-16
-2.080937682520008
3.604289793528899
3e-16


--- Page 161 ---
161
128
0.0
0.0
23.9157613166
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 63.546
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.70878889077061
dis_froz_max = 0.48048689883903073
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.27839567057768
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Cu: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.431867728651088
/


--- Page 162 ---
162
129
Figure S53: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cu2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cu2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
42
Material: Cu2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2I2-f26a3e57/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.720061443473 0.279846731587 0.999993514349
Cu 0.279938556526 0.720153268414 6.485651e-06
I 0.2249071137 0.224947990153 0.072114276006
I 0.775092886276 0.775052009823 0.927885723994


--- Page 163 ---
163
130
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.120422302049
0.0
3e-16
-0.4775540093584855
4.092091657585917
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.435727342225
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Cu2I2-f26a3e57/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Cu 63.546 Cu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Cu 0.720061443473 0.279846731587 0.999993514349
Cu 0.279938556526 0.720153268414 6.485651e-06
I 0.2249071137 0.224947990153 0.072114276006
I 0.775092886276 0.775052009823 0.927885723994
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.120422302049
0.0
3e-16
-0.4775540093584855
4.092091657585917
3e-16


--- Page 164 ---
164
131
0.0
0.0
23.435727342225
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 63.546
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.799022118200565
dis_froz_max = -0.7694604940002687
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.54074609530083
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Cu: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -7.366281615397771
/


--- Page 165 ---
165
132
Figure S54: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Cu2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Cu2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
43
Material: Fe2O2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2O2Cl2-c2dd5d25/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.249999920005 0.250001960869 0.043295605604


--- Page 166 ---
166
133
Fe 0.750000079995 0.749997771142 0.9567041973879999
Cl 0.750000079995 0.250001023503 0.120796112078
Cl 0.249999920005 0.749999219696 0.879203972083
O 0.249999920005 0.750000258781 0.016829059615
O 0.750000079995 0.249999766008 0.983171053232
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3083299018
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.7878482117
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.052301
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2O2Cl2-c2dd5d25/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.249999920005 0.250001960869 0.043295605604
Fe 0.750000079995 0.749997771142 0.9567041973879999
Cl 0.750000079995 0.250001023503 0.120796112078
Cl 0.249999920005 0.749999219696 0.879203972083
O 0.249999920005 0.750000258781 0.016829059615
O 0.750000079995 0.249999766008 0.983171053232
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 167 ---
167
134
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3083299018
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.7878482117
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.052301
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.36156851428089
dis_froz_max = 2.587695024075248
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -20.518675213209598
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -7.922814806469433
/


--- Page 168 ---
168
135
Figure S55: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Fe2O2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Fe2O2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
44
Material: Fe2O4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2O4-d86dcd38/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.750000090018 0.749996495729 0.046743145807
Fe 0.249999909982 0.250003327581 0.953256853865


--- Page 169 ---
169
136
O 0.249999909982 0.750001138372 0.97561798627
O 0.750000090018 0.250008134624 0.898653522309
O 0.750000090018 0.249998647952 0.024382084881
O 0.249999909982 0.749991725778 0.101346406869
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.788701558455
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.798058441698
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.007257
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2O4-d86dcd38/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.750000090018 0.749996495729 0.046743145807
Fe 0.249999909982 0.250003327581 0.953256853865
O 0.249999909982 0.750001138372 0.97561798627
O 0.750000090018 0.250008134624 0.898653522309
O 0.750000090018 0.249998647952 0.024382084881
O 0.249999909982 0.749991725778 0.101346406869
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 170 ---
170
137
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.788701558455
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.798058441698
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.007257
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.7554286342925
dis_froz_max = 2.699602041937859
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.471228806786469
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.202681879668365
/


--- Page 171 ---
171
138
Figure S56: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Fe2O4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Fe2O4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
45
Material: Fe2S2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2S2-c43e5cee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 0.0
Fe 0.5 0.5 0.0


--- Page 172 ---
172
139
S 0.0 0.5 0.054452044795
S 0.5 0.0 0.945547955205
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5843513156
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5843513156
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.4716996744
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2S2-c43e5cee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 0.0
Fe 0.5 0.5 0.0
S 0.0 0.5 0.054452044795
S 0.5 0.0 0.945547955205
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 173 ---
173
140
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5843513156
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5843513156
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.4716996744
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.73840418314444
dis_froz_max = 1.8857217834947182
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.146519290542281
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'S: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -5.019605373131271
/


--- Page 174 ---
174
141
Figure S57: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Fe2S2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Fe2S2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
46
Material: Fe2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2Se2-98934fdf/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.24999828335 0.249998282569 6.661e-09
Fe 0.750001719042 0.750001717702 9.619e-09


--- Page 175 ---
175
142
Se 0.250000084652 0.749999913002 0.917538077807
Se 0.749999912928 0.250000086727 0.082461905913
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.704424090275
0.0
2e-16
-2.1176803865e-06
3.704424354272395
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.653132
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2Se2-98934fdf/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.24999828335 0.249998282569 6.661e-09
Fe 0.750001719042 0.750001717702 9.619e-09
Se 0.250000084652 0.749999913002 0.917538077807
Se 0.749999912928 0.250000086727 0.082461905913
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 176 ---
176
143
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.704424090275
0.0
2e-16
-2.1176803865e-06
3.704424354272395
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.653132
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.680313223074677
dis_froz_max = 1.2405268891879953
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.45580954718155
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= -3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -8.828073192833834
/


--- Page 177 ---
177
144
Figure S58: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Fe2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Fe2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
47
Material: Fe2Te2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2Te2-9afadeef/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.750006289648 0.750006289648 0.0
Fe 0.249993710352 0.249993710352 0.0


--- Page 178 ---
178
145
Te 0.250015355098 0.749984644902 0.10186503026
Te 0.749984644902 0.250015355098 0.89813496974
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.611441569776
0.0
2e-16
-4.68030000208e-05
3.6114415694727247
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.5404859644
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Fe2Te2-9afadeef/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.750006289648 0.750006289648 0.0
Fe 0.249993710352 0.249993710352 0.0
Te 0.250015355098 0.749984644902 0.10186503026
Te 0.749984644902 0.250015355098 0.89813496974
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 179 ---
179
146
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.611441569776
0.0
2e-16
-4.68030000208e-05
3.6114415694727247
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.5404859644
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.730824763779768
dis_froz_max = 2.468108877179845
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.100566955729041
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -4.933709324948259
/


--- Page 180 ---
180
147
Figure S59: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Fe2Te2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Fe2Te2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
48
Material: FeBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeBr2-4fe37cfc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.500000000027 2.7e-11 0.0
Br 0.833333333312 0.6666666666666666 0.913331995543
Br 0.166666666635 0.3333333333333333 0.086668004457


--- Page 181 ---
181
148
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.73047673833
0.0
2e-16
-1.865238369094574
3.2306876236613546
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.2985203443
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeBr2-4fe37cfc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.500000000027 2.7e-11 0.0
Br 0.833333333312 0.6666666666666666 0.913331995543
Br 0.166666666635 0.3333333333333333 0.086668004457
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.73047673833
0.0
2e-16
-1.865238369094574
3.2306876236613546
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.2985203443


--- Page 182 ---
182
149
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.13797801994703
dis_froz_max = -2.5439146862866027
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.83634861855867
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= 1, mr= 1,3'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -7.654202938689456
/


--- Page 183 ---
183
150
Figure S60: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer FeBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer FeBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
49
Material: FeCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeCl2-2192f7e0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.053758167172
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.946241832826


--- Page 184 ---
184
151
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4045179942
0.0
2e-16
-1.7022589971001996
2.9483990707003107
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.4605043055
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeCl2-2192f7e0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.053758167172
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.946241832826
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4045179942
0.0
2e-16
-1.7022589971001996
2.9483990707003107
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.4605043055


--- Page 185 ---
185
152
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.955113605420385
dis_froz_max = -2.1509749105433036
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.48109323819908
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= -5, mr= 1,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -8.814657059572996
/


--- Page 186 ---
186
153
Figure S61: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer FeCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer FeCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
50
Material: FeI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeI2-e6c3fcb9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.908253794747
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.091746205253


--- Page 187 ---
187
154
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.019016945661
0.0
2e-16
-2.0095084728913686
3.4805707731474262
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.626751762
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/FeI2-e6c3fcb9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Fe 55.845 Fe_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Fe 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.908253794747
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.091746205253
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.019016945661
0.0
2e-16
-2.0095084728913686
3.4805707731474262
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.626751762


--- Page 188 ---
188
155
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 55.845
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.306092125896603
dis_froz_max = -2.343630094188023
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -15.926320096531267
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Fe: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -10.394357866875444
/


--- Page 189 ---
189
156
Figure S62: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer FeI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer FeI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
51
Material: Ga2Ge2Te2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Ge2Te2-f2d3a206/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.898689386253
Ga 0.0 0.0 0.101310613745
Ge 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.985805597795


--- Page 190 ---
190
157
Ge 0.0 0.0 0.014194402204
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.146437282008
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.853562717994
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1097893551
0.0
3e-16
-2.054894677599907
3.5591819856998894
3e-16
0.0
0.0
28.3570216207
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Ge2Te2-f2d3a206/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.898689386253
Ga 0.0 0.0 0.101310613745
Ge 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.985805597795
Ge 0.0 0.0 0.014194402204
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.146437282008
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.853562717994
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 191 ---
191
158
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1097893551
0.0
3e-16
-2.054894677599907
3.5591819856998894
3e-16
0.0
0.0
28.3570216207
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 69.723
amass(2) = 72.631
amass(3) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.162256873830849
dis_froz_max = -2.995076577220197
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.648564519604474
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-34'
proj(1) = 'Ga: l= -5, mr= 3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Ge: l= 3, mr= 5,7'
proj(3) = 'Te: l= -5, mr= 2,3'
dis_froz_min = -12.718908519291482
/


--- Page 192 ---
192
159
Figure S63: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ga2Ge2Te2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ga2Ge2Te2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is
12 meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
52
Material: Ga2S2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2S2-334e36d5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.050029222632
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.949970728512
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.906152159656
S 2.7e-11 0.0 0.093847889201


--- Page 193 ---
193
160
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6413323098
0.0
2e-16
-1.8206661550001157
3.153486284000177
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.6414209227
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2S2-334e36d5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.050029222632
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.949970728512
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.906152159656
S 2.7e-11 0.0 0.093847889201
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6413323098
0.0
2e-16
-1.8206661550001157
3.153486284000177
2e-16


--- Page 194 ---
194
161
0.0
0.0
24.6414209227
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 69.723
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.111714570834364
dis_froz_max = -2.1386857595468234
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -29.262135617155955
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Ga: l= -3, mr= 3,4'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -16.257942246879917
/


--- Page 195 ---
195
162
Figure S64: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ga2S2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ga2S2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
53
Material: Ga2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Se2-6e158fda/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.950220699515
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049779300485
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9029168336260001
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.097083166374


--- Page 196 ---
196
163
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8179527967
0.0
2e-16
-1.9089763983000267
3.306444112400112
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.7928744463
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Se2-6e158fda/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.950220699515
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049779300485
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9029168336260001
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.097083166374
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8179527967
0.0
2e-16
-1.9089763983000267
3.306444112400112
2e-16


--- Page 197 ---
197
164
0.0
0.0
24.7928744463
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 69.723
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.679356259973591
dis_froz_max = -1.4359538306495958
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.308545102698087
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-23'
proj(1) = 'Ga: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -10.674827241615676
/


--- Page 198 ---
198
165
Figure S65: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ga2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ga2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
54
Material: Ga2Te2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Te2-5bb67fae/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.950747127668
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.049252872332
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.900006420984
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.099993579016


--- Page 199 ---
199
166
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1353505675
0.0
3e-16
-2.0676752837000594
3.5813186450001235
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.0629321763
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Te2-5bb67fae/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.950747127668
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.049252872332
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.900006420984
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.099993579016
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1353505675
0.0
3e-16
-2.0676752837000594
3.5813186450001235
3e-16


--- Page 200 ---
200
167
0.0
0.0
25.0629321763
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 69.723
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.444649304065184
dis_froz_max = -1.2163887918867888
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.804357419280848
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-23'
proj(1) = 'Ga: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.61951093224755
/


--- Page 201 ---
201
168
Figure S66: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ga2Te2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ga2Te2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
55
Material: Ga2Te2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Te2Cl2-57833ac7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.0 0.015338099369 0.036663288449
Ga 0.500000000012 0.51533481014 0.963336994553
Te 0.0 0.232067531845 0.944566271342


--- Page 202 ---
202
169
Te 0.500000000012 0.732072049868 0.055433132452
Cl 0.0 0.239629565571 0.105984192026
Cl 0.500000000012 0.739626964374 0.894016121177
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0811050385
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
5.983590743
4e-16
0.0
0.0
25.0950819527
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ga2Te2Cl2-57833ac7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ga 0.0 0.015338099369 0.036663288449
Ga 0.500000000012 0.51533481014 0.963336994553
Te 0.0 0.232067531845 0.944566271342
Te 0.500000000012 0.732072049868 0.055433132452
Cl 0.0 0.239629565571 0.105984192026
Cl 0.500000000012 0.739626964374 0.894016121177
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 203 ---
203
170
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0811050385
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
5.983590743
4e-16
0.0
0.0
25.0950819527
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 69.723
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.056737841641615
dis_froz_max = -3.113763881572245
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.378638306399633
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-25'
proj(1) = 'Ga: l= 3, mr= 4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -3, mr= 2,3'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -14.428360885293678
/


--- Page 204 ---
204
171
Figure S67: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ga2Te2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ga2Te2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
56
Material: Ge2S2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ge2S2-002458b7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.250000000014 0.876711155904 0.056297745943
Ge 0.750000000041 0.376917309225 0.943704472898
S 0.750000000041 0.499939754166 0.047738486869
S 0.250000000014 0.000136374368 0.95225929429


--- Page 205 ---
205
172
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.677998012873
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.374559144363
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6805798486
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ge2S2-002458b7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.250000000014 0.876711155904 0.056297745943
Ge 0.750000000041 0.376917309225 0.943704472898
S 0.750000000041 0.499939754166 0.047738486869
S 0.250000000014 0.000136374368 0.95225929429
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.677998012873
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.374559144363
3e-16


--- Page 206 ---
206
173
0.0
0.0
22.6805798486
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 72.631
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.270606035005551
dis_froz_max = -0.8015939674757089
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.320766739993918
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Ge: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,6'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,6'
dis_froz_min = -14.601059329004283
/


--- Page 207 ---
207
174
Figure S68: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ge2S2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ge2S2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
57
Material: Ge2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ge2Se2-ec506034/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.250438690691 0.402391727305 0.946921986922
Ge 0.750420722815 0.902391397045 0.053078138004
Se 0.250412150981 0.488402670999 0.057280854273
Se 0.750447655408 0.988402784634 0.942719020801


--- Page 208 ---
208
175
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.937892234956
0.0
2e-16
2.709064521e-07
4.296534050139991
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7941391396
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ge2Se2-ec506034/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.250438690691 0.402391727305 0.946921986922
Ge 0.750420722815 0.902391397045 0.053078138004
Se 0.250412150981 0.488402670999 0.057280854273
Se 0.750447655408 0.988402784634 0.942719020801
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.937892234956
0.0
2e-16
2.709064521e-07
4.296534050139991
3e-16


--- Page 209 ---
209
176
0.0
0.0
22.7941391396
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 72.631
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.469961751377484
dis_froz_max = -1.0784138077963008
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -18.111265292603935
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-24'
proj(1) = 'Ge: l= -4, mr= 4,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -9.013416917271588
/


--- Page 210 ---
210
177
Figure S69: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ge2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ge2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
58
Material: GeI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/GeI2-165aacdb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.0 0.0 1e-12
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.080725154578
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.91927484542


--- Page 211 ---
211
178
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1372123676
0.0
3e-16
-2.0686061838000387
3.5829310113001287
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8713139479
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/GeI2-165aacdb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.0 0.0 1e-12
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.080725154578
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.91927484542
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1372123676
0.0
3e-16
-2.0686061838000387
3.5829310113001287
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8713139479


--- Page 212 ---
212
179
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 72.631
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.825215684945356
dis_froz_max = -0.9590179848258167
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.366725030005004
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Ge: l= 3, mr= 2,3,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -12.729011815932441
/


--- Page 213 ---
213
180
Figure S70: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer GeI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer GeI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
59
Material: GeI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/GeI2-8bc200b4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9250027312569999
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.074997268743


--- Page 214 ---
214
181
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2630842615
0.0
3e-16
-2.13154213070011
3.691939268900228
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5470600462
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/GeI2-8bc200b4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ge 72.631 Ge_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ge 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9250027312569999
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.074997268743
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2630842615
0.0
3e-16
-2.13154213070011
3.691939268900228
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5470600462


--- Page 215 ---
215
182
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 72.631
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.828566099897493
dis_froz_max = 0.7037945401331323
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.69145690259103
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Ge: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.698747514955027
/


--- Page 216 ---
216
183
Figure S71: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer GeI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer GeI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
60
Material: Hf2N2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf2N2Cl2-0737014a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049498303773


--- Page 217 ---
217
184
Hf 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.950501696225
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967235456856
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032764543146
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.881327421879
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.118672578123
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5777572792
0.0
2e-16
-1.7888786395998226
3.0984286922996436
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.2936528976
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf2N2Cl2-0737014a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049498303773
Hf 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.950501696225
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967235456856
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032764543146
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.881327421879
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.118672578123
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 218 ---
218
185
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5777572792
0.0
2e-16
-1.7888786395998226
3.0984286922996436
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.2936528976
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.349379867894339
dis_froz_max = 3.7182091326430107
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.158157902610803
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 3,5,7'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -4.806527707678638
/


--- Page 219 ---
219
186
Figure S72: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Hf2N2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Hf2N2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
61
Material: Hf2N2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf2N2I2-b4a4766b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046801715361


--- Page 220 ---
220
187
Hf 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.953198284639
I 4.3e-11 3.1e-11 0.128757882991
I 4.3e-11 3.1e-11 0.871242117005
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.967777779473
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.03222222053
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6980850072
0.0
2e-16
-1.8490425037999993
3.2026355615999513
2e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0141502904
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf2N2I2-b4a4766b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046801715361
Hf 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.953198284639
I 4.3e-11 3.1e-11 0.128757882991
I 4.3e-11 3.1e-11 0.871242117005
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.967777779473
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.03222222053
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 221 ---
221
188
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6980850072
0.0
2e-16
-1.8490425037999993
3.2026355615999513
2e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0141502904
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.142832430190083
dis_froz_max = 4.25954397744365
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.749111248402933
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -7.769431306202209
/


--- Page 222 ---
222
189
Figure S73: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Hf2N2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Hf2N2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
62
Material: Hf3Te2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf3Te2-42aa6bd8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.934788747224
Hf 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.065211252774


--- Page 223 ---
223
190
Hf 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Te 0.0 0.0 0.882700876319
Te 0.0 0.0 0.117299123683
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.703706750801
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.703706750801
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0297397864
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Hf3Te2-42aa6bd8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.934788747224
Hf 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.065211252774
Hf 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Te 0.0 0.0 0.882700876319
Te 0.0 0.0 0.117299123683
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 224 ---
224
191
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.703706750801
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.703706750801
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0297397864
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 23
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 25.97445972956798
dis_froz_max = 4.391721370568359
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.207883587781643
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.291229112731813
/


--- Page 225 ---
225
192
Figure S74: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Hf3Te2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Hf3Te2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
63
Material: HfS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfS2-c007475c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.0
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.936517352887


--- Page 226 ---
226
193
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.063482647113
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6296494405
0.0
2e-16
-1.8148247205000323
3.1433686225001
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9029363442
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfS2-c007475c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.0
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.936517352887
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.063482647113
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 227 ---
227
194
3.6296494405
0.0
2e-16
-1.8148247205000323
3.1433686225001
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9029363442
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.784287818043936
dis_froz_max = 1.2132285313215396
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.593438297921956
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= -5, mr= 6'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.640183063466983
/


--- Page 228 ---
228
195
Figure S75: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer HfS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer HfS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
64
Material: HfSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfSe2-52dbe490/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.067908518326


--- Page 229 ---
229
196
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.932091481675
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.763956683
0.0
2e-16
-1.8819783413998366
3.259682106299671
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1713329631
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfSe2-52dbe490/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.067908518326
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.932091481675
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 230 ---
230
197
3.763956683
0.0
2e-16
-1.8819783413998366
3.259682106299671
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1713329631
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.81028808341227
dis_froz_max = 0.1375242222306623
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.049535700547985
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.818576966723692
/


--- Page 231 ---
231
198
Figure S76: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer HfSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer HfSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
65
Material: HfTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfTe2-d66f357b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.999999999997
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.92483504749


--- Page 232 ---
232
199
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.075164952512
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.970299106
0.0
2e-16
-1.985149553100055
3.438379886400139
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5627240068
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HfTe2-d66f357b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hf 178.49 Hf_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hf 0.0 0.0 0.999999999997
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.92483504749
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.075164952512
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 233 ---
233
200
3.970299106
0.0
2e-16
-1.985149553100055
3.438379886400139
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5627240068
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 178.49
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.982913754380615
dis_froz_max = 1.8362938471857357
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.366612736400379
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Hf: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.63675540086832
/


--- Page 234 ---
234
201
Figure S77: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer HfTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer HfTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
66
Material: HgI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HgI2-410f6c5c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hg 200.592 Hg_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hg 0.499999999989 0.499999999989 0.0
I 0.499999999989 0.0 0.075600362569


--- Page 235 ---
235
202
I 0.0 0.499999999989 0.924399637431
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.4773308507
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4773308507
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.574393854
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/HgI2-410f6c5c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Hg 200.592 Hg_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Hg 0.499999999989 0.499999999989 0.0
I 0.499999999989 0.0 0.075600362569
I 0.0 0.499999999989 0.924399637431
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 236 ---
236
203
4.4773308507
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4773308507
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.574393854
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 200.592
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.8771148471444
dis_froz_max = -0.8522741407983716
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.05677794655936
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-2'
proj(1) = 'Hg: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -4, mr= 1,3'
dis_froz_min = -4.187034388317553
/


--- Page 237 ---
237
204
Figure S78: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer HgI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer HgI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
67
Material: In2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2O2Br2-f0ecf9a3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.500000000014 0.5 0.961562892587
In 0.0 0.0 0.03843690106
Br 0.0 0.5 0.884240405755


--- Page 238 ---
238
205
Br 0.500000000014 0.0 0.115760071314
O 0.500000000014 0.0 0.987189702853
O 0.0 0.5 0.012810026431
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6423769913
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1380208074
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0506785544
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2O2Br2-f0ecf9a3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.500000000014 0.5 0.961562892587
In 0.0 0.0 0.03843690106
Br 0.0 0.5 0.884240405755
Br 0.500000000014 0.0 0.115760071314
O 0.500000000014 0.0 0.987189702853
O 0.0 0.5 0.012810026431
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 239 ---
239
206
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6423769913
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1380208074
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0506785544
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 114.818
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.108014915845011
dis_froz_max = -0.8706471326197558
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.332061233201955
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'In: l= 3, mr= 5,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -2, mr= 1,2,3'
dis_froz_min = -11.352397687816289
/


--- Page 240 ---
240
207
Figure S79: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer In2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer In2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
68
Material: In2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2Se2-86f0c9f4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.055591877425
In 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.944408122577
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.106354115156
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.893645884842


--- Page 241 ---
241
208
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0659345692
0.0
2e-16
-2.032967284700124
3.521202627200268
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.376677999
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2Se2-86f0c9f4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.055591877425
In 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.944408122577
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.106354115156
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.893645884842
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0659345692
0.0
2e-16
-2.032967284700124
3.521202627200268
2e-16


--- Page 242 ---
242
209
0.0
0.0
25.376677999
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 114.818
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.328577468676268
dis_froz_max = -2.7603272560283036
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.070979070283585
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-23'
proj(1) = 'In: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 3,4'
dis_froz_min = -16.1737657953413
/


--- Page 243 ---
243
210
Figure S80: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer In2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer In2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
69
Material: In2Se3
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2Se3-4bbe4bb6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.344992417378 0.285524120326 0.92575168295
In 0.714475879663 0.655007582591 0.07424831705
Se 0.685058861141 0.636792331181 0.87462108141
Se 0.886142290021 0.113857710041 0.0


--- Page 244 ---
244
211
Se 0.36320766882 0.314941138861 0.12537891859
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.96821412753
0.0
2e-16
1.8552097253326154
3.5078369741138142
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.388166858294
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/In2Se3-4bbe4bb6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
In 114.818 In_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
In 0.344992417378 0.285524120326 0.92575168295
In 0.714475879663 0.655007582591 0.07424831705
Se 0.685058861141 0.636792331181 0.87462108141
Se 0.886142290021 0.113857710041 0.0
Se 0.36320766882 0.314941138861 0.12537891859
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 245 ---
245
212
3.96821412753
0.0
2e-16
1.8552097253326154
3.5078369741138142
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.388166858294
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 114.818
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 6.2961054198499475
dis_froz_max = -2.685658883439124
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.33254884554306
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-28'
proj(1) = 'In: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 2, mr= 1,5'
dis_froz_min = -13.446238526883368
/


--- Page 246 ---
246
213
Figure S81: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer In2Se3. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer In2Se3 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
70
Material: K2Ag2Se2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/K2Ag2Se2-088e95a0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.5 0.0 0.105659671399
K 0.0 0.5 0.8943403286030001
Ag 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 247 ---
247
214
Ag 0.5 0.5 1e-12
Se 0.0 0.5 0.068643591348
Se 0.5 0.0 0.931356408649
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.4627944536
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4627944536
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1901265836
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/K2Ag2Se2-088e95a0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Ag 107.868 Ag_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.5 0.0 0.105659671399
K 0.0 0.5 0.8943403286030001
Ag 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Ag 0.5 0.5 1e-12
Se 0.0 0.5 0.068643591348
Se 0.5 0.0 0.931356408649
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 248 ---
248
215
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.4627944536
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4627944536
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1901265836
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 39.098
amass(2) = 107.868
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.406785355278574
dis_froz_max = 1.5616982107539439
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.694164706484223
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-28'
proj(1) = 'K: l= -5, mr= 4,6'
proj(2) = 'Ag: l= -2, mr= 3'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 1,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.600060429982264
/


--- Page 249 ---
249
216
Figure S82: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer K2Ag2Se2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer K2Ag2Se2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
71
Material: K2Tl2O2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/K2Tl2O2-0d1adfd8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.499999999987 0.825357243367 0.935739537392
K 0.0 0.673517609648 0.064260224039
Tl 0.499999999987 0.157833723715 0.060502961794


--- Page 250 ---
250
217
Tl 0.0 0.341040210209 0.939497233191
O 0.499999999987 0.475528523173 0.004063742854
O 0.0 0.023344806742 0.99593630073
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7933380867
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.227890927
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9293330863
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/K2Tl2O2-0d1adfd8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.499999999987 0.825357243367 0.935739537392
K 0.0 0.673517609648 0.064260224039
Tl 0.499999999987 0.157833723715 0.060502961794
Tl 0.0 0.341040210209 0.939497233191
O 0.499999999987 0.475528523173 0.004063742854
O 0.0 0.023344806742 0.99593630073
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 251 ---
251
218
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7933380867
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.227890927
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9293330863
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 39.098
amass(2) = 204.383
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.11833154245439
dis_froz_max = -0.23575693459261604
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.510754041336785
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-20'
proj(1) = 'K: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Tl: l= 2, mr= 2,4'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.771233909302314
/


--- Page 252 ---
252
219
Figure S83: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer K2Tl2O2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer K2Tl2O2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
72
Material: KTlCl4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/KTlCl4-f9fb4abc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Tl 0.499999999992 0.499999999992 1e-12
Cl 0.770056792472 0.354749986965 0.063117305662


--- Page 253 ---
253
220
Cl 0.645250013035 0.770056792472 0.936882694335
Cl 0.229943207528 0.645250013035 0.063117305662
Cl 0.354749986965 0.229943207528 0.936882694339
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.5773273199
0.0
4e-16
-4e-16
6.5773273199
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7789802121
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/KTlCl4-f9fb4abc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
K 39.098 K_r.upf
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
K 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Tl 0.499999999992 0.499999999992 1e-12
Cl 0.770056792472 0.354749986965 0.063117305662
Cl 0.645250013035 0.770056792472 0.936882694335
Cl 0.229943207528 0.645250013035 0.063117305662
Cl 0.354749986965 0.229943207528 0.936882694339
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 254 ---
254
221
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.5773273199
0.0
4e-16
-4e-16
6.5773273199
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7789802121
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 39.098
amass(2) = 204.383
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.155654645438094
dis_froz_max = -2.8522646064553308
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.504783164868613
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'K: l= -2, mr= 2'
proj(2) = 'Tl: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.655870242016729
/


--- Page 255 ---
255
222
Figure S84: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer KTlCl4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer KTlCl4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 0 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
73
Material: La2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2Br2-3165ccb6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = smearing
smearing = gaussian
degauss = 0.001
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-11
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.942564907639


--- Page 256 ---
256
223
La 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.057435115087
Br 0.0 0.0 0.131805896969
Br 0.0 0.0 0.868194080304
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.134616409249
0.0
3e-16
2.067308195529759
3.5806828400624804
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.036739
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2Br2-3165ccb6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = smearing
smearing = gaussian
degauss = 0.001
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.942564907639
La 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.057435115087
Br 0.0 0.0 0.131805896969
Br 0.0 0.0 0.868194080304
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 257 ---
257
224
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.134616409249
0.0
3e-16
2.067308195529759
3.5806828400624804
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.036739
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 138.905
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.947732616728484
dis_froz_max = 1.8427304716364628
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.690671623816776
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'La: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 4,5'
dis_froz_min = -10.291278444264059
/


--- Page 258 ---
258
225
Figure S85: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer La2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer La2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
74
Material: La2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2Cl2-e5cca531/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.060084779974
La 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939915220026


--- Page 259 ---
259
226
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.8711547781519999
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.128845221848
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.097321512496
0.0
3e-16
-2.048660756265403
3.548384517283968
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.148413177
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2Cl2-e5cca531/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.060084779974
La 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939915220026
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.8711547781519999
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.128845221848
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 260 ---
260
227
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.097321512496
0.0
3e-16
-2.048660756265403
3.548384517283968
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.148413177
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 138.905
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.412914878314663
dis_froz_max = 2.2697961833170606
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.05742980101
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'La: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -3.718307867029039
/


--- Page 261 ---
261
228
Figure S86: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer La2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer La2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
75
Material: La2PBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2PBr2-fa044947/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
P 30.974 P_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.060534666328


--- Page 262 ---
262
229
La 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939465333671
P 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.130038776864
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.869961223139
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2737448732
0.0
3e-16
-2.1368724365998464
3.7011716294998047
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0018107019
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/La2PBr2-fa044947/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
P 30.974 P_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.060534666328
La 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939465333671
P 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.130038776864
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.869961223139
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 263 ---
263
230
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2737448732
0.0
3e-16
-2.1368724365998464
3.7011716294998047
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0018107019
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 138.905
amass(2) = 30.974
amass(3) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.915595435546834
dis_froz_max = 2.406763600322933
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.318742988343022
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'La: l= -5, mr= 2'
proj(2) = 'P: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,7'
proj(3) = 'Br: l= 2, mr= 1,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -0.8503429035210237
/


--- Page 264 ---
264
231
Figure S87: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer La2PBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer La2PBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 11 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
76
Material: LaBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LaBr2-0e5c4017/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 2.8e-11 0.999999999986 0.0
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.09758446557


--- Page 265 ---
265
232
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.90241553443
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.145868154802
0.0
3e-16
2.072934077398996
3.5904271427982946
3e-16
0.0
0.0
19.6714414604
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LaBr2-0e5c4017/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 2.8e-11 0.999999999986 0.0
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.09758446557
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.90241553443
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 266 ---
266
233
4.145868154802
0.0
3e-16
2.072934077398996
3.5904271427982946
3e-16
0.0
0.0
19.6714414604
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 138.905
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 22.732839106600863
dis_froz_max = 2.3888615685825716
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.483564805649534
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'La: l= -5, mr= 2,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -2.6602420467998327
/


--- Page 267 ---
267
234
Figure S88: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer LaBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer LaBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
77
Material: LaI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LaI2-01f3d6ab/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
I 0.5 0.5 0.920268759807


--- Page 268 ---
268
235
I 0.5 0.5 0.079731240194
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9535928548
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9535928548
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8417438351
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LaI2-01f3d6ab/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
La 138.905 La_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
La 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
I 0.5 0.5 0.920268759807
I 0.5 0.5 0.079731240194
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 269 ---
269
236
3.9535928548
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9535928548
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8417438351
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 138.905
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.743621775540873
dis_froz_max = 2.4382885300021613
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.54779053993294
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'La: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -1.8163795441840795
/


--- Page 270 ---
270
237
Figure S89: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer LaI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer LaI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
78
Material: Li2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Li2-OH2-ac92599f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Li 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.999999999999
H 0.0 0.500000000014 0.076423165382


--- Page 271 ---
271
238
H 0.500000000014 0.0 0.92357683462
O 0.0 0.500000000014 0.035555771536
O 0.500000000014 0.0 0.964444228465
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5666949419
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5666949419
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6488030055
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Li2-OH2-ac92599f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Li 0.500000000014 0.500000000014 0.999999999999
H 0.0 0.500000000014 0.076423165382
H 0.500000000014 0.0 0.92357683462
O 0.0 0.500000000014 0.035555771536
O 0.500000000014 0.0 0.964444228465
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 272 ---
272
239
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5666949419
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5666949419
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6488030055
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 6.941
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.78677628347758
dis_froz_max = 1.5920542933898565
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.776893260580902
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-4'
proj(1) = 'Li: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 2, mr= 1,2'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -13.158051737608474
/


--- Page 273 ---
273
240
Figure S90: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Li2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Li2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
79
Material: LiAlTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LiAlTe2-318f57c7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
Al 26.982 Al_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.0 0.0 0.075895942093
Al 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.955766759636
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.059983715007


--- Page 274 ---
274
241
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.908353583265
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3801464577
0.0
3e-16
-2.190073228799869
3.793318104799796
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.4260136812
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LiAlTe2-318f57c7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
Al 26.982 Al_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.0 0.0 0.075895942093
Al 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.955766759636
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.059983715007
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.908353583265
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 275 ---
275
242
4.3801464577
0.0
3e-16
-2.190073228799869
3.793318104799796
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.4260136812
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 6.941
amass(2) = 26.982
amass(3) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.02256775699045
dis_froz_max = -0.9585728464474661
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.92846339575661
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Li: l= 3, mr= 5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Al: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5'
proj(3) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.061287764866703
/


--- Page 276 ---
276
243
Figure S91: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer LiAlTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer LiAlTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
80
Material: LiBH4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LiBH4-bdc1ab51/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
B 10.811 B_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.32668536658 0.67331463342 0.999999999998
B 0.668313497373 0.331686502627 0.999999999998
H 0.86869504812 0.33777708368 0.957596778826


--- Page 277 ---
277
244
H 0.791065525265 0.645990850486 0.021723015078
H 0.354009149514 0.208934474735 0.978276984924
H 0.66222291632 0.13130495188 0.042403221176
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.132356941594
0.0
3e-16
-2.1041710308921777
3.55652051385821
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6224824539
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/LiBH4-bdc1ab51/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Li 6.941 Li_r.upf
B 10.811 B_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Li 0.32668536658 0.67331463342 0.999999999998
B 0.668313497373 0.331686502627 0.999999999998
H 0.86869504812 0.33777708368 0.957596778826
H 0.791065525265 0.645990850486 0.021723015078
H 0.354009149514 0.208934474735 0.978276984924
H 0.66222291632 0.13130495188 0.042403221176
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 278 ---
278
245
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.132356941594
0.0
3e-16
-2.1041710308921777
3.55652051385821
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6224824539
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 6.941
amass(2) = 10.811
amass(3) = 1.008
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.874788328052503
dis_froz_max = 0.2460181778240269
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.343964467976242
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-2'
proj(1) = 'Li: l= -5, mr= 5'
proj(2) = 'B: l= 2, mr= 3'
proj(3) = 'H: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -8.386869544392638
/


--- Page 279 ---
279
246
Figure S92: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer LiBH4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer LiBH4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
81
Material: Lu2CCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2CCl2-842ae805/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.95017994281
Lu 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.04982005719
C 4.4e-11 3.2e-11 0.0


--- Page 280 ---
280
247
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.116426186207
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.883573813793
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.607661935019
0.0
2e-16
-1.803830967509795
3.1243268839473752
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.1040505564
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2CCl2-842ae805/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.95017994281
Lu 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.04982005719
C 4.4e-11 3.2e-11 0.0
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.116426186207
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.883573813793
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 281 ---
281
248
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.607661935019
0.0
2e-16
-1.803830967509795
3.1243268839473752
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.1040505564
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 174.967
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.605691340010843
dis_froz_max = -0.552251242273428
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.3880215969037
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Lu: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.200637122087752
/


--- Page 282 ---
282
249
Figure S93: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Lu2CCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Lu2CCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
82
Material: Lu2H2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2H2Cl2-217e915a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.050549336163


--- Page 283 ---
283
250
Lu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.949450663834
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.968776705216
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.031223294786
Cl 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.115359457654
Cl 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.884640542347
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.647687232928
0.0
2e-16
-1.8238436164642193
3.1589898087918518
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0382889487
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2H2Cl2-217e915a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.050549336163
Lu 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.949450663834
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.968776705216
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.031223294786
Cl 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.115359457654
Cl 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.884640542347
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 284 ---
284
251
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.647687232928
0.0
2e-16
-1.8238436164642193
3.1589898087918518
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.0382889487
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 174.967
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 24.27815873661707
dis_froz_max = 3.8309768697849766
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -10.614692441032734
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Lu: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -5, mr= 2,4,6'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -6.7373147120111145
/


--- Page 285 ---
285
252
Figure S94: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Lu2H2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Lu2H2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
83
Material: Lu2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2O2Br2-540236a7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.5 0.0 0.044489626534
Lu 0.0 0.5 0.955510373466
Br 0.0 0.5 0.110943696815


--- Page 286 ---
286
253
Br 0.5 0.0 0.889056303185
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.5 0.5 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.763502502029
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.763502502029
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4699963194
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2O2Br2-540236a7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.5 0.0 0.044489626534
Lu 0.0 0.5 0.955510373466
Br 0.0 0.5 0.110943696815
Br 0.5 0.0 0.889056303185
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.5 0.5 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 287 ---
287
254
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.763502502029
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.763502502029
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4699963194
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 174.967
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.271985260734432
dis_froz_max = -0.6579206845601893
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.420724700573064
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Lu: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 2,4,5'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.907528088970018
/


--- Page 288 ---
288
255
Figure S95: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Lu2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Lu2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
84
Material: Lu2O2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2O2I2-c29e86bc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.5 0.0 0.041410054539
Lu 0.0 0.5 0.958589945458
I 0.0 0.5 0.115276755039


--- Page 289 ---
289
256
I 0.5 0.0 0.884723244966
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8810234864
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8810234864
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9872252558
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Lu2O2I2-c29e86bc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Lu 174.967 Lu_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Lu 0.5 0.0 0.041410054539
Lu 0.0 0.5 0.958589945458
I 0.0 0.5 0.115276755039
I 0.5 0.0 0.884723244966
O 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
O 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 290 ---
290
257
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8810234864
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8810234864
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9872252558
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 174.967
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.909923651516811
dis_froz_max = -1.3004010451411334
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.989134273707812
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Lu: l= -4, mr= 3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,4,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.900603187086215
/


--- Page 291 ---
291
258
Figure S96: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Lu2O2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Lu2O2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 12 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
85
Material: MgBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgBr2-af39c06c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.0 0.0 0.0
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.065657581533
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.934342418467


--- Page 292 ---
292
259
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.866305189434
0.0
2e-16
-1.9331525947672075
3.348318512869126
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0381639498
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgBr2-af39c06c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.0 0.0 0.0
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.065657581533
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.934342418467
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.866305189434
0.0
2e-16
-1.9331525947672075
3.348318512869126
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0381639498


--- Page 293 ---
293
260
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 24.305
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.172223495243548
dis_froz_max = 0.015051706653171237
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.607731995063826
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Mg: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,7'
dis_froz_min = -15.149655626365432
/


--- Page 294 ---
294
261
Figure S97: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MgBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MgBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
86
Material: MgCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgCl2-36555105/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 3.3158e-08
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.060808844124
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939191122718


--- Page 295 ---
295
262
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.645331576333
0.0
2e-16
-1.8226657882165302
3.1569497502780544
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7262264347
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgCl2-36555105/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 3.3158e-08
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.060808844124
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.939191122718
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.645331576333
0.0
2e-16
-1.8226657882165302
3.1569497502780544
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7262264347


--- Page 296 ---
296
263
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 24.305
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.469613273576737
dis_froz_max = 0.4096781052097187
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.76775373870068
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Mg: l= -3, mr= 3,4'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.553492734335125
/


--- Page 297 ---
297
264
Figure S98: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MgCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MgCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
87
Material: MgI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgI2-65d0664c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.0 0.0 1e-12
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927156047111
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072843952887


--- Page 298 ---
298
265
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1535350098
0.0
3e-16
-2.0767675047997805
3.597066833999593
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3742955077
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MgI2-65d0664c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mg 24.305 Mg_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mg 0.0 0.0 1e-12
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927156047111
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072843952887
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1535350098
0.0
3e-16
-2.0767675047997805
3.597066833999593
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3742955077


--- Page 299 ---
299
266
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 24.305
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.915821629547063
dis_froz_max = -0.9963608122466265
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.995334517983665
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Mg: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -11.404013883917413
/


--- Page 300 ---
300
267
Figure S99: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MgI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MgI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
88
Material: MnBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnBr2-171dc431/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.499999899993 0.999999949994 0.0
Mn 0.999999900003 0.499999949999 0.0


--- Page 301 ---
301
268
Br 0.333150263475 0.499999899974 0.913520828171
Br 0.833150250081 0.999999899974 0.913520821732
Br 0.666849856508 0.49999997005 0.086479171829
Br 0.166849869902 0.99999997005 0.086479178268
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.711676710234
0.0
4e-16
-4.686326444e-07
3.8791403788359715
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.486864
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnBr2-171dc431/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.499999899993 0.999999949994 0.0
Mn 0.999999900003 0.499999949999 0.0
Br 0.333150263475 0.499999899974 0.913520828171
Br 0.833150250081 0.999999899974 0.913520821732
Br 0.666849856508 0.49999997005 0.086479171829
Br 0.166849869902 0.99999997005 0.086479178268
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 302 ---
302
269
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.711676710234
0.0
4e-16
-4.686326444e-07
3.8791403788359715
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.486864
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 54.938
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.169870414209779
dis_froz_max = 2.2515965950150516
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.153444822967263
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Mn: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2'
dis_froz_min = -2.491637138509075
/


--- Page 303 ---
303
270
Figure S100: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MnBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MnBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
89
Material: MnCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnCl2-ce2d27fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.249999960008 0.24999987999 0.0
Mn 0.749999960012 0.749999880001 0.0


--- Page 304 ---
304
271
Cl 0.414665165008 0.749999965036 0.919339434511
Cl 0.914665013702 0.249999965039 0.919339392517
Cl 0.085334835002 0.750000034939 0.080660565489
Cl 0.585334986308 0.250000034936 0.080660607483
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.379195982686
0.0
4e-16
6.25732076e-08
3.7150438244769997
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.262353
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnCl2-ce2d27fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.249999960008 0.24999987999 0.0
Mn 0.749999960012 0.749999880001 0.0
Cl 0.414665165008 0.749999965036 0.919339434511
Cl 0.914665013702 0.249999965039 0.919339392517
Cl 0.085334835002 0.750000034939 0.080660565489
Cl 0.585334986308 0.250000034936 0.080660607483
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 305 ---
305
272
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.379195982686
0.0
4e-16
6.25732076e-08
3.7150438244769997
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.262353
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 54.938
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.980475446529507
dis_froz_max = 4.46053117540747
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.403996181764654
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Mn: l= -5, mr= 1,2'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -3.5751165891288457
/


--- Page 306 ---
306
273
Figure S101: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MnCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MnCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
90
Material: MnI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnI2-26a361a8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.5 0.500000000007 0.0
Mn 0.0 0.0 0.0


--- Page 307 ---
307
274
I 0.499999994987 0.83413645773 0.909213471625
I 0.999999994987 0.334131774168 0.909217286241
I 4.989e-09 0.665868225832 0.090782713759
I 0.500000005013 0.165863542284 0.090786528375
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1294801182
0.0
3e-16
-4e-16
7.2211376865
4e-16
0.0
0.0
18.206416
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MnI2-26a361a8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.5 0.500000000007 0.0
Mn 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.499999994987 0.83413645773 0.909213471625
I 0.999999994987 0.334131774168 0.909217286241
I 4.989e-09 0.665868225832 0.090782713759
I 0.500000005013 0.165863542284 0.090786528375
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 308 ---
308
275
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1294801182
0.0
3e-16
-4e-16
7.2211376865
4e-16
0.0
0.0
18.206416
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 54.938
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.486938258492474
dis_froz_max = 2.9445918046312176
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.504621461458369
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Mn: l= -5, mr= 3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 2,6'
dis_froz_min = -2.5243869818970666
/


--- Page 309 ---
309
276
Figure S102: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MnI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MnI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
91
Material: Mn
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Mn-OH2-46080bdd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 10
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.749999999987 0.250000000005 0.0


--- Page 310 ---
310
277
Mn 0.249999999998 0.75000000001 0.0
H 0.584730153609 0.750000004999 0.898943728594
H 0.084730771365 0.250000005006 0.898947278509
H 0.915269846364 0.74999999501 0.101056271406
H 0.415269228608 0.249999995004 0.101052721491
O 0.08478877219 0.250000000025 0.946908658079
O 0.584785610281 0.750000000034 0.9469129394019999
O 0.415211227791 0.250000000011 0.053091341921
O 0.915214389724 0.750000000012 0.053087060598
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.757393127621
0.0
4e-16
1.64009e-11
3.356228706441
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.1981708844
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Mn-OH2-46080bdd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 10
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mn 54.938 Mn_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mn 0.749999999987 0.250000000005 0.0
Mn 0.249999999998 0.75000000001 0.0
H 0.584730153609 0.750000004999 0.898943728594
H 0.084730771365 0.250000005006 0.898947278509
H 0.915269846364 0.74999999501 0.101056271406
H 0.415269228608 0.249999995004 0.101052721491
O 0.08478877219 0.250000000025 0.946908658079
O 0.584785610281 0.750000000034 0.9469129394019999
O 0.415211227791 0.250000000011 0.053091341921
O 0.915214389724 0.750000000012 0.053087060598
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 311 ---
311
278
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.757393127621
0.0
4e-16
1.64009e-11
3.356228706441
2e-16
0.0
0.0
20.1981708844
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 54.938
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.13337229938318
dis_froz_max = 5.41780411426531
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.965490604086872
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'Mn: l= -1, mr= 1'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -4, mr= 1'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -2.1887043957456287
/


--- Page 312 ---
312
279
Figure S103: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Mn. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Mn over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
92
Material: Mo2Te4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Mo2Te4-ac78d7c8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.750000000014 0.511227677383 0.086048376068
Te 0.250000000014 0.353603680348 0.913951393218


--- Page 313 ---
313
280
Te 0.250000000014 0.001948489722 0.061589329789
Te 0.750000000014 0.86287735105 0.938410803353
Mo 0.750000000014 0.251704274787 0.995997521208
Mo 0.250000000014 0.613109879683 0.004002576364
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4624380306
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.3778258413
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.1947906566
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Mo2Te4-ac78d7c8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.750000000014 0.511227677383 0.086048376068
Te 0.250000000014 0.353603680348 0.913951393218
Te 0.250000000014 0.001948489722 0.061589329789
Te 0.750000000014 0.86287735105 0.938410803353
Mo 0.750000000014 0.251704274787 0.995997521208
Mo 0.250000000014 0.613109879683 0.004002576364
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 314 ---
314
281
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4624380306
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.3778258413
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.1947906566
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 95.95
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.613319772449785
dis_froz_max = 1.522124103152926
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.923156399956435
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-32'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 2,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Mo: l= -5, mr= 1,3'
dis_froz_min = -6.0845871349752185
/


--- Page 315 ---
315
282
Figure S104: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Mo2Te4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Mo2Te4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 12 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
93
Material: MoS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoS2-44a10f28/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999857161
S 0.0 0.0 0.068509583022


--- Page 316 ---
316
283
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931490559817
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.1867374979
0.0
2e-16
-1.5933687488999035
2.7597956284997776
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1892369035
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoS2-44a10f28/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999999857161
S 0.0 0.0 0.068509583022
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931490559817
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 317 ---
317
284
3.1867374979
0.0
2e-16
-1.5933687488999035
2.7597956284997776
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1892369035
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 95.95
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.819699405029503
dis_froz_max = 2.6989082928573134
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.901171494635236
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Mo: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'S: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -9.012338288831955
/


--- Page 318 ---
318
285
Figure S105: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MoS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MoS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
94
Material: MoSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoSe2-a6703220/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 3.0885e-08
Se 0.99999999997 0.0 0.071546810453
Se 0.99999999997 0.0 0.928453158662


--- Page 319 ---
319
286
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3157939819
0.0
2e-16
-1.657896990900254
2.8715618220003982
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3586496233
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoSe2-a6703220/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 3.0885e-08
Se 0.99999999997 0.0 0.071546810453
Se 0.99999999997 0.0 0.928453158662
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3157939819
0.0
2e-16
-1.657896990900254
2.8715618220003982
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3586496233


--- Page 320 ---
320
287
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 95.95
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.235471823689405
dis_froz_max = -2.0412882548686095
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.83977929602345
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Mo: l= -3, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -12.970719865371294
/


--- Page 321 ---
321
288
Figure S106: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MoSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MoSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
95
Material: MoTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoTe2-5b9f3963/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.923330343494
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076669600229
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5.6277e-08


--- Page 322 ---
322
289
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5653929348
0.0
2e-16
-1.7826964673999741
3.087720855999977
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6401794724
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/MoTe2-5b9f3963/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Mo 95.95 Mo_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.923330343494
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076669600229
Mo 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5.6277e-08
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5653929348
0.0
2e-16
-1.7826964673999741
3.087720855999977
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6401794724


--- Page 323 ---
323
290
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 95.95
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 17
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.005708701309732
dis_froz_max = -1.265561033280842
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.671454460694036
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Mo: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.017576456102086
/


--- Page 324 ---
324
291
Figure S107: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer MoTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer MoTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
96
Material: Na2PdH2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Na2PdH2-36b23e97/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Na 22.99 Na_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Na 0.499999999986 0.499999999986 0.931956882087


--- Page 325 ---
325
292
Na 0.499999999986 0.499999999986 0.068043117914
H 0.0 0.0 0.072751659389
H 0.0 0.0 0.927248340612
Pd 0.0 0.0 0.999999999998
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5029596269
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5029596269
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3782523071
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Na2PdH2-36b23e97/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Na 22.99 Na_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Na 0.499999999986 0.499999999986 0.931956882087
Na 0.499999999986 0.499999999986 0.068043117914
H 0.0 0.0 0.072751659389
H 0.0 0.0 0.927248340612
Pd 0.0 0.0 0.999999999998
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 326 ---
326
293
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5029596269
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.5029596269
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3782523071
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 22.99
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 106.42
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.61517248820069
dis_froz_max = 1.037100493868314
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.413760289600354
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Na: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Pd: l= 2, mr= 2,3'
dis_froz_min = -8.03188296319619
/


--- Page 327 ---
327
294
Figure S108: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Na2PdH2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Na2PdH2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is
10 meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
97
Material: NaCN
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NaCN-92e02622/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Na 22.99 Na_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Na 0.0 0.285917300329 0.0
C 0.5 0.88200967746 0.0
N 0.5 0.632732176254 0.0


--- Page 328 ---
328
295
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.564393628
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.7173301201
3e-16
0.0
0.0
20.0
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NaCN-92e02622/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Na 22.99 Na_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Na 0.0 0.285917300329 0.0
C 0.5 0.88200967746 0.0
N 0.5 0.632732176254 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.564393628
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.7173301201
3e-16


--- Page 329 ---
329
296
0.0
0.0
20.0
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 22.99
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.594661520654103
dis_froz_max = 1.356558345174279
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.444833133976893
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-5'
proj(1) = 'Na: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 1, mr= 1,3'
dis_froz_min = -10.552163176512199
/


--- Page 330 ---
330
297
Figure S109: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NaCN. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NaCN over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
98
Material: Nb2CS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Nb2CS2-bc8ecf70/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.953462704255


--- Page 331 ---
331
298
Nb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.046537295747
C 0.0 0.0 1e-12
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.889613318026
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.110386681972
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2807541079
0.0
2e-16
-1.6403770540002074
2.8412164011003456
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6593016153
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Nb2CS2-bc8ecf70/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.953462704255
Nb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.046537295747
C 0.0 0.0 1e-12
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.889613318026
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.110386681972
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 332 ---
332
299
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2807541079
0.0
2e-16
-1.6403770540002074
2.8412164011003456
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6593016153
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 21
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.611813729056228
dis_froz_max = 1.839356619192186
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.81104511949404
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 3,6,7'
proj(3) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -5.414480160589873
/


--- Page 333 ---
333
300
Figure S110: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Nb2CS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Nb2CS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
99
Material: NbF4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbF4-97ae2fae/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.078903779092


--- Page 334 ---
334
301
F 0.5 0.5 0.921096220911
F 0.5 0.0 0.999999999999
F 0.0 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1247060298
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1247060298
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.7763570995
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbF4-97ae2fae/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.078903779092
F 0.5 0.5 0.921096220911
F 0.5 0.0 0.999999999999
F 0.0 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 335 ---
335
302
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1247060298
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1247060298
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.7763570995
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 21
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.151403423303226
dis_froz_max = 0.3833787693560655
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -22.835864944374016
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'F: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -13.461929905564741
/


--- Page 336 ---
336
303
Figure S111: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbF4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbF4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 0 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
100
Material: NbS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbS2-6607ba8d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.919840122761 0.919840124457 0.0
S 0.253179938606 0.253179937764 0.932380515203


--- Page 337 ---
337
304
S 0.253179938606 0.253179937764 0.067619484797
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.342599948557
0.0
2e-16
1.6714210798094746
2.8947065631891684
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1432690858
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbS2-6607ba8d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.919840122761 0.919840124457 0.0
S 0.253179938606 0.253179937764 0.932380515203
S 0.253179938606 0.253179937764 0.067619484797
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 338 ---
338
305
3.342599948557
0.0
2e-16
1.6714210798094746
2.8947065631891684
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1432690858
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 28.66435121151324
dis_froz_max = -0.6870025123415484
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -19.87714584026958
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'S: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -5.724140057456093
/


--- Page 339 ---
339
306
Figure S112: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
101
Material: NbS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbS2-7f4de45e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 1e-12
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.066798138043


--- Page 340 ---
340
307
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933201861955
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3732986197
0.0
2e-16
-1.6866493097998687
2.9213622991997106
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1024431539
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbS2-7f4de45e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 1e-12
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.066798138043
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933201861955
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 341 ---
341
308
3.3732986197
0.0
2e-16
-1.6866493097998687
2.9213622991997106
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1024431539
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.074138745838745
dis_froz_max = 0.8509341829702572
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.743456597510804
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= 2, mr= 3,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -9.843274322774633
/


--- Page 342 ---
342
309
Figure S113: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
102
Material: NbSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbSe2-53c8feaa/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072029167936


--- Page 343 ---
343
310
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.927970832064
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4660841469
0.0
2e-16
-1.7330420733999965
3.0017169228999383
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3599289458
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbSe2-53c8feaa/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072029167936
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.927970832064
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 344 ---
344
311
3.4660841469
0.0
2e-16
-1.7330420733999965
3.0017169228999383
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3599289458
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 29.533048869034786
dis_froz_max = 4.5424955528213085
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.134978639503414
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.182707969354684
/


--- Page 345 ---
345
312
Figure S114: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
103
Material: NbSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbSe2-aba7c72f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.928293975743


--- Page 346 ---
346
313
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.071706024258
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4756827071
0.0
2e-16
-1.7378413533997787
3.0100295198995766
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3579401799
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbSe2-aba7c72f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.928293975743
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.071706024258
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 347 ---
347
314
3.4756827071
0.0
2e-16
-1.7378413533997787
3.0100295198995766
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3579401799
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 24.33317895531972
dis_froz_max = 2.156919282875384
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.83461941354868
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -5.338016830607749
/


--- Page 348 ---
348
315
Figure S115: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
104
Material: NbTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbTe2-8e69589f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078465853679


--- Page 349 ---
349
316
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9215341463210001
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.669860294
0.0
2e-16
-1.8349301471002002
3.178192243000294
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6602884458
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NbTe2-8e69589f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Nb 92.906 Nb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Nb 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078465853679
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9215341463210001
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 350 ---
350
317
3.669860294
0.0
2e-16
-1.8349301471002002
3.178192243000294
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6602884458
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 92.906
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 24.325392344736347
dis_froz_max = 2.2167569511953573
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.503111080894671
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Nb: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -9.286645985736612
/


--- Page 351 ---
351
318
Figure S116: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NbTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NbTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
105
Material: NiBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NiBr2-9000c8b9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ni 58.693 Ni_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ni 6e-12 0.500000000022 0.0
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.166666495458 0.920169757338


--- Page 352 ---
352
319
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.833333504542 0.079830242662
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.680229641614
0.0
2e-16
-1.8401129544506767
3.1871712838120567
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.6742564869
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NiBr2-9000c8b9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ni 58.693 Ni_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ni 6e-12 0.500000000022 0.0
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.166666495458 0.920169757338
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.833333504542 0.079830242662
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 353 ---
353
320
3.680229641614
0.0
2e-16
-1.8401129544506767
3.1871712838120567
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.6742564869
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 58.693
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.490548229641842
dis_froz_max = 0.9068666861626942
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.276641806763926
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ni: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -5.224470734743861
/


--- Page 354 ---
354
321
Figure S117: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NiBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NiBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
106
Material: NiO2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NiO2-4a9d8f87/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ni 58.693 Ni_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ni 0.0 0.0 2e-12
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.957015906611
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.042984093388


--- Page 355 ---
355
322
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.8242033451
0.0
2e-16
-1.412101672500161
2.4458318423002594
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.8824530565
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/NiO2-4a9d8f87/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ni 58.693 Ni_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ni 0.0 0.0 2e-12
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.957015906611
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.042984093388
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.8242033451
0.0
2e-16
-1.412101672500161
2.4458318423002594
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.8824530565


--- Page 356 ---
356
323
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 58.693
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 28.95883047488703
dis_froz_max = -1.0021052158480215
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.750798146735455
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Ni: l= -5, mr= 4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.467039824385607
/


--- Page 357 ---
357
324
Figure S118: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer NiO2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer NiO2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
107
Material: OsOCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/OsOCl2-4b18a71b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Os 190.23 Os_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Os 0.0 0.0 0.0


--- Page 358 ---
358
325
Cl 0.499999999972 0.0 0.9315108512
Cl 0.499999999972 0.0 0.0684891488
O 0.0 0.499999999987 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6186081982
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.7165946079
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1396665584
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/OsOCl2-4b18a71b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.1
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Os 190.23 Os_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Os 0.0 0.0 0.0
Cl 0.499999999972 0.0 0.9315108512
Cl 0.499999999972 0.0 0.0684891488
O 0.0 0.499999999987 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 359 ---
359
326
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6186081982
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.7165946079
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1396665584
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 190.23
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.621285453997501
dis_froz_max = -0.586219378340374
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.596294277435867
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Os: l= 3, mr= 4,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 4,6,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -10.905735349600143
/


--- Page 360 ---
360
327
Figure S119: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer OsOCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer OsOCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
108
Material: P4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/P4-af33e4ee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
P 30.974 P_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
P 0.5 0.911581322154 0.952437392875
P 0.5 0.088418677846 0.047562607123
P 0.0 0.588418622269 0.952437392663
P 0.0 0.411581377731 0.047562607339


--- Page 361 ---
361
328
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.305465699
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.6143426699
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.1833103733
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/P4-af33e4ee/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
P 30.974 P_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
P 0.5 0.911581322154 0.952437392875
P 0.5 0.088418677846 0.047562607123
P 0.0 0.588418622269 0.952437392663
P 0.0 0.411581377731 0.047562607339
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.305465699
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.6143426699
3e-16
0.0
0.0
22.1833103733


--- Page 362 ---
362
329
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 30.974
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.900037563297918
dis_froz_max = -2.2320493842143003
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.215366985211634
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-4'
proj(1) = 'P: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -11.716413308242776
/


--- Page 363 ---
363
330
Figure S120: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer P4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer P4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
109
Material: Pb2Br2F2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2Br2F2-52ff1ba3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.5 0.06040091454
Pb 0.5 0.0 0.939599085463
Br 0.5 0.0 0.114767563232


--- Page 364 ---
364
331
Br 0.0 0.5 0.885232436767
F 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1070895444
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1070895444
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4031884696
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2Br2F2-52ff1ba3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.5 0.06040091454
Pb 0.5 0.0 0.939599085463
Br 0.5 0.0 0.114767563232
Br 0.0 0.5 0.885232436767
F 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 365 ---
365
332
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1070895444
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1070895444
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4031884696
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.446184718303494
dis_froz_max = 2.031883261343465
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.614778511733096
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'F: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -10.782137227313232
/


--- Page 366 ---
366
333
Figure S121: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pb2Br2F2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pb2Br2F2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
110
Material: Pb2Cl2F2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2Cl2F2-876eee87/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.500000000012 0.062065554114
Pb 0.500000000012 0.0 0.937934445886
Cl 0.500000000012 0.0 0.108690635592


--- Page 367 ---
367
334
Cl 0.0 0.500000000012 0.891309364408
F 0.500000000012 0.500000000012 0.0
F 0.0 0.0 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0271991521
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0271991521
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1594826758
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2Cl2F2-876eee87/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.500000000012 0.062065554114
Pb 0.500000000012 0.0 0.937934445886
Cl 0.500000000012 0.0 0.108690635592
Cl 0.0 0.500000000012 0.891309364408
F 0.500000000012 0.500000000012 0.0
F 0.0 0.0 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 368 ---
368
335
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0271991521
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0271991521
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1594826758
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.124100500988582
dis_froz_max = -1.0612776366096268
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.87797784540621
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= 3, mr= 3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,7'
proj(3) = 'F: l= -5, mr= 1,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -10.898061878501336
/


--- Page 369 ---
369
336
Figure S122: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pb2Cl2F2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pb2Cl2F2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
111
Material: Pb2I2F2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2I2F2-250eb10e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.499999999988 0.057444293137
Pb 0.499999999988 0.0 0.942555706861
I 0.499999999988 0.0 0.121001747593


--- Page 370 ---
370
337
I 0.0 0.499999999988 0.878998252408
F 0.499999999988 0.499999999988 1e-12
F 0.0 0.0 1e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2074081901
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.2074081901
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.067081427
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2I2F2-250eb10e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.499999999988 0.057444293137
Pb 0.499999999988 0.0 0.942555706861
I 0.499999999988 0.0 0.121001747593
I 0.0 0.499999999988 0.878998252408
F 0.499999999988 0.499999999988 1e-12
F 0.0 0.0 1e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 371 ---
371
338
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2074081901
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.2074081901
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.067081427
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.353933388194775
dis_froz_max = -1.6790479412565444
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -27.169866486797595
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= -5, mr= 2,4'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,6'
proj(3) = 'F: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -16.046577904031412
/


--- Page 372 ---
372
339
Figure S123: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pb2I2F2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pb2I2F2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
112
Material: Pb2O2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2O2-39ae46a4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.500000000025 0.05334882844
Pb 0.500000000025 0.0 0.94665117156
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.500000000025 0.500000000025 0.0


--- Page 373 ---
373
340
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0633545946
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0633545946
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.3993742628
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pb2O2-39ae46a4/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.0 0.500000000025 0.05334882844
Pb 0.500000000025 0.0 0.94665117156
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.500000000025 0.500000000025 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0633545946
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0633545946
2e-16


--- Page 374 ---
374
341
0.0
0.0
22.3993742628
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.68297817437251
dis_froz_max = 0.9549680208882423
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -18.752411857333907
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.500150867188852
/


--- Page 375 ---
375
342
Figure S124: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pb2O2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pb2O2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
113
Material: PbF4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbF4-f6e7170b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.917526718335
F 0.5 0.5 0.082473281667
F 0.0 0.5 0.999999999999


--- Page 376 ---
376
343
F 0.5 0.0 0.999999999999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.4068812504
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4068812504
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0751078051
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbF4-f6e7170b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.5 0.917526718335
F 0.5 0.5 0.082473281667
F 0.0 0.5 0.999999999999
F 0.5 0.0 0.999999999999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 377 ---
377
344
4.4068812504
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.4068812504
3e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0751078051
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 2.9513385697988292
dis_froz_max = -2.124201584031279
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -32.49780020010648
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-9'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'F: l= 3, mr= 2,4'
dis_froz_min = -13.81637947808155
/


--- Page 378 ---
378
345
Figure S125: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer PbF4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer PbF4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
114
Material: PbI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbI2-1a4e4cc5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.999999999978 0.0 0.999999999999
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078521346664
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9214786533379999


--- Page 379 ---
379
346
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.6448345541
0.0
3e-16
-2.322417277099933
4.022544720199846
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.9017857947
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbI2-1a4e4cc5/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pb 0.999999999978 0.0 0.999999999999
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.078521346664
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9214786533379999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.6448345541
0.0
3e-16
-2.322417277099933
4.022544720199846
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.9017857947


--- Page 380 ---
380
347
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 207.2
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.514006664636366
dis_froz_max = -0.30176746307349234
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.36138451815053
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Pb: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.860034348042893
/


--- Page 381 ---
381
348
Figure S126: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer PbI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer PbI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
115
Material: PbTe
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbTe-9fa77217/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.040398765279
Pb 0.0 0.0 0.959601234721
K_POINTS automatic


--- Page 382 ---
382
349
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.260969394
0.0
3e-16
-2.1304846970001976
3.6901077400003683
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6139750069
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PbTe-9fa77217/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Pb 207.2 Pb_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.040398765279
Pb 0.0 0.0 0.959601234721
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.260969394
0.0
3e-16
-2.1304846970001976
3.6901077400003683
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.6139750069
---
epw1.in ---


--- Page 383 ---
383
350
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 207.2
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 22.142143882227188
dis_froz_max = 0.37076171681917014
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.94921646860783
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Pb: l= 3, mr= 1,2'
dis_froz_min = -8.701261463599746
/


--- Page 384 ---
384
351
Figure S127: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer PbTe. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer PbTe over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
116
Material: Pd2Cl4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pd2Cl4-c696e5d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pd 3.0250104e-05 0.237934313575 1.014476e-06
Pd 0.500031042931 0.737905922752 0.999998986563
Cl 0.678707280869 0.020081476849 0.943552869112
Cl 0.821266301413 0.520037154479 0.943547156284


--- Page 385 ---
385
352
Cl 0.17872379125 0.955759541648 0.05644774381
Cl 0.321275025048 0.455796977633 0.056452229755
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.248971329306
0.0
3e-16
-4.07352165378e-05
6.3273815989198745
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6937055919
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pd2Cl4-c696e5d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pd 3.0250104e-05 0.237934313575 1.014476e-06
Pd 0.500031042931 0.737905922752 0.999998986563
Cl 0.678707280869 0.020081476849 0.943552869112
Cl 0.821266301413 0.520037154479 0.943547156284
Cl 0.17872379125 0.955759541648 0.05644774381
Cl 0.321275025048 0.455796977633 0.056452229755
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 386 ---
386
353
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.248971329306
0.0
3e-16
-4.07352165378e-05
6.3273815989198745
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6937055919
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 106.42
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.893471556376664
dis_froz_max = -2.538683927352756
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.30507017202839
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Pd: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -13.243472838908168
/


--- Page 387 ---
387
354
Figure S128: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pd2Cl4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pd2Cl4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
117
Material: Pd2S4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pd2S4-40b347fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pd 0.499999999991 0.0 0.0
Pd 0.0 0.5 0.0
S 0.104416383343 0.111520232948 0.969969858777
S 0.604416383334 0.388479767052 0.030030141223


--- Page 388 ---
388
355
S 0.895583616657 0.888479767052 0.030030141223
S 0.395583616648 0.611520232948 0.969969858777
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.4628581755
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
5.5673079556
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.2451023148
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Pd2S4-40b347fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pd 106.42 Pd_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pd 0.499999999991 0.0 0.0
Pd 0.0 0.5 0.0
S 0.104416383343 0.111520232948 0.969969858777
S 0.604416383334 0.388479767052 0.030030141223
S 0.895583616657 0.888479767052 0.030030141223
S 0.395583616648 0.611520232948 0.969969858777
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 389 ---
389
356
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.4628581755
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
5.5673079556
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.2451023148
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 106.42
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.25084551245901
dis_froz_max = -2.8829773380195016
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.154957619513272
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'Pd: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -14.003328229295619
/


--- Page 390 ---
390
357
Figure S129: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Pd2S4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Pd2S4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
118
Material: PtO2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PtO2-e12d44ef/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pt 195.085 Pt_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pt 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.043137030528
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.956862969472


--- Page 391 ---
391
358
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.1500880387
0.0
2e-16
-1.5750440194002346
2.7280562657004297
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.8927076652
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PtO2-e12d44ef/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pt 195.085 Pt_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pt 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.043137030528
O 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.956862969472
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.1500880387
0.0
2e-16
-1.5750440194002346
2.7280562657004297
2e-16
0.0
0.0
21.8927076652


--- Page 392 ---
392
359
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 195.085
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 18.418099608431245
dis_froz_max = -1.2609216176412998
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -28.44984261006378
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-8'
proj(1) = 'Pt: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,7'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -16.615272764698798
/


--- Page 393 ---
393
360
Figure S130: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer PtO2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer PtO2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
119
Material: PtSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PtSe2-2ecfdaa7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pt 195.085 Pt_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pt 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.059088825835
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.940911174167


--- Page 394 ---
394
361
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.712039942754
0.0
2e-16
-1.8560199713268493
3.2147208903534024
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.556934758499
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/PtSe2-2ecfdaa7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Pt 195.085 Pt_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Pt 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.059088825835
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.940911174167
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.712039942754
0.0
2e-16
-1.8560199713268493
3.2147208903534024
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.556934758499


--- Page 395 ---
395
362
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 195.085
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.309349592941519
dis_froz_max = -1.4890177451699262
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -25.34509070218621
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Pt: l= -5, mr= 2,3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.11078558759354
/


--- Page 396 ---
396
363
Figure S131: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer PtSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer PtSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
120
Material: Rh2Te2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Rh2Te2Cl2-ba07eb34/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Rh 102.906 Rh_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.5 0.742626231793 0.940461095771
Te 0.0 0.89524542467 0.059538726258
Rh 0.5 0.07793682575 0.000413389397


--- Page 397 ---
397
364
Rh 0.0 0.559939614635 0.999585814975
Cl 0.5 0.394013114794 0.061756994218
Cl 0.0 0.243852078447 0.938243979381
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6841743102
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.6010273558
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6548037443
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Rh2Te2Cl2-ba07eb34/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Rh 102.906 Rh_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.5 0.742626231793 0.940461095771
Te 0.0 0.89524542467 0.059538726258
Rh 0.5 0.07793682575 0.000413389397
Rh 0.0 0.559939614635 0.999585814975
Cl 0.5 0.394013114794 0.061756994218
Cl 0.0 0.243852078447 0.938243979381
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 398 ---
398
365
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6841743102
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.6010273558
4e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6548037443
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 102.906
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 6.98880296532379
dis_froz_max = -1.8987765155582919
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.212645458316484
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-22'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= -2, mr= 1,2'
proj(2) = 'Rh: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= -3, mr= 1,2'
dis_froz_min = -7.850101243973987
/


--- Page 399 ---
399
366
Figure S132: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Rh2Te2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Rh2Te2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
121
Material: RuOCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/RuOCl2-20528d22/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ru 101.07 Ru_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ru 0.5 0.500000000014 1e-12


--- Page 400 ---
400
367
Cl 0.0 0.500000000014 0.930386233123
Cl 0.0 0.500000000014 0.069613766874
O 0.5 0.0 1e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5728623174
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.6793641367
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2006600697
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/RuOCl2-20528d22/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ru 101.07 Ru_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ru 0.5 0.500000000014 1e-12
Cl 0.0 0.500000000014 0.930386233123
Cl 0.0 0.500000000014 0.069613766874
O 0.5 0.0 1e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 401 ---
401
368
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5728623174
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.6793641367
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2006600697
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 101.07
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.868461159111412
dis_froz_max = 1.6809501426328777
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -22.271573899825995
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Ru: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -5, mr= 1,2,5'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -5.247540353147592
/


--- Page 402 ---
402
369
Figure S133: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer RuOCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer RuOCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
122
Material: Sb2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2-6ba9c022/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.961755953534
Sb 0.999999999962 0.999999999972 0.038244046466
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0


--- Page 403 ---
403
370
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1039108386
0.0
3e-16
-2.0519554193998273
3.554091041099772
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.5486586805
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2-6ba9c022/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 2
ntyp = 1
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.961755953534
Sb 0.999999999962 0.999999999972 0.038244046466
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1039108386
0.0
3e-16
-2.0519554193998273
3.554091041099772
3e-16
0.0
0.0
21.5486586805
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw


--- Page 404 ---
404
371
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.799630092541031
dis_froz_max = -0.8199511701516222
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.59337667653075
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -13.781451084266752
/


--- Page 405 ---
405
372
Figure S134: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
123
Material: Sb2Te2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te2I2-47227ded/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.658595936375 0.683484481382 0.998643417546
Sb 0.912401741298 0.175841208478 0.001356437613
Te 0.497618939317 0.00539023556 0.931004318635


--- Page 406 ---
406
373
Te 0.073377215089 0.853934703135 0.068995774489
I 0.235769914309 0.529137893824 0.912090727573
I 0.3352265092 0.330185399927 0.087909324145
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.323067481372
0.0
3e-16
2.1612440123864136
7.311298829008145
5e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0396385593
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te2I2-47227ded/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.658595936375 0.683484481382 0.998643417546
Sb 0.912401741298 0.175841208478 0.001356437613
Te 0.497618939317 0.00539023556 0.931004318635
Te 0.073377215089 0.853934703135 0.068995774489
I 0.235769914309 0.529137893824 0.912090727573
I 0.3352265092 0.330185399927 0.087909324145
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 407 ---
407
374
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.323067481372
0.0
3e-16
2.1612440123864136
7.311298829008145
5e-16
0.0
0.0
24.0396385593
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.34701864594388
dis_froz_max = -2.651215178176276
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.16135798840759
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-26'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 2, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(3) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.726460074781732
/


--- Page 408 ---
408
375
Figure S135: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2Te2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2Te2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
124
Material: Sb2Te2Se
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te2Se-4b565886/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933062414618
Sb 0.0 0.0 0.066937585381
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.131281239759


--- Page 409 ---
409
376
Te 0.0 0.0 0.8687187602399999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2295932721
0.0
3e-16
-2.1147966360998836
3.6629352213998625
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0848252969
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te2Se-4b565886/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933062414618
Sb 0.0 0.0 0.066937585381
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.131281239759
Te 0.0 0.0 0.8687187602399999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 410 ---
410
377
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2295932721
0.0
3e-16
-2.1147966360998836
3.6629352213998625
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0848252969
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 21
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.17921109940621
dis_froz_max = 1.5009151876082205
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.36540489970721
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= -3, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -11.700313554829776
/


--- Page 411 ---
411
378
Figure S136: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2Te2Se. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2Te2Se over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
125
Material: Sb2Te3
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te3-5446d851/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927167028901
Sb 1.3e-11 2.7e-11 0.072832971097
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.134836986137
Te 1.3e-11 2.7e-11 0.865163013861


--- Page 412 ---
412
379
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 4e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.3131148106
0.0
3e-16
-2.1565574053002323
3.7352669955003575
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.4925488549
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2Te3-5446d851/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927167028901
Sb 1.3e-11 2.7e-11 0.072832971097
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.134836986137
Te 1.3e-11 2.7e-11 0.865163013861
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 4e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 413 ---
413
380
4.3131148106
0.0
3e-16
-2.1565574053002323
3.7352669955003575
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.4925488549
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.1324699753593155
dis_froz_max = -0.8168001547530754
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.47473399066403
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= 3, mr= 1,2,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -7.737089885510894
/


--- Page 414 ---
414
381
Figure S137: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2Te3. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2Te3 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
126
Material: Sb2TeSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2TeSe2-06c37a20/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076367885916
Sb 0.0 0.0 0.923632114084
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5e-12


--- Page 415 ---
415
382
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.868431336217
Se 0.0 0.0 0.131568663779
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1486245965
0.0
3e-16
-2.0743122982999034
3.5928142913998395
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.2732782578
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2TeSe2-06c37a20/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.076367885916
Sb 0.0 0.0 0.923632114084
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 5e-12
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.868431336217
Se 0.0 0.0 0.131568663779
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 416 ---
416
383
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1486245965
0.0
3e-16
-2.0743122982999034
3.5928142913998395
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.2732782578
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 6.308499863096864
dis_froz_max = -2.4994152752977685
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.31829982167139
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,6'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 2, mr= 1,4'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -13.277725454099388
/


--- Page 417 ---
417
384
Figure S138: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2TeSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2TeSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
127
Material: Sb2TeSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2TeSe2-25d3815e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 6.2e-11 2.8e-11 0.066460078793
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.929098307937
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.13252040058


--- Page 418 ---
418
385
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.998294723117
Se 6.2e-11 2.8e-11 0.8736264895729999
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1446016952
0.0
3e-16
-2.0723008476998737
3.5893303565997754
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0867692555
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sb2TeSe2-25d3815e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sb 121.76 Sb_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sb 6.2e-11 2.8e-11 0.066460078793
Sb 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.929098307937
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.13252040058
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.998294723117
Se 6.2e-11 2.8e-11 0.8736264895729999
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 419 ---
419
386
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1446016952
0.0
3e-16
-2.0723008476998737
3.5893303565997754
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0867692555
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 121.76
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.203807135760673
dis_froz_max = -3.4560830963086193
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -17.207901876771373
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-30'
proj(1) = 'Sb: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -3, mr= 1,2'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 1,2,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.17246225311449
/


--- Page 420 ---
420
387
Figure S139: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sb2TeSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sb2TeSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
128
Material: Sc2CCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2CCl2-a3d13064/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9521369747990001
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.047863025199
C 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999


--- Page 421 ---
421
388
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.112673344166
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.887326655837
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4418335835
0.0
2e-16
-1.720916791900083
2.9807153189001436
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7743889097
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2CCl2-a3d13064/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9521369747990001
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.047863025199
C 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.112673344166
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.887326655837
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 422 ---
422
389
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4418335835
0.0
2e-16
-1.720916791900083
2.9807153189001436
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7743889097
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 44.956
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.18734871706472
dis_froz_max = -2.2731821099833276
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.93192291929262
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Sc: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 1,2,6'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= -1, mr= 1,2'
dis_froz_min = -16.6132911208335
/


--- Page 423 ---
423
390
Figure S140: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sc2CCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sc2CCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
129
Material: Sc2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2Cl2-72e26a99/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.166666666661 0.833333333339 0.053531231478
Sc 0.833333333339 0.166666666661 0.946468768522


--- Page 424 ---
424
391
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.122788921498
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.877211078502
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.489218719298
0.0
2e-16
-1.7446093597465162
3.021752050215971
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6056311598
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2Cl2-72e26a99/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.166666666661 0.833333333339 0.053531231478
Sc 0.833333333339 0.166666666661 0.946468768522
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.122788921498
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.877211078502
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 425 ---
425
392
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.489218719298
0.0
2e-16
-1.7446093597465162
3.021752050215971
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6056311598
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 44.956
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.964359680046009
dis_froz_max = 2.372286469843902
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.595796249364081
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Sc: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -4.615238629135439
/


--- Page 426 ---
426
393
Figure S141: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sc2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sc2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
130
Material: Sc2H2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2H2Cl2-be771dba/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.04898940949


--- Page 427 ---
427
394
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.951010590508
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.971150859396
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.028849140603
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999967 0.111593478476
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999967 0.8884065215270001
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.499759327882
0.0
2e-16
-1.7498796639409278
3.03088048512244
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7801103088
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2H2Cl2-be771dba/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.04898940949
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.951010590508
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.971150859396
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.028849140603
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999967 0.111593478476
Cl 0.999999999984 0.999999999967 0.8884065215270001
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 428 ---
428
395
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.499759327882
0.0
2e-16
-1.7498796639409278
3.03088048512244
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7801103088
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 44.956
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.765987993708652
dis_froz_max = 3.757645199156863
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.24582449596892
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Sc: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= -5, mr= 4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.4751346426610485
/


--- Page 429 ---
429
396
Figure S142: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sc2H2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sc2H2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
131
Material: Sc2NCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2NCl2-e8313707/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.953856818231


--- Page 430 ---
430
397
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046143181768
N 0.0 0.0 2e-12
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.111760303599
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.8882396964
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3650766248
0.0
2e-16
-1.6825383123997917
2.9142418427996852
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7122873471
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2NCl2-e8313707/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.953856818231
Sc 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046143181768
N 0.0 0.0 2e-12
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.111760303599
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.8882396964
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 431 ---
431
398
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3650766248
0.0
2e-16
-1.6825383123997917
2.9142418427996852
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.7122873471
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 44.956
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 17
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 27.543670812376334
dis_froz_max = 2.422732068609069
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.754510588710273
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Sc: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 1,3,7'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4'
dis_froz_min = -8.603920364733769
/


--- Page 432 ---
432
399
Figure S143: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sc2NCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sc2NCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
132
Material: Sc2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2O2Br2-3a8261f8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.5 0.0 0.964254030955
Sc 0.0 0.500000000025 0.035745976213
Br 0.0 0.0 0.887179364331


--- Page 433 ---
433
400
Br 0.5 0.500000000025 0.112820505064
O 0.5 0.500000000025 0.989286103756
O 0.0 0.0 0.010714019681
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.569978908385
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.982981066783
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.8541491432
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sc2O2Br2-3a8261f8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sc 44.956 Sc_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sc 0.5 0.0 0.964254030955
Sc 0.0 0.500000000025 0.035745976213
Br 0.0 0.0 0.887179364331
Br 0.5 0.500000000025 0.112820505064
O 0.5 0.500000000025 0.989286103756
O 0.0 0.0 0.010714019681
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 434 ---
434
401
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.569978908385
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.982981066783
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.8541491432
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 44.956
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.920972637625978
dis_froz_max = -1.7121777490169188
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -27.80537527969378
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Sc: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 4,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -12.599649962225136
/


--- Page 435 ---
435
402
Figure S144: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sc2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sc2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
133
Material: Si2H2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Si2H2-8795ce3f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Si 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.984848047917
Si 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.015151952085
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9215227899139999
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.078477210084


--- Page 436 ---
436
403
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8901956037
0.0
2e-16
-1.9450978019002219
3.3690082185003862
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.7135487142
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Si2H2-8795ce3f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Si 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.984848047917
Si 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.015151952085
H 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9215227899139999
H 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.078477210084
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8901956037
0.0
2e-16
-1.9450978019002219
3.3690082185003862
2e-16


--- Page 437 ---
437
404
0.0
0.0
23.7135487142
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 28.086
amass(2) = 1.008
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.503403196529051
dis_froz_max = -1.1234454268057572
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.60399492976764
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-2'
proj(1) = 'Si: l= -5, mr= 2,4'
proj(2) = 'H: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -13.086777247924653
/


--- Page 438 ---
438
405
Figure S145: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Si2H2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Si2H2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 8 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
134
Material: SiTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SiTe2-4a9e5884/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Si 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.069779684314


--- Page 439 ---
439
406
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.930220315685
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7944064429
0.0
2e-16
-1.8972032215000354
3.286052371800087
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3305813639
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SiTe2-4a9e5884/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Si 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.069779684314
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.930220315685
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 440 ---
440
407
3.7944064429
0.0
2e-16
-1.8972032215000354
3.286052371800087
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3305813639
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 28.086
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.72647164933089
dis_froz_max = 1.805166376618677
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.787276498743438
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Si: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.692670617267055
/


--- Page 441 ---
441
408
Figure S146: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer SiTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer SiTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
135
Material: Sn2O2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sn2O2-267a62e9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.927635146086 0.072364893433 0.939231888078
Sn 0.570976910772 0.429023046202 0.060768009522
O 0.959759289053 0.040240724323 0.033802416729
O 0.538851952754 0.461148037351 0.966197685671


--- Page 442 ---
442
409
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.557693527776
0.0
2e-16
-0.6371717009077413
3.5001707840458764
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.8041829791
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sn2O2-267a62e9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.927635146086 0.072364893433 0.939231888078
Sn 0.570976910772 0.429023046202 0.060768009522
O 0.959759289053 0.040240724323 0.033802416729
O 0.538851952754 0.461148037351 0.966197685671
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.557693527776
0.0
2e-16
-0.6371717009077413
3.5001707840458764
2e-16


--- Page 443 ---
443
410
0.0
0.0
22.8041829791
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 118.711
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 21.460083531564578
dis_froz_max = -0.15247334621931774
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.36001727994329
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Sn: l= 3, mr= 1,2,7'
proj(2) = 'O: l= -3, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -7.61016604655952
/


--- Page 444 ---
444
411
Figure S147: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sn2O2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sn2O2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
136
Material: Sn2O2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sn2O2-cc03c437/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.5 0.0 0.052749351912
Sn 0.0 0.5 0.947250648088
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.5 0.5 0.0


--- Page 445 ---
445
412
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8519982476
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8519982476
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.3347663658
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sn2O2-cc03c437/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.5 0.0 0.052749351912
Sn 0.0 0.5 0.947250648088
O 0.0 0.0 0.0
O 0.5 0.5 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8519982476
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8519982476
2e-16


--- Page 446 ---
446
413
0.0
0.0
22.3347663658
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 118.711
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.410399037962211
dis_froz_max = 0.025313233028255944
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.726063676343415
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-13'
proj(1) = 'Sn: l= 3, mr= 3,7'
proj(2) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -11.18519965354708
/


--- Page 447 ---
447
414
Figure S148: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sn2O2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sn2O2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
137
Material: SnF4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnF4-b738b603/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.0
F 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.079332700669
F 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.920667299331
F 0.499999999976 0.0 0.0


--- Page 448 ---
448
415
F 0.0 0.499999999976 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.175930911373
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.175930911373
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8456466502
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnF4-b738b603/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.0
F 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.079332700669
F 0.499999999976 0.499999999976 0.920667299331
F 0.499999999976 0.0 0.0
F 0.0 0.499999999976 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 449 ---
449
416
4.175930911373
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.175930911373
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.8456466502
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 118.711
amass(2) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.800611547305717
dis_froz_max = -1.9804894558138466
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.431591353684066
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-9'
proj(1) = 'Sn: l= -5, mr= 2,3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'F: l= 3, mr= 2,3,7'
dis_froz_min = -15.700163464239841
/


--- Page 450 ---
450
417
Figure S149: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer SnF4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer SnF4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 0 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
138
Material: SnS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnS2-15c1c8d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.934653914185
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.065346085816


--- Page 451 ---
451
418
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6735242703
0.0
2e-16
-1.836762135099855
3.181365339499731
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9654742181
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnS2-15c1c8d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.934653914185
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.065346085816
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6735242703
0.0
2e-16
-1.836762135099855
3.181365339499731
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9654742181


--- Page 452 ---
452
419
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 118.711
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.649142846031465
dis_froz_max = -1.143348827910092
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.36689231047024
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Sn: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.200892089026322
/


--- Page 453 ---
453
420
Figure S150: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer SnS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer SnS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
139
Material: SnSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnSe2-8aad97b9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.930808041467
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.069191958534


--- Page 454 ---
454
421
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8549728042
0.0
2e-16
-1.9274864020999742
3.338504379400013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2095437301
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/SnSe2-8aad97b9/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sn 118.711 Sn_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.930808041467
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.069191958534
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8549728042
0.0
2e-16
-1.9274864020999742
3.338504379400013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2095437301


--- Page 455 ---
455
422
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 118.711
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.78851002044591
dis_froz_max = -0.19159543384778543
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.952303327504442
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-18'
proj(1) = 'Sn: l= -3, mr= 1,3'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -13.812215406345898
/


--- Page 456 ---
456
423
Figure S151: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer SnSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer SnSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
140
Material: Sr2Br2F2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2Br2F2-2c2c4d86/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.056741857937
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.943258142063
Br 0.0 0.5 0.112824397426


--- Page 457 ---
457
424
Br 0.5 0.0 0.887175602574
F 0.0 0.0 0.0
F 0.5 0.5 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1094097458
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1094097458
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2078167054
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2Br2F2-2c2c4d86/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.056741857937
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.943258142063
Br 0.0 0.5 0.112824397426
Br 0.5 0.0 0.887175602574
F 0.0 0.0 0.0
F 0.5 0.5 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 458 ---
458
425
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.1094097458
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.1094097458
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2078167054
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 87.62
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.541064660508319
dis_froz_max = -0.35651511544665304
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -29.44147071153401
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Sr: l= -4, mr= 2,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6,7'
proj(3) = 'F: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -17.046681373085484
/


--- Page 459 ---
459
426
Figure S152: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sr2Br2F2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sr2Br2F2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
141
Material: Sr2H2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2H2Br2-c2d05d41/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.056168810767
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.94383118923
H 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999


--- Page 460 ---
460
427
H 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
Br 0.5 0.0 0.110194843222
Br 0.0 0.5 0.889805156784
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0955506522
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.0955506522
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.0283080372
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2H2Br2-c2d05d41/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.056168810767
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.94383118923
H 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
H 0.5 0.5 0.999999999999
Br 0.5 0.0 0.110194843222
Br 0.0 0.5 0.889805156784
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 461 ---
461
428
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.0955506522
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.0955506522
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.0283080372
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 87.62
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.484388662524726
dis_froz_max = 0.10507275364560886
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.40339207034594
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Sr: l= -5, mr= 2,3'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,6'
proj(3) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3'
dis_froz_min = -15.359163851183762
/


--- Page 462 ---
462
429
Figure S153: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sr2H2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sr2H2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
142
Material: Sr2H2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2H2I2-e806521a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.051137069969
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.948862930032
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 463 ---
463
430
H 0.5 0.5 1e-12
I 0.5 0.0 0.112137671927
I 0.0 0.5 0.887862328071
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2921496716
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.2921496716
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4594463213
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2H2I2-e806521a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
H 1.008 H_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.0 0.5 0.051137069969
Sr 0.5 0.0 0.948862930032
H 0.0 0.0 1e-12
H 0.5 0.5 1e-12
I 0.5 0.0 0.112137671927
I 0.0 0.5 0.887862328071
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 464 ---
464
431
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2921496716
0.0
3e-16
-3e-16
4.2921496716
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.4594463213
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 87.62
amass(2) = 1.008
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.438792886810013
dis_froz_max = 0.2437437285406654
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.39889841968817
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Sr: l= -5, mr= 2,3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'H: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,6,7'
proj(3) = 'I: l= 2, mr= 2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -12.587814439586703
/


--- Page 465 ---
465
432
Figure S154: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sr2H2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sr2H2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
143
Material: Sr2I4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2I4-937bb010/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.25 0.369888844734 0.968793768344
Sr 0.75 0.869895519838 0.031206148874
I 0.25 0.62173478274 0.079238979393
I 0.75 0.12173224031 0.92076027863


--- Page 466 ---
466
433
I 0.75 0.617913505692 0.92068311134
I 0.25 0.117916298553 0.07931771342
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.7464820888
0.0
3e-16
-5e-16
8.2198127756
5e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5173566099
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Sr2I4-937bb010/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Sr 87.62 Sr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Sr 0.25 0.369888844734 0.968793768344
Sr 0.75 0.869895519838 0.031206148874
I 0.25 0.62173478274 0.079238979393
I 0.75 0.12173224031 0.92076027863
I 0.75 0.617913505692 0.92068311134
I 0.25 0.117916298553 0.07931771342
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 467 ---
467
434
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.7464820888
0.0
3e-16
-5e-16
8.2198127756
5e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5173566099
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 87.62
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.11999378395953
dis_froz_max = -0.44213698390085954
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.35594597534636
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Sr: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.68432562888394
/


--- Page 468 ---
468
435
Figure S155: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Sr2I4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Sr2I4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
144
Material: Ta2CS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ta2CS2-b8472668/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046276819712


--- Page 469 ---
469
436
Ta 0.999999999939 0.0 0.953723199421
C 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.99999996391
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.89042414497
S 0.999999999939 0.0 0.109575871987
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.285913547
0.0
2e-16
-1.6429567734999297
2.8456846062999035
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6370541481
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ta2CS2-b8472668/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.046276819712
Ta 0.999999999939 0.0 0.953723199421
C 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.99999996391
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.89042414497
S 0.999999999939 0.0 0.109575871987
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 470 ---
470
437
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.285913547
0.0
2e-16
-1.6429567734999297
2.8456846062999035
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.6370541481
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 180.948
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 19
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.55909900992262
dis_froz_max = 4.485862814428479
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.01154050856612
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Ta: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 2, mr= 1'
proj(3) = 'S: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -5.199413314939194
/


--- Page 471 ---
471
438
Figure S156: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ta2CS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ta2CS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
145
Material: TaS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaS2-0c60e3e0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9323918079869999


--- Page 472 ---
472
439
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.067608192015
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3365347992
0.0
2e-16
-1.668267399599996
2.889523896799997
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1523695269
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaS2-0c60e3e0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.9323918079869999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.067608192015
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 473 ---
473
440
3.3365347992
0.0
2e-16
-1.668267399599996
2.889523896799997
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1523695269
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 180.948
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 21.2729515061621
dis_froz_max = 0.7165614089367693
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -18.567855097445033
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ta: l= 3, mr= 1,7'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -7.363681028054365
/


--- Page 474 ---
474
441
Figure S157: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TaS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TaS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
146
Material: TaSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaSe2-14799dc8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.070865370615


--- Page 475 ---
475
442
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.929134629384
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4980824352
0.0
2e-16
-1.7490412176001613
3.029428253400228
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3456070629
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaSe2-14799dc8/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.070865370615
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.929134629384
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 476 ---
476
443
3.4980824352
0.0
2e-16
-1.7490412176001613
3.029428253400228
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3456070629
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 180.948
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.26491409846905
dis_froz_max = 1.9376371956468335
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.552338184162096
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Ta: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6'
dis_froz_min = -5.3930961770462815
/


--- Page 477 ---
477
444
Figure S158: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TaSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TaSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 11 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
147
Material: TaSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaSe2-634a5756/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.928142768223


--- Page 478 ---
478
445
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.071857231778
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4667854283
0.0
2e-16
-1.7333927141997718
3.0023242503995866
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3686877481
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TaSe2-634a5756/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ta 180.948 Ta_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ta 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.928142768223
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.071857231778
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 479 ---
479
446
3.4667854283
0.0
2e-16
-1.7333927141997718
3.0023242503995866
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3686877481
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 180.948
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 21.57799738107449
dis_froz_max = 1.0721607395935653
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.56953971638937
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Ta: l= 2, mr= 1,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.020572576154356
/


--- Page 480 ---
480
447
Figure S159: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TaSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TaSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
148
Material: Ti2N2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2Br2-4bafa127/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.49999999997 0.0 0.970702165146
Ti 0.0 0.500000000025 0.029297849085
Br 0.0 0.0 0.89241533588


--- Page 481 ---
481
448
Br 0.49999999997 0.500000000025 0.107584644534
N 0.49999999997 0.500000000025 0.986444642041
N 0.0 0.0 0.013555363315
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3699845896
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9512724954
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.5313887704
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2Br2-4bafa127/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.49999999997 0.0 0.970702165146
Ti 0.0 0.500000000025 0.029297849085
Br 0.0 0.0 0.89241533588
Br 0.49999999997 0.500000000025 0.107584644534
N 0.49999999997 0.500000000025 0.986444642041
N 0.0 0.0 0.013555363315
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 482 ---
482
449
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3699845896
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9512724954
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.5313887704
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.576357785186437
dis_froz_max = -0.9489490146138213
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -24.742028762689245
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(3) = 'N: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -14.279320423503611
/


--- Page 483 ---
483
450
Figure S160: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2N2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2N2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
149
Material: Ti2N2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2Cl2-fe5fd491/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.500000000015 0.0 0.969396257797
Ti 0.0 0.500000000013 0.03060373549
N 0.500000000015 0.500000000013 0.985125576709


--- Page 484 ---
484
451
N 0.0 0.0 0.01487441811
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.896158101153
Cl 0.500000000015 0.500000000013 0.103841910741
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2731880139
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9533439905
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1849575755
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2Cl2-fe5fd491/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.500000000015 0.0 0.969396257797
Ti 0.0 0.500000000013 0.03060373549
N 0.500000000015 0.500000000013 0.985125576709
N 0.0 0.0 0.01487441811
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.896158101153
Cl 0.500000000015 0.500000000013 0.103841910741
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 485 ---
485
452
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2731880139
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9533439905
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1849575755
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.851606807084258
dis_froz_max = -1.307977760452741
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.949514191294444
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 4,5,7'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -11.861329476264526
/


--- Page 486 ---
486
453
Figure S161: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2N2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2N2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
150
Material: Ti2N2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2I2-c71e186d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.499999999986 0.0 0.973390871246


--- Page 487 ---
487
454
Ti 0.0 0.5 0.026609133358
I 0.0 0.0 0.887627355839
I 0.499999999986 0.5 0.112372649605
N 0.499999999986 0.5 0.987644304736
N 0.0 0.0 0.012355685216
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5302590857
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9701793762
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.8532673162
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2N2I2-c71e186d/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.499999999986 0.0 0.973390871246
Ti 0.0 0.5 0.026609133358
I 0.0 0.0 0.887627355839
I 0.499999999986 0.5 0.112372649605
N 0.499999999986 0.5 0.987644304736
N 0.0 0.0 0.012355685216
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 488 ---
488
455
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5302590857
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.9701793762
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.8532673162
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.572523351970865
dis_froz_max = 4.277607098048097
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.670761865786126
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'N: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -10.314243685577177
/


--- Page 489 ---
489
456
Figure S162: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2N2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2N2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
151
Material: Ti2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2O2Br2-738fbe70/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.5 0.975986857287


--- Page 490 ---
490
457
Ti 0.500000000015 0.0 0.024013189321
Br 0.500000000015 0.5 0.897396929942
Br 0.0 0.0 0.102602822976
O 0.0 0.0 0.9792464195
O 0.500000000015 0.5 0.020753780974
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.393138961542
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.079287849569
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2453715395
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2O2Br2-738fbe70/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.5 0.975986857287
Ti 0.500000000015 0.0 0.024013189321
Br 0.500000000015 0.5 0.897396929942
Br 0.0 0.0 0.102602822976
O 0.0 0.0 0.9792464195
O 0.500000000015 0.5 0.020753780974
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 491 ---
491
458
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.393138961542
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.079287849569
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.2453715395
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.35888572810271
dis_froz_max = 3.699810303169479
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -20.495775077091988
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,7'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -6.626776373413922
/


--- Page 492 ---
492
459
Figure S163: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
152
Material: Ti2O2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2O2Cl2-0e1a716c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.499999999985 0.0 0.972106304382


--- Page 493 ---
493
460
Ti 0.0 0.499999999975 0.02789364086
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.900080782386
Cl 0.499999999985 0.499999999975 0.099919212239
O 0.499999999985 0.499999999975 0.9763529706
O 0.0 0.0 0.023647089533
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2610212407
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0256328532
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.9437525048
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2O2Cl2-0e1a716c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.499999999985 0.0 0.972106304382
Ti 0.0 0.499999999975 0.02789364086
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.900080782386
Cl 0.499999999985 0.499999999975 0.099919212239
O 0.499999999985 0.499999999975 0.9763529706
O 0.0 0.0 0.023647089533
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 494 ---
494
461
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2610212407
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
4.0256328532
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.9437525048
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.057693024508314
dis_froz_max = 1.196741754148141
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -18.76149591578667
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.969754135646326
/


--- Page 495 ---
495
462
Figure S164: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2O2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2O2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
153
Material: Ti2PTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2PTe2-b8da2485/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
P 30.974 P_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.949729293776


--- Page 496 ---
496
463
Ti 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.050270702531
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.119913945158
Te 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.880086057691
P 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 8.45e-10
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6438693679
0.0
2e-16
-1.8219346838999815
3.1556834406999137
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.3222723261
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Ti2PTe2-b8da2485/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
P 30.974 P_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.949729293776
Ti 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.050270702531
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.119913945158
Te 3.2e-11 6.3e-11 0.880086057691
P 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 8.45e-10
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 497 ---
497
464
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6438693679
0.0
2e-16
-1.8219346838999815
3.1556834406999137
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.3222723261
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 126.7
amass(3) = 30.974
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 19
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.43368854039773
dis_froz_max = 2.827583518006489
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.404121895964382
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-21'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -5, mr= 1,2,5,6'
proj(3) = 'P: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -7.401728556652414
/


--- Page 498 ---
498
465
Figure S165: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Ti2PTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Ti2PTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
154
Material: TiBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiBr2-20f23168/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927766435265


--- Page 499 ---
499
466
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072233564736
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5037945504
0.0
2e-16
-1.751897275299748
3.034375090299568
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3857831485
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiBr2-20f23168/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Br 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927766435265
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072233564736
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 500 ---
500
467
3.5037945504
0.0
2e-16
-1.751897275299748
3.034375090299568
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3857831485
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 24.162818987171818
dis_froz_max = 0.886736438468688
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.903436146635295
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 3,4,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -3.6926027530606893
/


--- Page 501 ---
501
468
Figure S166: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TiBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TiBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
155
Material: TiCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiCl2-929df00f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.931116696376


--- Page 502 ---
502
469
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.068883303622
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.2853489371
0.0
2e-16
-1.6426744684999326
2.8451956398998988
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1954501107
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiCl2-929df00f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 1e-12
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.931116696376
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.068883303622
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 503 ---
503
470
3.2853489371
0.0
2e-16
-1.6426744684999326
2.8451956398998988
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1954501107
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 12.045726794639018
dis_froz_max = 2.156700626976075
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.292601919392693
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -5.024450188447782
/


--- Page 504 ---
504
471
Figure S167: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TiCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TiCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
156
Material: TiS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiS2-e7248a86/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.062134154621


--- Page 505 ---
505
472
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.93786584538
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4122780408
0.0
2e-16
-1.7061390203002214
2.9551194681003823
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.8544663209
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiS2-e7248a86/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.062134154621
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.93786584538
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 506 ---
506
473
3.4122780408
0.0
2e-16
-1.7061390203002214
2.9551194681003823
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.8544663209
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.825487306057415
dis_froz_max = 0.15983464663463742
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.511643326409892
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 1,4'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.102219462773451
/


--- Page 507 ---
507
474
Figure S168: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TiS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TiS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
157
Material: TiSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiSe2-6bdf4944/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.0
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.932873242142


--- Page 508 ---
508
475
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.067126757858
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5362588177
0.0
2e-16
-1.7681294089001534
3.0624899706003057
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1032480114
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiSe2-6bdf4944/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.0
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.932873242142
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.067126757858
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 509 ---
509
476
3.5362588177
0.0
2e-16
-1.7681294089001534
3.0624899706003057
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1032480114
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.770905218784943
dis_froz_max = 3.195719128961724
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.218327022736421
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.725271524528832
/


--- Page 510 ---
510
477
Figure S169: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TiSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TiSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
158
Material: TiTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiTe2-cef6b5c0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.925903813353


--- Page 511 ---
511
478
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.074096186647
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7638040926
0.0
2e-16
-1.8819020462002345
3.2595499590004127
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.4457410538
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/TiTe2-cef6b5c0/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Ti 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.925903813353
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.074096186647
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 512 ---
512
479
3.7638040926
0.0
2e-16
-1.8819020462002345
3.2595499590004127
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.4457410538
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 47.867
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.418600884354353
dis_froz_max = 0.6971000440768718
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.133457009496968
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Ti: l= 3, mr= 1,2,7'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -4.4320214182223365
/


--- Page 513 ---
513
480
Figure S170: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer TiTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer TiTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
159
Material: Tl2F2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2F2-d677a93f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.499999999987 0.0 0.066568930786
Tl 0.0 0.499999999987 0.933431069214
F 0.0 0.499999999987 0.040884913108
F 0.499999999987 0.0 0.959115086892


--- Page 514 ---
514
481
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8430604083
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8430604083
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1822519766
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2F2-d677a93f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
F 18.998 F_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.499999999987 0.0 0.066568930786
Tl 0.0 0.499999999987 0.933431069214
F 0.0 0.499999999987 0.040884913108
F 0.499999999987 0.0 0.959115086892
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.8430604083
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.8430604083
2e-16


--- Page 515 ---
515
482
0.0
0.0
23.1822519766
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 204.383
amass(2) = 18.998
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 16
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.33830439549697
dis_froz_max = -0.43855927279403684
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.057449265590176
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Tl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5'
proj(2) = 'F: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -13.437641196200914
/


--- Page 516 ---
516
483
Figure S171: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Tl2F2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Tl2F2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
160
Material: Tl2O
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2O-e45a04da/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.066284579593
Tl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933712936134
O 0.999999999972 0.0 2.484274e-06


--- Page 517 ---
517
484
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5776577955
0.0
2e-16
-1.7888288976998181
3.0983425368997306
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0106023332
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2O-e45a04da/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.066284579593
Tl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.933712936134
O 0.999999999972 0.0 2.484274e-06
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5776577955
0.0
2e-16
-1.7888288976998181
3.0983425368997306
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0106023332


--- Page 518 ---
518
485
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 204.383
amass(2) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 13
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.027035160459935
dis_froz_max = 0.8286936764383586
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.18269138836827
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Tl: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.03622595793925
/


--- Page 519 ---
519
486
Figure S172: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Tl2O. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Tl2O over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
161
Material: Tl2S
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2S-197324e3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072315464124
Tl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927684535875
S 0.0 0.0 1e-12


--- Page 520 ---
520
487
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2192010136
0.0
3e-16
-2.1096005068001356
3.6539352615002265
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2414401913
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Tl2S-197324e3/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Tl 204.383 Tl_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Tl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.072315464124
Tl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927684535875
S 0.0 0.0 1e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2192010136
0.0
3e-16
-2.1096005068001356
3.6539352615002265
3e-16
0.0
0.0
23.2414401913


--- Page 521 ---
521
488
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 204.383
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 21.053952526922764
dis_froz_max = -0.6663686325585285
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -18.485576365355925
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Tl: l= -5, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 5'
dis_froz_min = -11.385560813044451
/


--- Page 522 ---
522
489
Figure S173: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Tl2S. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Tl2S over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 13 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
162
Material: V2O2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/V2O2Br2-31b551fc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.74999993002 0.249969368108 0.033114402843


--- Page 523 ---
523
490
V 0.250000070009 0.750030712368 0.966885642975
Br 0.749999999978 0.750002794117 0.882749467348
Br 0.249999999993 0.249997066301 0.117250483481
O 0.249999999993 0.250023043898 0.975044442818
O 0.749999999978 0.749977015287 0.024955560535
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.435689485463
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.854690871556
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.0549460656
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/V2O2Br2-31b551fc/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.74999993002 0.249969368108 0.033114402843
V 0.250000070009 0.750030712368 0.966885642975
Br 0.749999999978 0.750002794117 0.882749467348
Br 0.249999999993 0.249997066301 0.117250483481
O 0.249999999993 0.250023043898 0.975044442818
O 0.749999999978 0.749977015287 0.024955560535
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 524 ---
524
491
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.435689485463
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.854690871556
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.0549460656
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.558818402778208
dis_froz_max = 1.7848991187889398
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.07552245365143
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -7.025180030914832
/


--- Page 525 ---
525
492
Figure S174: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer V2O2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer V2O2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
163
Material: VBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VBr2-7da27354/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.500000000007 0.499999999993 0.0
V 0.0 0.0 0.0


--- Page 526 ---
526
493
Br 0.337420239498 5.401e-09 0.918585914957
Br 0.837420049432 0.500000005406 0.918584305257
Br 0.662579760537 0.999999994596 0.081414085043
Br 0.162579950581 0.49999999458 0.081415694743
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.375838174034
0.0
4e-16
-2.312891205e-07
3.8031196209029927
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.504784999999
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VBr2-7da27354/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.500000000007 0.499999999993 0.0
V 0.0 0.0 0.0
Br 0.337420239498 5.401e-09 0.918585914957
Br 0.837420049432 0.500000005406 0.918584305257
Br 0.662579760537 0.999999994596 0.081414085043
Br 0.162579950581 0.49999999458 0.081415694743
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 527 ---
527
494
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.375838174034
0.0
4e-16
-2.312891205e-07
3.8031196209029927
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.504784999999
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.143352998938965
dis_froz_max = 5.631125545512342
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -12.430744340209564
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 3, mr= 1,2,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -3.063357166917005
/


--- Page 528 ---
528
495
Figure S175: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
164
Material: VCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VCl2-b4f4d78a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.499999999992 0.499999999976 0.0
V 0.0 0.0 0.0


--- Page 529 ---
529
496
Cl 0.659596544909 6.483e-09 0.077032117425
Cl 0.159596471067 0.500000006475 0.07703210214
Cl 0.340403455076 0.99999999353 0.922967882575
Cl 0.840403528916 0.499999993478 0.92296789786
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.976883374781
0.0
4e-16
4.570530689e-07
3.6297323099159717
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.174396
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VCl2-b4f4d78a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.499999999992 0.499999999976 0.0
V 0.0 0.0 0.0
Cl 0.659596544909 6.483e-09 0.077032117425
Cl 0.159596471067 0.500000006475 0.07703210214
Cl 0.340403455076 0.99999999353 0.922967882575
Cl 0.840403528916 0.499999993478 0.92296789786
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 530 ---
530
497
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
5.976883374781
0.0
4e-16
4.570530689e-07
3.6297323099159717
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.174396
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 18.632705836064552
dis_froz_max = 1.7763582213993407
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -18.944218746792785
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -2.8228342514277633
/


--- Page 531 ---
531
498
Figure S176: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
165
Material: VI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VI2-a610d4f6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.749982666402 0.74996640289 0.99999936077
V 0.250017249525 0.250033453625 6.55213e-07


--- Page 532 ---
532
499
I 0.913020277449 0.249971399725 0.086502502917
I 0.413019352464 0.750028550984 0.08650464081
I 0.586980677352 0.249971420576 0.913495358073
I 0.086979716817 0.750028572155 0.913497482218
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.922733242434
0.0
4e-16
-2.4810687741e-06
4.088804219833248
3e-16
0.0
0.0
18.702224
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VI2-a610d4f6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.749982666402 0.74996640289 0.99999936077
V 0.250017249525 0.250033453625 6.55213e-07
I 0.913020277449 0.249971399725 0.086502502917
I 0.413019352464 0.750028550984 0.08650464081
I 0.586980677352 0.249971420576 0.913495358073
I 0.086979716817 0.750028572155 0.913497482218
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 533 ---
533
500
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.922733242434
0.0
4e-16
-2.4810687741e-06
4.088804219833248
3e-16
0.0
0.0
18.702224
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.786053942945395
dis_froz_max = 1.9082119141529859
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.271838916588777
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 1,2,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -9.227467322777574
/


--- Page 534 ---
534
501
Figure S177: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
166
Material: VOBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VOBr2-ec2547d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 8
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.447200406274 0.499999999993 0.0


--- Page 535 ---
535
502
V 0.447200428886 0.0 0.0
Br 0.525738073983 0.749999990654 0.908313459557
Br 0.525738073983 0.250000009346 0.908313459557
Br 0.525738073983 0.749999990654 0.091686540443
Br 0.525738073983 0.250000009346 0.091686540443
O 0.017835650477 0.499999999993 0.0
O 0.017835700598 0.0 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.806220440154
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
7.170299272019
4e-16
0.0
0.0
19.4734630608
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VOBr2-ec2547d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 8
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.447200406274 0.499999999993 0.0
V 0.447200428886 0.0 0.0
Br 0.525738073983 0.749999990654 0.908313459557
Br 0.525738073983 0.250000009346 0.908313459557
Br 0.525738073983 0.749999990654 0.091686540443
Br 0.525738073983 0.250000009346 0.091686540443
O 0.017835650477 0.499999999993 0.0
O 0.017835700598 0.0 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 536 ---
536
503
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.806220440154
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
7.170299272019
4e-16
0.0
0.0
19.4734630608
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.940790180812284
dis_froz_max = 1.1555749796518886
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.589278802179738
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'V: l= -4, mr= 3'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 2, mr= 2,3,4'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 2,3,7'
dis_froz_min = -3.1000415321040444
/


--- Page 537 ---
537
504
Figure S178: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VOBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VOBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
167
Material: VOCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VOCl2-d16a934f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 8
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.447271369275 0.0 0.0


--- Page 538 ---
538
505
V 0.447270650507 0.499999999993 0.0
Cl 0.527594306446 0.750000289562 0.911737599058
Cl 0.527594306446 0.249999710438 0.911737599058
Cl 0.527594306446 0.750000289562 0.088262400942
Cl 0.527594306446 0.249999710438 0.088262400942
O 0.022381383798 0.0 0.0
O 0.022380426791 0.499999999993 0.0
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.821579248372
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.723805932274
4e-16
0.0
0.0
18.866902354652
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VOCl2-d16a934f/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 8
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.447271369275 0.0 0.0
V 0.447270650507 0.499999999993 0.0
Cl 0.527594306446 0.750000289562 0.911737599058
Cl 0.527594306446 0.249999710438 0.911737599058
Cl 0.527594306446 0.750000289562 0.088262400942
Cl 0.527594306446 0.249999710438 0.088262400942
O 0.022381383798 0.0 0.0
O 0.022380426791 0.499999999993 0.0
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 539 ---
539
506
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.821579248372
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.723805932274
4e-16
0.0
0.0
18.866902354652
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.769974601015043
dis_froz_max = 0.689905215573809
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.126727040821645
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-14'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 3, mr= 2,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 1, mr= 1'
proj(3) = 'O: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -4.563185524863742
/


--- Page 540 ---
540
507
Figure S179: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VOCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VOCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 1 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
168
Material: VS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VS2-5d80a112/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.0 0.0 0.0
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.081998463812


--- Page 541 ---
541
508
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.918001536188
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.184370147845
0.0
2e-16
-1.592185073967889
2.7577454430603736
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.8790581194
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VS2-5d80a112/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.0 0.0 0.0
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.081998463812
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.918001536188
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 542 ---
542
509
3.184370147845
0.0
2e-16
-1.592185073967889
2.7577454430603736
2e-16
0.0
0.0
17.8790581194
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 28.880273384385116
dis_froz_max = 2.6950544021046516
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.556810783331567
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'V: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -10.660071337712631
/


--- Page 543 ---
543
510
Figure S180: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
169
Material: VSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VSe2-ee6fd697/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.5 0.5 0.0
Se 0.166666666661 0.833333333339 0.913823284433


--- Page 544 ---
544
511
Se 0.833333333339 0.166666666661 0.086176715567
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.338545306959
0.0
2e-16
-1.6692726534385254
2.8912650475354673
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.3181003223
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VSe2-ee6fd697/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.5 0.5 0.0
Se 0.166666666661 0.833333333339 0.913823284433
Se 0.833333333339 0.166666666661 0.086176715567
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 545 ---
545
512
3.338545306959
0.0
2e-16
-1.6692726534385254
2.8912650475354673
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.3181003223
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.29619514329193
dis_froz_max = 2.671708748183489
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.795810567838972
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'V: l= -4, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -3.2806877197094373
/


--- Page 546 ---
546
513
Figure S181: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
170
Material: VTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VTe2-58f6c145/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.5 0.5 0.999999999998
Te 0.166666666677 0.833333333323 0.908379042343


--- Page 547 ---
547
514
Te 0.833333333323 0.166666666677 0.091620957659
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.635407217474
0.0
2e-16
-1.8177036086464988
3.148355003486034
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.7993724054
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/VTe2-58f6c145/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
V 50.942 V_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
V 0.5 0.5 0.999999999998
Te 0.166666666677 0.833333333323 0.908379042343
Te 0.833333333323 0.166666666677 0.091620957659
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 548 ---
548
515
3.635407217474
0.0
2e-16
-1.8177036086464988
3.148355003486034
2e-16
0.0
0.0
18.7993724054
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 50.942
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 29.743789329470193
dis_froz_max = 4.855478821814399
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.471912317815343
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'V: l= -4, mr= 2,3'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.193566833198466
/


--- Page 549 ---
549
516
Figure S182: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer VTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer VTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
171
Material: W2N3
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/W2N3-4c3b093a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
W 183.84 W_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.941627012797
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.058372987201


--- Page 550 ---
550
517
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.897355345144
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.102644654858
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 1e-12
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.9130614778
0.0
2e-16
-1.4565307388997422
2.5227852424995882
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1518869092
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/W2N3-4c3b093a/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 5
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
W 183.84 W_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.941627012797
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.058372987201
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.897355345144
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.102644654858
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 1e-12
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 551 ---
551
518
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
2.9130614778
0.0
2e-16
-1.4565307388997422
2.5227852424995882
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.1518869092
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 183.84
amass(2) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 23
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 22.075221903422385
dis_froz_max = 5.260576641192361
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -11.32013315973583
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'W: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.722116857685602
/


--- Page 552 ---
552
519
Figure S183: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer W2N3. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer W2N3 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
172
Material: W2Te4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/W2Te4-d34991c2/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
W 183.84 W_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.0 0.197806369517 0.9129469863
Te 0.5 0.706688495471 0.938713797248


--- Page 553 ---
553
520
Te 0.5 0.358614882352 0.087051191583
Te 0.0 0.849680062743 0.061288401942
W 0.0 0.455723398207 0.004298282025
W 0.5 0.100643212645 0.995701340902
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5003336484
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.327792264
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.220856573
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/W2Te4-d34991c2/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
W 183.84 W_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.0 0.197806369517 0.9129469863
Te 0.5 0.706688495471 0.938713797248
Te 0.5 0.358614882352 0.087051191583
Te 0.0 0.849680062743 0.061288401942
W 0.0 0.455723398207 0.004298282025
W 0.5 0.100643212645 0.995701340902
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 554 ---
554
521
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5003336484
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.327792264
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.220856573
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 183.84
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 14.111356978048978
dis_froz_max = 2.083925742240341
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.225998058633456
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-32'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= 2, mr= 3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'W: l= 2, mr= 1,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -2.550587324076275
/


--- Page 555 ---
555
522
Figure S184: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer W2Te4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer W2Te4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 12 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
173
Material: WSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/WSe2-3d52bc42/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
W 183.84 W_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1.828358e-06
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927974347927
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.072023823716


--- Page 556 ---
556
523
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3169774715
0.0
2e-16
-1.658488735799851
2.8725867540997596
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.364029221
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/WSe2-3d52bc42/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
W 183.84 W_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1.828358e-06
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.927974347927
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.072023823716
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.3169774715
0.0
2e-16
-1.658488735799851
2.8725867540997596
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.364029221


--- Page 557 ---
557
524
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 183.84
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 20.551227431169806
dis_froz_max = -1.990603241965383
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -18.253806107936153
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'W: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,7'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -8.281497805607822
/


--- Page 558 ---
558
525
Figure S185: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer WSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer WSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
174
Material: WTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/WTe2-f1f9e9c7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
W 183.84 W_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.923085474739
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.076914382925
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1.42336e-07


--- Page 559 ---
559
526
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5666234197
0.0
2e-16
-1.7833117100000393
3.088786487300092
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6618426882
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/WTe2-f1f9e9c7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
W 183.84 W_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.923085474739
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.076914382925
W 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 1.42336e-07
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.5666234197
0.0
2e-16
-1.7833117100000393
3.088786487300092
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6618426882


--- Page 560 ---
560
527
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 126.7
amass(2) = 183.84
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.668315000773385
dis_froz_max = -1.6266368648213936
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.90824779154556
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'W: l= 3, mr= 1,2,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -13.007156306586497
/


--- Page 561 ---
561
528
Figure S186: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer WTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer WTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 10 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
175
Material: Y2C2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2C2Br2-b4b9ba9c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.385303392886 0.385303388519 0.05421088434


--- Page 562 ---
562
529
Y 0.130076632473 0.130076639939 0.945789104008
C 0.678871179026 0.678871179741 0.013916764477
C 0.836508650301 0.836508653279 0.986083297375
Br 0.041674597821 0.041674599032 0.124662209843
Br 0.473704368843 0.473704360942 0.8753377399560001
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.994302246199
0.0
2e-16
2.1890959380249457
3.341004247378284
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.7286133965
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2C2Br2-b4b9ba9c/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.385303392886 0.385303388519 0.05421088434
Y 0.130076632473 0.130076639939 0.945789104008
C 0.678871179026 0.678871179741 0.013916764477
C 0.836508650301 0.836508653279 0.986083297375
Br 0.041674597821 0.041674599032 0.124662209843
Br 0.473704368843 0.473704360942 0.8753377399560001
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 563 ---
563
530
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.994302246199
0.0
2e-16
2.1890959380249457
3.341004247378284
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.7286133965
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 88.906
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 25.126696552163196
dis_froz_max = 3.0762177957603805
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -16.267008581776953
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Y: l= 3, mr= 2,4,6'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -1.823184100500474
/


--- Page 564 ---
564
531
Figure S187: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Y2C2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Y2C2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
176
Material: Y2C2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2C2I2-673fb5ad/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.087219437129 0.087219437648 0.949211324374


--- Page 565 ---
565
532
Y 0.817168798777 0.817168798841 0.050788515082
C 0.372376224421 0.372376223348 0.988292169216
C 0.532012370131 0.532012369245 0.011707823912
I 0.749494385745 0.749494386365 0.871344174309
I 0.154899426915 0.154899427662 0.128655993108
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.152035200963
0.0
3e-16
2.3100105181768114
3.450108363951315
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.008685161201
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2C2I2-673fb5ad/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
C 12.011 C_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.087219437129 0.087219437648 0.949211324374
Y 0.817168798777 0.817168798841 0.050788515082
C 0.372376224421 0.372376223348 0.988292169216
C 0.532012370131 0.532012369245 0.011707823912
I 0.749494385745 0.749494386365 0.871344174309
I 0.154899426915 0.154899427662 0.128655993108
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 566 ---
566
533
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.152035200963
0.0
3e-16
2.3100105181768114
3.450108363951315
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.008685161201
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 88.906
amass(2) = 12.011
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.58459009252134
dis_froz_max = 3.151664339070951
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.514743970595934
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Y: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3'
proj(2) = 'C: l= 3, mr= 3,4,6,7'
proj(3) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,6'
dis_froz_min = -9.238367570688249
/


--- Page 567 ---
567
534
Figure S188: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Y2C2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Y2C2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
177
Material: Y2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2Cl2-6c0a3f63/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.833333333338 0.166666666662 0.943503051178
Y 0.166666666662 0.833333333338 0.056496948822


--- Page 568 ---
568
535
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.873763725642
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.126236274358
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.753654645598
0.0
2e-16
-1.8768273228835948
3.2507602800725013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.7163434348
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2Cl2-6c0a3f63/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.833333333338 0.166666666662 0.943503051178
Y 0.166666666662 0.833333333338 0.056496948822
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.873763725642
Cl 0.5 0.5 0.126236274358
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 569 ---
569
536
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.753654645598
0.0
2e-16
-1.8768273228835948
3.2507602800725013
2e-16
0.0
0.0
24.7163434348
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 88.906
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.4372994457997
dis_froz_max = 3.7171101028044413
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -14.691744574699163
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Y: l= 2, mr= 1,2,5'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 2, mr= 1,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -3.3577956968819986
/


--- Page 570 ---
570
537
Figure S189: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Y2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Y2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
178
Material: Y2Ga2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2Ga2I2-bd338b25/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.0 0.0 0.927876595711


--- Page 571 ---
571
538
Y 0.0 0.0 0.072123404289
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.987920985709
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.012079014291
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.856581537705
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.143418462295
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2087557012
0.0
3e-16
-2.10437785059996
3.6448893555999162
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.9421885853
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2Ga2I2-bd338b25/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Ga 69.723 Ga_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.0 0.0 0.927876595711
Y 0.0 0.0 0.072123404289
Ga 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.987920985709
Ga 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.012079014291
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.856581537705
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.143418462295
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 572 ---
572
539
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.2087557012
0.0
3e-16
-2.10437785059996
3.6448893555999162
3e-16
0.0
0.0
27.9421885853
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 88.906
amass(2) = 69.723
amass(3) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 13.61329190799086
dis_froz_max = 2.7143557351554257
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.729843672374361
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-20'
proj(1) = 'Y: l= -5, mr= 2,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Ga: l= 3, mr= 1,4,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 3,7'
dis_froz_min = -4.3869490456941715
/


--- Page 573 ---
573
540
Figure S190: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Y2Ga2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Y2Ga2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 11 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
179
Material: Y2O2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2O2Cl2-083edaec/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.945761604732
Y 0.999999999974 0.0 0.054238395266
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.120116085798


--- Page 574 ---
574
541
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.879883914204
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032288792064
O 0.999999999974 0.0 0.967711207935
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.813750364148
0.0
2e-16
-1.9068751820739949
3.3028046990270044
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.368832354
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Y2O2Cl2-083edaec/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Y 88.906 Y_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
O 15.999 O_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Y 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.945761604732
Y 0.999999999974 0.0 0.054238395266
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.120116085798
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.879883914204
O 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032288792064
O 0.999999999974 0.0 0.967711207935
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 575 ---
575
542
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.813750364148
0.0
2e-16
-1.9068751820739949
3.3028046990270044
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.368832354
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 88.906
amass(2) = 35.453
amass(3) = 15.999
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.386644568992608
dis_froz_max = -1.0972458517760253
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.57252299596239
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Y: l= 3, mr= 4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6'
proj(3) = 'O: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,7'
dis_froz_min = -15.707154497489125
/


--- Page 576 ---
576
543
Figure S191: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Y2O2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Y2O2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
180
Material: ZnBr2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnBr2-d09dd793/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 1e-12
Br 0.0 0.0 0.065621779669
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.934378220329


--- Page 577 ---
577
544
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7614195424
0.0
2e-16
-1.88070977120015
3.257484878000314
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0118104407
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnBr2-d09dd793/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 1e-12
Br 0.0 0.0 0.065621779669
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.934378220329
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7614195424
0.0
2e-16
-1.88070977120015
3.257484878000314
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.0118104407


--- Page 578 ---
578
545
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 65.38
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.430694139559769
dis_froz_max = -2.370261667637048
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.204151608031538
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Zn: l= -5, mr= 1,3,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.845443322361039
/


--- Page 579 ---
579
546
Figure S192: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZnBr2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZnBr2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
181
Material: ZnCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnCl2-4d9f2040/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Cl 0.0 0.5 0.939909839096
Cl 0.5 0.0 0.060090160905


--- Page 580 ---
580
547
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.712001908057
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.712001908057
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7593417019
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnCl2-4d9f2040/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Cl 0.0 0.5 0.939909839096
Cl 0.5 0.0 0.060090160905
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.712001908057
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.712001908057
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7593417019


--- Page 581 ---
581
548
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 65.38
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 15
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.643601958687137
dis_froz_max = -1.1439709633489716
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.652340038151927
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Zn: l= 3, mr= 3,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -14.539409940276496
/


--- Page 582 ---
582
549
Figure S193: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZnCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZnCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
182
Material: ZnCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnCl2-6ef36b8b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999981856
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.060181912471
Cl 1.6e-11 3.2e-11 0.939818105673


--- Page 583 ---
583
550
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.600694363605
0.0
2e-16
-1.8003471818023766
3.1182927902239634
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7725935563
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnCl2-6ef36b8b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.999999981856
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.060181912471
Cl 1.6e-11 3.2e-11 0.939818105673
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.600694363605
0.0
2e-16
-1.8003471818023766
3.1182927902239634
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.7725935563


--- Page 584 ---
584
551
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 65.38
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 10
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.93476307147616
dis_froz_max = -2.4254081450372658
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.878512171242324
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Zn: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= 2, mr= 2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -12.29010084280872
/


--- Page 585 ---
585
552
Figure S194: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZnCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZnCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
183
Material: ZnI2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnI2-cc7f50d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.929570649417
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.070429350583


--- Page 586 ---
586
553
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.075564864704
0.0
2e-16
-2.037782432301558
3.5295427076456223
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3328023086
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZnI2-cc7f50d7/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zn 65.38 Zn_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zn 0.0 0.0 0.0
I 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.929570649417
I 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.070429350583
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
4.075564864704
0.0
2e-16
-2.037782432301558
3.5295427076456223
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.3328023086


--- Page 587 ---
587
554
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 65.38
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 8
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.882243204563428
dis_froz_max = -1.9480023006658866
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.635523946142065
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-11'
proj(1) = 'Zn: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 3, mr= 3,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.49757835866555
/


--- Page 588 ---
588
555
Figure S195: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZnI2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZnI2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
184
Material: Zr2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Br2-0f33aa90/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.955234941804
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.044765058198


--- Page 589 ---
589
556
Br 0.0 0.0 0.882962083436
Br 0.0 0.0 0.117037916562
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.533354188878
0.0
2e-16
-1.7666770944391197
3.0599744881722346
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.1902227201
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Br2-0f33aa90/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.955234941804
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.044765058198
Br 0.0 0.0 0.882962083436
Br 0.0 0.0 0.117037916562
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 590 ---
590
557
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.533354188878
0.0
2e-16
-1.7666770944391197
3.0599744881722346
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.1902227201
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 79.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 14
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 16.88892008979188
dis_froz_max = 3.7593241273222846
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.79994939724413
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,7'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,2,7'
dis_froz_min = -0.6614032585060161
/


--- Page 591 ---
591
558
Figure S196: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
185
Material: Zr2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Cl2-37576604/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9540881273390001
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.045911872661


--- Page 592 ---
592
559
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.113063867578
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.886936132422
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.44469403765
0.0
2e-16
-1.7223470188751357
2.9831925448903958
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9102609354
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Cl2-37576604/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 4
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9540881273390001
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.045911872661
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.113063867578
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.886936132422
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 593 ---
593
560
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.44469403765
0.0
2e-16
-1.7223470188751357
2.9831925448903958
2e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9102609354
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 18
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 19.269636999725115
dis_froz_max = 2.9809029715745528
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.424194444259555
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-10'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -4, mr= 3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -1.9274554647314828
/


--- Page 594 ---
594
561
Figure S197: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
186
Material: Zr2I4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2I4-0b0db0db/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.25 0.579492617904 0.002183268885
Zr 0.75 0.203589187624 0.997816806233
I 0.25 0.970407277245 0.067081241598
I 0.75 0.812670553264 0.932918693861


--- Page 595 ---
595
562
I 0.25 0.311223798351 0.909971726308
I 0.75 0.471855664703 0.090028263116
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7663514256
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.9054751532
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.3728695009
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2I4-0b0db0db/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.25 0.579492617904 0.002183268885
Zr 0.75 0.203589187624 0.997816806233
I 0.25 0.970407277245 0.067081241598
I 0.75 0.812670553264 0.932918693861
I 0.25 0.311223798351 0.909971726308
I 0.75 0.471855664703 0.090028263116
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 596 ---
596
563
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7663514256
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.9054751532
4e-16
0.0
0.0
24.3728695009
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 126.904
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 10.441724645423651
dis_froz_max = 0.8457647306186769
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -15.58626781824655
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,6,7'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -6.730782693426356
/


--- Page 597 ---
597
564
Figure S198: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2I4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2I4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
187
Material: Zr2N2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Br2-08cba12e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.499999999986 0.0 0.96607435297
Zr 0.0 0.499999999988 0.033925646824
Br 0.0 0.0 0.884951176571


--- Page 598 ---
598
565
Br 0.499999999986 0.499999999988 0.115048803657
N 0.499999999986 0.499999999988 0.988986590622
N 0.0 0.0 0.011013429356
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6152489843
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1416088481
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9222635485
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Br2-08cba12e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.499999999986 0.0 0.96607435297
Zr 0.0 0.499999999988 0.033925646824
Br 0.0 0.0 0.884951176571
Br 0.499999999986 0.499999999988 0.115048803657
N 0.499999999986 0.499999999988 0.988986590622
N 0.0 0.0 0.011013429356
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 599 ---
599
566
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6152489843
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1416088481
3e-16
0.0
0.0
25.9222635485
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 24
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.848868733524668
dis_froz_max = -3.0555791300955164
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -26.24425124404366
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 2, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 3,6'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -14.741507484739277
/


--- Page 600 ---
600
567
Figure S199: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2N2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2N2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
188
Material: Zr2N2Br2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Br2-4d2b5c69/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.048737715132
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.951262284866
Br 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.876489125847


--- Page 601 ---
601
568
Br 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.123510874154
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967414708527
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032585291474
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6598745258
0.0
2e-16
-1.8299372629002646
3.1695443140003996
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.6478360291
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Br2-4d2b5c69/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.048737715132
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.951262284866
Br 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.876489125847
Br 0.999999999984 0.999999999968 0.123510874154
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967414708527
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032585291474
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 602 ---
602
569
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6598745258
0.0
2e-16
-1.8299372629002646
3.1695443140003996
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.6478360291
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.129693049715339
dis_froz_max = 2.7660983097878846
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -21.11642736619924
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 3, mr= 1,3,5,6,7'
proj(3) = 'N: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4'
dis_froz_min = -13.177387757136218
/


--- Page 603 ---
603
570
Figure S200: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2N2Br2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2N2Br2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 6
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
189
Material: Zr2N2Cl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Cl2-b582a3bb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049829884803
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9501701151949999
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967200011107


--- Page 604 ---
604
571
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032799988898
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.88117486627
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.118825133727
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6215464513
0.0
2e-16
-1.8107732255998215
3.1363512277997394
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.3165423852
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2Cl2-b582a3bb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.049829884803
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.9501701151949999
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.967200011107
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.032799988898
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.88117486627
Cl 0.0 0.0 0.118825133727
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 605 ---
605
572
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6215464513
0.0
2e-16
-1.8107732255998215
3.1363512277997394
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.3165423852
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 26
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.560210859330732
dis_froz_max = 0.14877876180961103
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.852936266827466
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 2, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(2) = 'N: l= -5, mr= 2,3,4,5,6'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
dis_froz_min = -16.41217701851685
/


--- Page 606 ---
606
573
Figure S201: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2N2Cl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2N2Cl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2
meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
190
Material: Zr2N2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2I2-65ac34ca/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.5 0.0 0.967715540574
Zr 0.0 0.500000000012 0.032284459425
I 0.0 0.0 0.8793571567039999


--- Page 607 ---
607
574
I 0.5 0.500000000012 0.120642843294
N 0.5 0.500000000012 0.990909525819
N 0.0 0.0 0.009090474183
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7473119844
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1393123777
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.287406703
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2I2-65ac34ca/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.5 0.0 0.967715540574
Zr 0.0 0.500000000012 0.032284459425
I 0.0 0.0 0.8793571567039999
I 0.5 0.500000000012 0.120642843294
N 0.5 0.500000000012 0.990909525819
N 0.0 0.0 0.009090474183
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 608 ---
608
575
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7473119844
0.0
2e-16
-3e-16
4.1393123777
3e-16
0.0
0.0
26.287406703
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.75465421964652
dis_froz_max = -3.237097098164835
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -27.3953446936576
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= 2, mr= 3,4,5'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 2, mr= 1,2,3,5'
dis_froz_min = -10.429616646791052
/


--- Page 609 ---
609
576
Figure S202: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2N2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2N2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 3 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
191
Material: Zr2N2I2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2I2-f1f5127b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.047219566837
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.952780433163
I 0.999999999973 0.0 0.129631208928


--- Page 610 ---
610
577
I 0.999999999973 0.0 0.8703687910719999
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.967539784252
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.032460215748
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.737890482
0.0
2e-16
-1.8689452410001623
3.237108114000215
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.9402909328
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2N2I2-f1f5127b/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
I 126.904 I_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.047219566837
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.952780433163
I 0.999999999973 0.0 0.129631208928
I 0.999999999973 0.0 0.8703687910719999
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.967539784252
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.032460215748
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 611 ---
611
578
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.737890482
0.0
2e-16
-1.8689452410001623
3.237108114000215
2e-16
0.0
0.0
26.9402909328
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 126.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 22
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 7.213641627005384
dis_froz_max = -3.38140449682966
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -22.35071794837458
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-12'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'I: l= -5, mr= 2,6'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 1,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -15.238707717788163
/


--- Page 612 ---
612
579
Figure S203: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2N2I2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2N2I2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 7 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
192
Material: Zr2Si2Te2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Si2Te2-0a661d06/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.500000000027 0.07902100867


--- Page 613 ---
613
580
Zr 0.500000000027 0.0 0.920978991326
Si 0.0 0.0 0.0
Si 0.500000000027 0.500000000027 0.0
Te 0.500000000027 0.0 0.130684019155
Te 0.0 0.500000000027 0.869315980849
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6805504264
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.6805504264
2e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0653023657
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/Zr2Si2Te2-0a661d06/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Si 28.086 Si_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.500000000027 0.07902100867
Zr 0.500000000027 0.0 0.920978991326
Si 0.0 0.0 0.0
Si 0.500000000027 0.500000000027 0.0
Te 0.500000000027 0.0 0.130684019155
Te 0.0 0.500000000027 0.869315980849
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 614 ---
614
581
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6805504264
0.0
2e-16
-2e-16
3.6805504264
2e-16
0.0
0.0
27.0653023657
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 28.086
amass(3) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 20
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.273726668720531
dis_froz_max = 2.8538039747910435
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.345939496470608
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-20'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 2, mr= 1,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Si: l= -4, mr= 1,2,4,5'
proj(3) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 3,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.831065003036078
/


--- Page 615 ---
615
582
Figure S204: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer Zr2Si2Te2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer Zr2Si2Te2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the
present method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the
range over which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is
10 meV. The k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
193
Material: ZrCl2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrCl2-815b2b33/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999998442801
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.926929221292
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.073072335907


--- Page 616 ---
616
583
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4073495193
0.0
2e-16
-1.7036747594999624
2.9508512431999145
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.473380671
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrCl2-815b2b33/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.999998442801
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.926929221292
Cl 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.073072335907
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4073495193
0.0
2e-16
-1.7036747594999624
2.9508512431999145
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.473380671


--- Page 617 ---
617
584
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 7
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.957829738703403
dis_froz_max = -0.45110325087955383
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -19.19036361946475
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-7'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,3,4'
proj(2) = 'Cl: l= -4, mr= 1,3'
dis_froz_min = -7.069273139892443
/


--- Page 618 ---
618
585
Figure S205: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrCl2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrCl2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
194
Material: ZrNBr
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrNBr-7298ef34/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.021337523829
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931590890632
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.047071585539


--- Page 619 ---
619
586
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4834666069
0.0
2e-16
-1.7417333035001306
3.016770574900172
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.6097254117
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrNBr-7298ef34/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Br 79.904 Br_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.021337523829
Br 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931590890632
N 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.047071585539
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4834666069
0.0
2e-16
-1.7417333035001306
3.016770574900172
2e-16


--- Page 620 ---
620
587
0.0
0.0
22.6097254117
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 79.904
amass(3) = 14.007
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 9.917306968901325
dis_froz_max = -1.98115405369317
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.030977884880688
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= -5, mr= 1,2,4,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Br: l= 2, mr= 3,5'
proj(3) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 2,3,4,6'
dis_froz_min = -9.501637585309604
/


--- Page 621 ---
621
588
Figure S206: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrNBr. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrNBr over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
195
Material: ZrNCl
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrNCl-2b92cc43/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.0184039058
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.04599592291
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.93560017129


--- Page 622 ---
622
589
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4350890445
0.0
2e-16
-1.7175445222999166
2.9748743767998165
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.5102178763
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrNCl-2b92cc43/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
N 14.007 N_r.upf
Cl 35.453 Cl_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.0184039058
N 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.04599592291
Cl 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.93560017129
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.4350890445
0.0
2e-16
-1.7175445222999166
2.9748743767998165
2e-16


--- Page 623 ---
623
590
0.0
0.0
22.5102178763
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 14.007
amass(3) = 35.453
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.029664271270537
dis_froz_max = -2.169887607225367
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.398935482414583
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= -4, mr= 1,2,3,4'
proj(2) = 'N: l= 3, mr= 2,3,5'
proj(3) = 'Cl: l= 3, mr= 3,4,5,7'
dis_froz_min = -10.763982762238818
/


--- Page 624 ---
624
591
Figure S207: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrNCl. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrNCl over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
196
Material: ZrS2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrS2-70e152a6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.063637716044
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.936362283957


--- Page 625 ---
625
592
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6714880529
0.0
2e-16
-1.8357440264997835
3.1796019235995847
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9186134249
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrS2-70e152a6/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
S 32.066 S_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
S 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.063637716044
S 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.936362283957
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.6714880529
0.0
2e-16
-1.8357440264997835
3.1796019235995847
2e-16
0.0
0.0
22.9186134249


--- Page 626 ---
626
593
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 32.066
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 12
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 8.585991132926548
dis_froz_max = -2.620933559657856
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -20.405167050259227
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-6'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 2, mr= 4,5'
proj(2) = 'S: l= 3, mr= 1,2,3,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -11.419164624070474
/


--- Page 627 ---
627
594
Figure S208: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrS2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrS2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
197
Material: ZrSe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrSe2-2f549b91/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-12
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931750365923
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.068249634079


--- Page 628 ---
628
595
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7977180811
0.0
2e-16
-1.898859040599818
3.288920334699622
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1967661517
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrSe2-2f549b91/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
assume_isolated = 2D
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = 'david'
electron_maxstep = 200
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.999999999999
Se 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.931750365923
Se 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.068249634079
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.7977180811
0.0
2e-16
-1.898859040599818
3.288920334699622
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1967661517


--- Page 629 ---
629
596
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 9
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 17.632044702399334
dis_froz_max = -2.582447334312004
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
system_2d = 'dipole_sp'
lpolar = .true.
dis_win_min = -23.62903752901941
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= -5, mr= 1,4,5'
proj(2) = 'Se: l= 3, mr= 5,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -14.203086108836484
/


--- Page 630 ---
630
597
Figure S209: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrSe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrSe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 5 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
198
Material: ZrTe2
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTe2-88ed8d0e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.923778307646


--- Page 631 ---
631
598
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.076221692354
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.9744450917
0.0
2e-16
-1.9872225458000534
3.441970415400111
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6170073716
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTe2-88ed8d0e/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 3
ntyp = 2
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.0 0.0 0.0
Te 0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.923778307646
Te 0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.076221692354
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom


--- Page 632 ---
632
599
3.9744450917
0.0
2e-16
-1.9872225458000534
3.441970415400111
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.6170073716
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 11
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.705996295270122
dis_froz_max = 2.9501774446035594
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -13.096634310407772
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-16'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,5,6'
proj(2) = 'Te: l= -5, mr= 1,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -4.519689367764494
/


--- Page 633 ---
633
600
Figure S210: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrTe2. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrTe2 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 9 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
199
Material: ZrTiSe4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTiSe4-c269ecfd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.499999999992 0.503213780747 0.999999999999


--- Page 634 ---
634
601
Ti 0.0 0.982405464502 0.999999999999
Se 0.32061908895 0.996672525311 0.068502660343
Se 0.84465009916 0.503911770117 0.066538881568
Se 0.67938091105 0.996672525311 0.931497339656
Se 0.155349900824 0.503911770117 0.933461118435
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.375413239075
0.0
4e-16
-2e-16
3.669750559361
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1994873053
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTiSe4-c269ecfd/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Se 78.971 Se_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.499999999992 0.503213780747 0.999999999999
Ti 0.0 0.982405464502 0.999999999999
Se 0.32061908895 0.996672525311 0.068502660343
Se 0.84465009916 0.503911770117 0.066538881568
Se 0.67938091105 0.996672525311 0.931497339656
Se 0.155349900824 0.503911770117 0.933461118435
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 635 ---
635
602
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
6.375413239075
0.0
4e-16
-2e-16
3.669750559361
2e-16
0.0
0.0
23.1994873053
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 47.867
amass(3) = 78.971
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 25
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 15.306547598569193
dis_froz_max = 3.0391175370222956
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -17.387358733487186
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-32'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
proj(2) = 'Ti: l= -5, mr= 1,2,3,4,6'
proj(3) = 'Se: l= -4, mr= 1,3,4,5'
dis_froz_min = -11.28025022060367
/


--- Page 636 ---
636
603
Figure S211: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrTiSe4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrTiSe4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 2 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
200
Material: ZrTiTe4
The calculation files are appended below. These files should be executed in the order provided. The
location of pseudo potentials should be changed accordingly.
---
scf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = 'scf'
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTiTe4-6bb865fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.5 0.001530443597 0.99999985534


--- Page 637 ---
637
604
Ti 0.0 0.50152927714 1.48925e-07
Te 0.0 0.82395228127 0.923784152687
Te 0.5 0.345081260242 0.926191120598
Te 0.0 0.179108737796 0.076215876752
Te 0.5 0.657980702936 0.073808845697
K_POINTS automatic
6 6 1 0 0 0
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.866028027
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.7179495652
4e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5921491241
---
nscf.in ---
&CONTROL
calculation = bands
verbosity = 'high'
restart_mode = 'from_scratch'
outdir = './'
pseudo_dir = '/scratch1/05193/sabyadk/2D_materials_Wann/Materials/ZrTiTe4-6bb865fb/pseudo/'
prefix = 'hBN'
/
&SYSTEM
ibrav = 0
nat = 6
ntyp = 3
ecutwfc = 60
ecutrho = 240
occupations = 'smearing'
smearing = 'gaussian'
degauss = 0.01
nbnd = 60
/
&ELECTRONS
conv_thr = 1E-10
diagonalization = cg
electron_maxstep = 500
/
ATOMIC_SPECIES
Zr 91.224 Zr_r.upf
Ti 47.867 Ti_r.upf
Te 126.7 Te_r.upf
ATOMIC_POSITIONS crystal
Zr 0.5 0.001530443597 0.99999985534
Ti 0.0 0.50152927714 1.48925e-07
Te 0.0 0.82395228127 0.923784152687
Te 0.5 0.345081260242 0.926191120598
Te 0.0 0.179108737796 0.076215876752
Te 0.5 0.657980702936 0.073808845697
K_POINTS crystal
36
0.0 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.0 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.16666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.3333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.5 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.6666666666666666 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778


--- Page 638 ---
638
605
0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.16666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.3333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.5 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.6666666666666666 0.0 0.027778
0.8333333333333333 0.8333333333333333 0.0 0.027778
CELL_PARAMETERS angstrom
3.866028027
0.0
2e-16
-4e-16
6.7179495652
4e-16
0.0
0.0
23.5921491241
---
epw1.in ---
&inputepw
prefix = 'hBN'
amass(1) = 91.224
amass(2) = 47.867
amass(3) = 126.7
outdir = './'
elph = .false.
epbwrite = .false.
epbread = .false.
epwwrite = .true.
epwread = .false.
etf_mem = 1
nbndsub = 19
use_ws = .true.
wannierize = .true.
num_iter = 1000
iprint = 2
dis_win_max = 11.342203364621394
dis_froz_max = 1.585792728139754
fsthick = 1.2
temps = 1
degaussw = 0.005
dvscf_dir = './save'
nk1 = 6
nk2 = 6
nk3 = 1
nq1 = 1
nq2 = 1
nq3 = 1
dis_win_min = -15.947917215942264
wdata(1) = 'guiding_centres = T'
wdata(2) = 'dis_num_iter = 1500'
wdata(3) = 'bands_num_points = 100 '
wdata(4) = 'bands_plot = .true.'
wdata(5) = 'begin kpoint_path'
wdata(6) = 'G 0.0 0.0 0.0 M 0.5 0.0 0.0'
wdata(7) = 'M 0.5 0.0 0.0 K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0'
wdata(8) = 'K 0.3333333333 0.3333333333 0.0
X 1.0 1.0 0.0'
wdata(9) = 'X 1.0 1.0 0.0
M1 0.0 0.5 0.0'
wdata(10) = 'M1 0.0 0.5 0.0 G 0.0 0.0 0.0'
wdata(11) = 'end kpoint_path'
bands_skipped = 'exclude_bands = 1-32'
proj(1) = 'Zr: l= 3, mr= 4,7'
proj(2) = 'Ti: l= 2, mr= 1'
proj(3) = 'Te: l= 3, mr= 1,4,6,7'
dis_froz_min = -6.9565048049705736
/


--- Page 639 ---
639
606
Figure S212: Bandstructure ineterpolation for monolayer ZrTiTe4. Wannier-interpolation of the band
structure of monolayer ZrTiTe4 over a wide energy range. Blue dashed lines are results from the present
method, black solid lines are explicit DFT calculations. The yellow shaded region shows the range over
which optimization has been performed. The interpolation error within the yellow region is 4 meV. The
k-grid employed for NSCF calculation is 6×6.
