--- Page 1 ---
Preprint.
CacheFlow: Efficient LLM Serving with
3D-Parallel KV Cache Restoration
Sean Nian1, Jiahao Fang1, Qilong Feng2, Zhiyu Wu1, Fan Lai1
1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
2National University of Singapore
Abstract
KV cache restoration has emerged as a dominant bottleneck in serving
long-context LLM workloads, including multi-turn conversations, retrieval-
augmented generation, and agentic pipelines. Existing approaches treat
restoration as a per-request tradeoff between recomputation and I/O trans-
fer, recomputing KV states from scratch or offloading them from external
storage (e.g., CPU memory or remote machines). However, existing ad-
vances fail to exploit parallelism across tokens, layers, and distributed
deployments, and critically ignore resource contention under batched serv-
ing. We present CacheFlow, a KV cache restoration framework that re-
thinks cache restoration as a multi-dimensional parallel execution problem.
CacheFlow introduces a unified 3D parallelism abstraction across tokens,
layers, and GPUs, enabling fine-grained overlap of recomputation and I/O
along the structural dependencies of transformer inference. At the core
of CacheFlow is a batch-aware two-pointer scheduler that jointly optimizes
compute and I/O allocation across requests by prioritizing operations with
the highest marginal reduction in recomputation cost. Our evaluations
show that CacheFlow reduces Time-To-First-Token (TTFT) by 10%–62%
over existing advances across diverse models, workloads, and hardware.
1
Introduction
The rapid adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs) in interactive and agentic applications
has driven a fundamental shift toward long-context inference. Modern workloads, including
multi-turn conversations (Jiang et al., 2026), retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Liu
et al., 2024b; Yao et al., 2025), and tool-augmented agents (Zhang et al., 2026a), rely heavily
on reusing previously processed context. As a result, efficiently restoring the Key-Value
(KV) cache, the intermediate latent representation of prior context, has become a first-class
efficiency challenge, as KV cache restoration directly determines Time-To-First-Token (TTFT),
a critical latency metric for user-facing systems (Qin et al., 2025; Yao et al., 2025).
Despite its latency-critical role, KV cache restoration remains fundamentally inefficient,
incurring many seconds of latency for long-context requests. Existing advances expose a
coarse-grained dichotomy: they either rely on prefill recomputation (vll; Liu et al., 2024a;
Li et al., 2026), which regenerates KV cache from plaintext at high computational cost, or
perform I/O-based restoration by offloading KV cache from external memory (e.g., CPU
memory, SSD, or remote nodes (Liu et al., 2025)), which is constrained by bandwidth.
While recent hybrid approaches (Jin et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2025) partially
overlap computation and I/O, they remain fundamentally request-centric and fail to capture
two key properties of modern LLM serving (§2). First, KV cache recomputation cost scales
superlinearly: due to the quadratic complexity of attention, later tokens incur dispropor-
tionately higher cost, making naive recomputation inefficient for long contexts. This effect
is exacerbated by workload heterogeneity, where requests span a wide spectrum of lengths
to restore, from short system prompts to long multi-turn contexts. Second, production LLM
serving is inherently batched and distributed across multiple GPUs, where compute and
I/O resources are shared across requests. This introduces resource contention and straggler
effects, rendering per-request optimization insufficient for maximizing overall efficiency.
1
arXiv:2604.25080v1  [cs.DC]  28 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Preprint.
In this paper, we introduce CacheFlow, a serving system that rethinks KV cache restoration
as a multi-dimensional parallel execution problem. Our key insight is that restoration is
not a monolithic operation, but can be decomposed into fine-grained units that expose
three complementary forms of parallelism: (i) Token-level parallelism: overlapping recompu-
tation of earlier tokens with I/O transfer of later tokens, exploiting the causal dependency
across tokens; (ii) Layer-level parallelism: pipelining recomputation of lower layers with
transfer of higher-layer KV cache, leveraging the execution dependency of model layers; (iii)
Multi-GPU parallelism: enabling concurrent restoration across GPUs, allowing each GPU to
reconstruct the KV cache of its local model shard while preserving global correctness. Each
exposes structured dependencies that can be exploited for parallel execution. This leads to a
unified view: KV cache restoration is a multi-dimensional scheduling problem that requires jointly
optimizing computation and I/O across requests and GPUs.
However, realizing this vision introduces three fundamental challenges (§3). First, at
the request level, determining the optimal composition of parallelism requires carefully
balancing heterogeneous costs across tokens, as well as the interplay between compute
and I/O capabilities. Second, at the multi-GPU level, enabling parallel restoration requires
managing inter-device dependencies to preserve correctness while maximizing concurrency.
Third, at the batch level, concurrent restoration across multiple requests introduces severe
resource contention and straggler effects, requiring coordinated scheduling.
Contributions. To address these challenges, we make the following contributions:
• A new formulation of KV cache restoration as a multi-dimensional scheduling prob-
lem. We identify the interplay between quadratic recomputation cost and shared re-
source contention, and show that optimal restoration corresponds to balancing compute
and I/O via a harmonic-mean bound (§3.1).
• A novel 3D-parallel KV cache restoration framework. We introduce a unified execution
model that orchestrates token-, layer-, and GPU-level parallelism via a novel batch-aware
two-pointer scheduling strategy, enabling fine-grained overlap of recomputation and
transfer. For distributed deployments, we introduce a lightweight state abstraction
where each GPU stores boundary hidden states for concurrent restoration (§3.2-§3.3).
• End-to-end system and evaluations. We implement CacheFlow atop existing serving
stacks, vLLM (vll) and LMCache (Liu et al., 2025), seamlessly supporting existing LLM
applications. We evaluate it across diverse models (Qwen3-8B, Qwen3-30B-A3B, and
Llama-3.1-8B), realistic chatbot and agentic pipeline workloads, and hardware conditions.
CacheFlow reduces TTFT by 10%–62% over existing advances (§4).
2
Background and Motivation
LLM serving consists of two sequential stages: a prefill stage that processes the input context
and produces the first output token, and a decode stage that autoregressively generates
subsequent tokens (Zhang et al., 2026b). During prefill, the model materializes the KV cache,
intermediate representations of each token at every attention layer, which are retained in
GPU memory to enable efficient reuse during decoding to avoid recomputation.
KV cache as a first-order resource bottleneck. For a transformer with L layers, H attention
heads, and per-head dimension d, serving a request of length N requires storing 2 × L ×
H × d × N elements in the KV cache. This linear scaling with respect to sequence length.
With rapidly increasing context sizes in modern workloads, the KV cache becomes a dom-
inant consumer of GPU memory. Figure 1a shows that real-world workloads, including
multi-turn chatbots and AI-assisted coding and tool-call agents, can reach over 20,000 tokens
per request. This corresponds to KV cache sizes of 2.8 GB for models such as Qwen3-8B, 9.7
GB for Llama-3.1-405B for a single request, and even larger for reasoning-oriented models
such as DeepSeek-R1. These requirements far exceed the memory capacity of a single GPU,
forcing systems to either offload KV cache to lower tiers (Liu et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2025) or
discard and recompute it on demand (vll; Zhang et al., 2026b).
2


--- Page 3 ---
Preprint.
0
10000
20000
30000
Sequence Length (tokens)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
CDF across Requests
LMSYS-Chat
SWE-Bench
WildChat
(a) Long lengths to restore.
0
32K
64K
96K
128K
Input Sequence Length
0
50
100
150
200
KV Cache Size (GB)
Qwen3-8B
Llama-3.1-405B
DeepSeek-R1
(b) Severe memory pressure.
102
103
104
Input Sequence Length
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
TTFT (s)
A100
H100
L40
I/O (40 Gbps)
I/O (10 Gbps)
(c) High restoration costs.
Figure 1: KV cache restoration is a fundamental bottleneck. (a) Real-world workloads,
including multi-turn conversations (LMSys-Chat (Zheng et al., 2024a), WildChat (Zhao et al.,
2024)) and agentic pipelines (SWE-Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024)), exhibit a high prevalence of
long input prefixes that require KV cache reuse. (b) The KV cache footprint grows linearly
with sequence length and quickly exceeds GPU memory capacity. (c) Recomputation incurs
superlinear latency due to quadratic attention cost, while I/O restoration is bounded by
bandwidth and degrades under realistic (e.g., 10–40 Gbps) conditions.
KV cache restoration becomes a key latency bottleneck. Restoring KV cache is on the
critical path of prefill and directly determines Time-To-First-Token (TTFT), a key latency
metric for interactive applications. However, existing strategies incur substantial latency. As
shown in Figure 1, recomputation can take over 1.2–1.5 seconds for long contexts on modern
GPUs, far exceeding typical latency targets (∼200 ms). In contrast, I/O-based restoration can
be faster under ideal conditions (e.g., 80 Gbps), but is highly sensitive to bandwidth; under
realistic conditions (e.g., 10 Gbps, typical disk or inter-node transfer in Amazon Cloud (Jin
et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2024b)), its latency can exceed that of recomputation. Consequently,
neither approach alone provides robust performance across operating regimes.
Limitations of existing advances. Existing systems largely reduce KV restoration to a
per-request decision between recomputation and I/O transfer, or a coarse-grained hybrid
of the two. While simple, this abstraction fails to capture three fundamental properties
of modern LLM serving: (i) Non-uniform recomputation cost: The cost of recomputation is
highly heterogeneous across tokens due to quadratic attention. Later tokens incur dispro-
portionately higher cost; (ii) Underutilized structural parallelism: KV cache restoration exhibits
inherent parallelism along multiple dimensions, including tokens (causal dependency),
layers (feed-forward structure), and model shards (distributed execution), which existing
designs fail to exploit; and (iii) Batch-level resource contention. Production serving executes
many requests concurrently on shared compute and I/O resources. This introduces con-
tention and straggler effects, rendering per-request optimization insufficient for maximizing
system-wide throughput and latency.
Addressing this challenge requires rethinking restoration as a coordinated parallel execution
problem that adapts to heterogeneous costs, shared resources, and distributed environments.
3
Methodologies
We present CacheFlow, a KV cache restoration framework that rethinks restoration as a
multi-dimensional parallel execution problem. As shown in Figure 2, given a request with
a cached prefix of Nc tokens, CacheFlow aims to minimize restoration latency by jointly
optimizing recomputation and I/O across multiple structural dimensions. Our design is
grounded in a unifying principle: KV cache restoration can be decomposed into a dependency
graph over tokens, layers, and devices, and executed via coordinated parallel along these dimensions.
We next introduce intra-request parallelism across tokens and layers (§3.1), then extend the
design to distributed multi-GPU settings (§3.2), and finally address batch-level scheduling
under shared resource constraints (§3.3).
3


--- Page 4 ---
Preprint.
Batched 
Requests
Cached 
Prefix
Uncached 
Suffix
Cacheflow
KV Cache
Inference 
Engine
Model Layer i
Token IDs
Restore by Recompute
Restore by Transfer
Token-wise
Layer-wise
GPU 1
GPU 2
GPU 3
GPU 4
3D Parallelism Restoration
Multi-GPU, In-Parallel Restoration
KV Cache 
Restored
Compute 
Pointer
I/O
Pointer
Compute 
Pointer
I/O
Pointer
Batch-aware Two-pointer
Scheduler
   3D-Parallel      
KV Cache Restoration
Figure 2: CacheFlow architecture and 3D parallelism workflow.
3.1
2D Restoration: Token- and Layer-wise Parallelism
KV cache restoration exhibits highly non-uniform costs due to both algorithmic and system-
level factors. Let Tcomp(n) denote the cost of recomputing n tokens. Due to attention,
Tcomp(n) grows superlinearly (quadratically in dominant terms), while also exhibiting
fixed overheads, such as kernel launches and memory movement (e.g., loading weight
matrices from HBM to on-chip SRAM). As shown in Figure 1c, recomputing 2 000 tokens
incurs latency comparable to recomputing 500 tokens, largely due to fixed overheads. In
contrast, I/O cost Tio(n) scales approximately linearly with data size but is bounded by
bandwidth. This mismatch leads to a key challenge: how to partition restoration work such
that recomputation and I/O are maximally overlapped while minimizing redundant cost?
Unified Two-pointer Abstraction. To address these challenges, we introduce the first two
dimensions of CacheFlow’s 3D parallelism: parallelism across the token and layer axes of the
KV cache. Both dimensions share a common algorithmic foundation—a two-pointer, meet-
in-the-middle strategy that executes recomputation and I/O loading from opposite ends of
the dependency graph—but operate along different structural axes of the transformer:
• Token-wise parallelism: Given a request with Nc cached tokens and a chunk size of C,
we partition the prefix into ⌈Nc/C⌉chunks indexed 0, 1, . . . , ⌈Nc/C⌉−1. We choose
C to align with the preferred block size of FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022) (typically
512 tokens), ensuring efficient kernel execution and high throughput. Two pointers
are initialized at opposite ends: a compute pointer at chunk 0 and an I/O pointer at
chunk ⌈Nc/C⌉−1. The compute pointer advances forward, recomputing KV states for
chunks 0, 1, 2, . . ., while the I/O pointer retreats backward, loading cached KV states for
chunks ⌈Nc/C⌉−1, ⌈Nc/C⌉−2, . . . from external storage. The two processes proceed
concurrently and meet at an intermediate chunk, at which point restoration completes
without redundant work. This design is particularly effective for long sequences, where
prioritizing I/O for later chunks avoids disproportionately high recomputation cost.
• Layer-wise parallelism: While token-wise restoration determines which token ranges to
recompute versus load, it applies the same decision uniformly across all layers for each
chunk. In contrast, layer-wise restoration decouples this decision across layers. Given
a transformer with L layers, we initialize a forward pointer ℓfwd at layer 0 and a reverse
pointer ℓio at layer L−1. The forward process recomputes activations bottom-up through
layers 0, 1, 2, . . ., advancing ℓfwd after each layer. In parallel, a loader retrieves cached
KV states top-down through layers L−1, L−2, L−3, . . ., retreating ℓio accordingly. When
the forward pass pointer reaches a point where all higher layers have already been
restored via loading, the process identifies a cutover layer ℓand terminates loading. This
design is more effective for relatively short sequences (e.g., a few hundred tokens), where
recomputation cost is dominated by fixed overheads.
4


--- Page 5 ---
Preprint.
0
10K
20K
30K
40K
Prompt Length (tokens)
10
2
10
3
TTFT (ms)
convergence
point
Token-wise
Layer-wise
Figure 3: The crossover point de-
fines the threshold L∆used by
CacheFlow to switch between
strategies.
Adaptive Parallelism Strategy.
While both strategies
enable overlap between computation and I/O, yet ex-
hibiting complementary strengths, maximizing overall
restoration throughput requires deciding when to switch
between token-wise and layer-wise parallelism.
We observe that the choice reduces to identifying a
sequence-length threshold, L∆, at which token-wise
restoration begins to outperform layer-wise restoration.
Importantly, L∆is largely content-agnostic, depending
primarily on hardware characteristics. As shown in Fig-
ure 3, we therefore can perform lightweight offline pro-
filing across sequence lengths for both strategies and se-
lect the crossover point as L∆= min{N | Ttoken(N) ≤
Tlayer(N)}, which is then used to guide runtime decisions.
3.2
Extending to 3D: Multi-GPU Parallelism
Practical LLM serving deployments often partition model layers across multiple GPUs (Li
et al., 2023). Consider a transformer with L layers distributed across S stages, where stage
s owns layers [ℓstart
s
, ℓend
s
) and resides on a dedicated GPU. CacheFlow extends the 2D
abstraction to a third dimension by enabling parallel restoration across model shards.
Decoupling via Boundary Activations.
Our key insight is that KV cache restoration across
these stages can be decoupled and parallelized by its lightweight boundary activations—the
input to the first layer of the next stage, which is much smaller than storing and loading the
KV cache of all [ℓstart
s
, ℓend
s
) layers. As such, each GPU can independently reconstruct the KV
cache for its local shard, as it already possesses the required input states for recomputation.
This design is naturally compatible with both token-wise and layer-wise restoration. Con-
cretely, each GPU retrieves cached boundary activations for the prefix tokens and performs
its local forward computation, which in turn triggers KV cache restoration (via the same
two-pointer mechanism) for its assigned layers. Note that this phase depends only on
cached boundary states rather than live intermediate activations, transforming KV cache
restoration from a sequential pipeline into a concurrent, shard-local process, significantly
improving overall latency.
Theoretical Speedup of 3D Parallelism. We first restate the optimal performance bound for
token- and layer-wise restoration under the two-pointer model. Let Tcomp denote the time
to fully recompute the cached prefix (across all L layers or tokens), and Tio the time to load
it entirely from storage. For a split at position ℓ, where segments [0, ℓ) are recomputed and
[ℓ, L) are loaded, the total restoration time is:
T(ℓ) = max
 ℓ
L · Tcomp, L −ℓ
L
· Tio

.
(1)
The optimal split ℓminimizes this envelope and is achieved when the two terms are equal:
ℓ=
L·Tio
Tcomp+Tio and T∗=
Tcomp·Tio
Tcomp+Tio . Thus, the optimal restoration time corresponds to the
harmonic mean of computation and I/O costs. Intuitively, when I/O is fast (Tio ≪Tcomp),
ℓis small and most of the prefix is restored via loading; conversely, when I/O is slow
(Tio ≫Tcomp), ℓapproaches L and recomputation dominates. Therefore, our two-pointer
abstraction achieves the optimal performance across all regimes as T∗≤min(Tcomp, Tio).
We next analyze the benefit of multi-GPU parallelism. Suppose the model is partitioned
across S pipeline stages, each responsible for L/S layers on average. With boundary
activations available, each stage can restore its local KV cache independently and in parallel.
This yields per-stage costs of Tcomp/S and Tio/S, respectively. Applying the same two-
5


--- Page 6 ---
Preprint.
Algorithm 1 Batch-aware 3D Two-Pointer KV Cache Restoration
Require: Requests R, chunk size C, threshold L∆, GPU stages {1, . . . , S}
1: for each r ∈R do
▷Initialize per-request pointers
2:
sr ←(token-wise if Nr
c ≥L∆else layer-wise)
3:
(pcomp
r
, pio
r ) ←
(0, ⌈Nr
c/C⌉−1),
sr = token-wise
(0, L −1),
sr = layer-wise
4: end for
5: while R ̸= ∅do
6:
Rio ←Requests with largest remaining work per I/O channel (source)
7:
for each stage s = 1, . . . , S in parallel do
▷Multi-GPU parallelism
8:
parallel do
▷Overlap I/O and compute
9:
for each r ∈Rio: load KV at pio
r , pio
r ←pio
r −1
10:
for each r ∈R: recompute KV at pcomp
r
, pcomp
r
←pcomp
r
+ 1
11:
end for
12:
R ←{r ∈R | pcomp
r
< pio
r }
▷Remove completed requests
13: end while
pointer optimality within each stage, the restoration time becomes:
T∗
multi-GPU = Tcomp/S · Tio/S
Tcomp/S + Tio/S = 1
S · Tcomp · Tio
Tcomp + Tio
= T∗
S .
(2)
Thus, multi-GPU parallelism achieves an ideal linear speedup proportional to the number of
pipeline stages S. While this speedup may be moderated by load imbalance, our evaluations
show that CacheFlow can approach the scaling limits of the hardware (§4.2).
3.3
Batch-level Scheduling over 3D Parallelism
While 3D parallelism optimizes individual requests, real-world serving executes a batch
R of requests under shared compute and I/O resources. This introduces new challenges:
requests exhibit heterogeneous KV cache lengths needed to restore and compete for shared
compute and I/O resources, leading to straggler effects. For example, concurrently loading
KV cache for multiple requests from the same storage tier can slow down per-request
transfers. The key question then becomes: how can we maximize aggregate restoration
throughput across a batch of requests under shared resource constraints?
Batch-aware Two-Pointer Scheduling.
We formulate batch restoration as a global schedul-
ing problem over all requests and shared resources, and address it with a batch-aware
two-pointer scheduling strategy. Our key insight is that the benefit of allocating I/O band-
width to a request depends on how much recomputation it can avoid. Due to the quadratic
cost of attention, requests with longer cached prefixes incur significantly higher recom-
putation cost, especially for later chunks. Therefore, transferring the KV cache for longer
requests yields higher marginal benefit compared to shorter ones.
We extend the two-pointer abstraction to the batch setting by coordinating pointer advance-
ment across requests. Each request maintains its own compute and I/O pointers, while a
global scheduler allocates compute and I/O resources at each step. For I/O scheduling,
CacheFlow prioritizes requests with the largest remaining recomputation cost (i.e., longest
length to restore). Specifically, we maintain requests in descending order of their length to
restore the KV cache, and prioritize transferring the KV cache of requests with the longest
remaining lengths. This prioritization ensures that I/O is spent where it yields the greatest
reduction in overall compute cost.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the 3D-parallel restoration workflow. The scheduler operates in a
progressive, chunk-level manner. After each chunk is processed (either recomputed or loaded),
the system updates the remaining cost of each request and adjusts scheduling priorities.
This enables dynamic adaptation to evolving resource availability and request progress,
while preserving the optimality properties of the two-pointer design at the per-request level.
6


--- Page 7 ---
Preprint.
0.0
0.5
1.0
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Llama-3.1-8B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(a) WildChat Workloads
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-8B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(b) LMSys-Chat Workloads
0
1
2
3
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-30B-A3B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(c) Agentic pipeline (SWEBench)
Figure 4: CacheFlow achieves lower serving latency than existing advances.
4
Evaluation
4.1
Experimental setup
We implement CacheFlow atop vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) and LMCache (Liu et al., 2025),
enabling more efficient KV cache restoration without altering the model or the application.
Models and Workloads. We evaluate CacheFlow on three representative LLMs spanning
both dense and mixture-of-experts (MoE) architectures: Qwen3-8B, Llama-3.1-8B, and
Qwen3-30B-A3B (MoE models with 3B active experts). These models exhibit diverse KV
cache footprints and compute-to-I/O ratios, enabling us to stress-test different regimes.
We construct workloads from three realistic serving datasets: (i) LMSYS-Chat (Zheng et al.,
2024a), which consists of real ChatGPT multi-turn conversational traces where successive
turns share long prefixes, reflecting common chatbot deployments; (ii) WildChat (Zhao
et al., 2024), a large-scale corpus of open-domain conversations with diverse tasks and
languages, inducing a broad distribution of prefix lengths and reuse patterns; and (iii) SWE-
Bench (Jimenez et al., 2024), an agentic coding benchmark with repeated tool invocations
over shared repository contexts, representing emerging agentic workloads with systematic
prefix reuse. Together, these workloads cover both short- and long-context regimes.
Hardware and Network Conditions. We conduct experiments on NVIDIA L40S (46 GB),
A100 (40 GB), and H100 (80 GB) GPUs, covering both single-GPU and multi-GPU deploy-
ments. To systematically study the impact of I/O constraints, we evaluate different practical
bandwidth conditions of 80 Gbps, 40 Gbps, and 10 Gbps, corresponding to typical Infiniband
(RoCE) speed (Jin et al., 2025), Lambda Lab SSD read speed, and Amazon Cloud inter-node
bandwidth (Liu et al., 2024b), respectively. By default, we use 10 Gbps; we vary bandwidth
and GPU type in later ablation studies (§4.3).
Baselines. We compare CacheFlow against three advances:
• vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023): recomputation-only restoration via standard prefill, represent-
ing the compute-bound extreme.
• SGLang (Zheng et al., 2024b): the state-of-the-art LLM serving framework that restores
KV cache via HiCache, which extends RadixAttention caching to storage tiers.
• LMCache (Liu et al., 2025) v0.3.1: pure KV cache loading without recomputation, repre-
senting the I/O-bound extreme and the state-of-the-art offloading system.
• Cake (Jin et al., 2025): the state-of-the-art hybrid restoration approach that partitions the
prefix along the token dimension for individual requests.
Metrics. We aim to minimize Time-To-First-Token (TTFT), which directly captures the latency
impact of KV cache restoration on user-perceived responsiveness. We also report GPU
compute utilization and I/O bandwidth utilization during restoration.
4.2
End-to-End Performance
CacheFlow reduces serving latency. Figure 4 shows the TTFT distribution across requests
for WildChat, LMSys-Chat, and SWE-Bench. Across all workloads, CacheFlow consistently
left-shifts the CDF, indicating lower latency at every percentile. Overall, CacheFlow achieves
7


--- Page 8 ---
Preprint.
vLLM LMCache
Cake CacheFlow
0
25
50
75
100
Utilization (%)
91%
10%
45%
88%
0%
100%
22%
78%
GPU Compute
PCIe RX
Figure 5: Resource utiliza-
tion during KV restoration.
CacheFlow keeps compute
and I/O active.
0
5K
10K
15K
20K
25K
30K
Prompt Length (tokens)
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
TTFT (s)
Qwen3-8B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
Figure 6:
TTFT by input
length. vLLM grows super-
linearly with length.
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
CDF
vLLM
CacheFlow w/o Multi-GPU
CacheFlow
Figure 7: 3D-parallelism ab-
lation. Ablation comparison
with the multi-GPU optimiza-
tion disabled versus enabled.
0.0
0.5
1.0
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-8B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(a) 40 Gbps I/O speed.
0.0
0.5
1.0
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-8B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(b) 80 Gbps I/O speed.
Figure 8: Impact of I/O bandwidth on TTFT
CDFs (SWEBench on H100). CacheFlow con-
sistently improves TTFT at both 40 Gbps and
80 Gbps compared with the best baseline.
0
1
2
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-30B-A3B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(a) 2xL40S deployments.
0
1
2
3
TTFT (s)
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF across Requests
Qwen3-30B-A3B
vLLM
SGLang
Cake
CacheFlow
(b) A100 deployments.
Figure 9:
Impact of GPUs on TTFT
(SWEBench). CacheFlow improves TTFT on
L40S and A100 by adapting the compute–I/O
meeting point.
a 1.1×–1.7× reduction in TTFT compared to existing advances. The gains are most pro-
nounced on LMSys-Chat and SWE-Bench, which feature longer contexts and thus incur
higher KV restoration costs. Notably, the improvement widens in the tail (e.g., P90–P99),
where straggler effects dominate. This highlights the effectiveness of our batch-aware
two-pointer scheduling, which prioritizes high-impact restoration decisions and mitigates
contention across requests, improving aggregate throughput and tail latency.
CacheFlow improves resource utilization. Figure 5 reports average GPU and I/O utilization
during KV cache restoration. LMCache saturates I/O bandwidth but achieves only 10%
GPU utilization, as KV transfers throttle execution. Conversely, vLLM is compute-bound
with 91% GPU utilization but idle I/O. In contrast, CacheFlow achieves 88% GPU and
78% I/O utilization by effectively overlapping recomputation and I/O, demonstrating
that its multi-dimensional parallelism maximizes resource efficiency and directly reduces
restoration latency.
4.3
Ablation Studies
Breakdown by request lengths. Figure 6 breaks down CacheFlow’s performance across
different request length regimes. We notice that recomputation-based methods (e.g., vLLM)
exhibit superlinear latency growth, reflecting the quadratic cost of attention. In contrast,
CacheFlow scales more gracefully by overlapping recomputation and I/O. As sequence
length increases (from 6K to 30K), the performance gap between vLLM, SGLang and
CacheFlow widens from 1.1× to 1.7×, demonstrating our two-pointer effectiveness, which
prioritizes I/O for later tokens in long requests and bounds quadratic recomputation costs.
Ablation of 3D parallelism. We next break down our 3D parallelism design by disabling the
multi-GPU parallelism, so each GPU performs only 2D token- and layer-wise parallelism
while maintaining sequential dependencies across GPUs. Figure 7 shows that 3D parallelism
is complementary: without multi-GPU execution, average restoration latency rises from
0.21 s to 0.29 s (a 38% increase). Notably, even with only 2D parallelism, CacheFlow still
outperforms vLLM by 24%, highlighting the effectiveness of our two-pointer design.
8


--- Page 9 ---
Preprint.
Impact of I/O bandwidth. We evaluate CacheFlow under different network bandwidths
to our end-to-end evaluations: 40 Gbps (typical of AWS g5.12xlarge inter-node links) and
80 Gbps (typical of GCP a2-ultragpu-8g inter-node links) on our H100 cluster. Figure 8
shows that CacheFlow consistently improves TTFT, yielding 1.7× and 1.5× speedups at
40 Gbps and 80 Gbps, respectively. These gains stem from CacheFlow’s adaptive two-pointer
design: the recomputation pointer progresses forward while the I/O pointer retreats from
the end of the tokens (layers), dynamically balancing compute and I/O. Under higher
bandwidth, more KV cache can be loaded in parallel, further reducing restoration latency.
batch=2
batch=4
batch=8
0
1
2
3
Avg TTFT (s)
1.53
1.46
2.25
1.17
2.24
3.32
0.45
0.88
1.28
vLLM
SGLang
CacheFlow
Figure 10: CacheFlow improves
latency
by
1.6×–2.6×
across
batch sizes.
Impact of GPU hardware.
Figure 9 further ablates
our previous setting by varying the hardware from
H100s to 2xL40S and A100s on the Qwen3-MoE model,
under 10 Gbps KV cache I/O transfer.
We observe
that CacheFlow consistently outperforms the baseline,
achieving 1.6× and 1.5× speedups on L40S and A100, re-
spectively. These results demonstrate that CacheFlow’s
multi-dimensional parallelism effectively adapts to di-
verse hardware, delivering robust improvements.
Impact of Batch Size. Figure 10 shows that CacheFlow
persistently improves TTFT latency by 1.6×–2.6× across
batch sizes (2, 4, and 8 on L40S, Llama-3.1-8B). This
improvement becomes more pronounced with a larger
batch size, confirming the effectiveness of our batch-aware design.
5
Related work
KV cache compression. A large body of work reduces KV cache footprint via compression
techniques, including quantization, token pruning, and architectural modifications. Dif-
fKV (Zhang et al., 2025) exploits the heterogeneous importance of tokens across attention
heads and applies hierarchical quantization and pruning at a per-token granularity. BTP (Li
et al., 2025) applies different token pruning ratios over model layers. R-KV (Cai et al., 2026)
and BumbleBee (Kumari et al., 2024) identifies salient tokens using attention scores while
preserving token diversity during pruning. These approaches reduce memory footprint and
I/O volume, but are largely orthogonal to our work: they do not address the latency-critical
restoration, nor the coordination between recomputation and I/O under shared resources.
KV cache offloading and restoration. Recent systems focus on extending KV cache capacity
via offloading and accelerating restoration. LMCache (Liu et al., 2025) and KVcached (Yu
et al., 2025) enable KV cache management across heterogeneous memory tiers (e.g., GPU
and remote nodes). HCache (Gao et al., 2025) proposes storing compact hidden states to
accelerate restoration, but treats restoration as a uniform process, ignoring the heterogeneous
cost across sequence positions and system contention. Continumm (Li et al., 2026) predicts
reuse patterns in agentic workflows and selectively offloads KV cache based on future
access. KVFlow (Pan et al., 2025) formulates KV prefetching as a graph scheduling problem
to capture dependencies across multi-agent pipelines. MoonCake (Qin et al., 2025) overlaps
prefill computation with KV transfer to downstream decode stages. Instead, CacheFlow
formulates KV cache restoration as a multi-dimensional scheduling problem over tokens,
layers, and GPUs, enabling fine-grained overlap while accounting for batch contention.
6
Conclusion
KV cache restoration has become a first-order bottleneck in long-context LLM serving, yet
existing approaches treat it as a per-request tradeoff between recomputation and I/O. In this
work, we argue that restoration is fundamentally a multi-dimensional parallel execution
problem. We present CacheFlow, which introduces a unified 3D parallelism abstraction
across tokens, layers, and GPUs, together with a batch-aware two-pointer scheduler that
maximizes compute and I/O overlap under shared resources. Evaluations across diverse
models, workloads, and hardware show that CacheFlow reduces TTFT by 10%–62%.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Preprint.
References
A high-throughput and memory-efficient inference and serving engine for llms. URL
https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm.
Zefan Cai, Wen Xiao, Hanshi Sun, Cheng Luo, Yikai Zhang, Ke Wan, Yucheng Li, Yeyang
Zhou, Li-Wen Chang, Jiuxiang Gu, Zhen Dong, Anima Anandkumar, Abedelkadir Asi,
and Junjie Hu. R-kv: Redundancy-aware kv cache compression for reasoning models. In
NeurIPS, 2026.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher R´e. Flashattention: Fast
and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. In arXiv: 2205.14135, 2022.
Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, and Jiwu Shu. Fast state restoration in llm serving with hcache.
In EuroSys, 2025.
Yinsicheng Jiang, Yeqi Huang, Liang Cheng, Cheng Deng, Xuan Sun, and Luo Mai. Con-
textpilot: Fast long-context inference via context reuse. In MLSys, 2026.
Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
Karthik Narasimhan. Swe-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues?
In ICLR, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06770.
Shuowei Jin, Xueshen Liu, Qingzhao Zhang, and Z. Morley Mao. Compute or load kv
cache? why not both? In ICML, 2025.
Lilly Kumari, Shengjie Wang, Tianyi Zhou, Nikhil Sarda, Anthony Rowe, and Jeff Bilmes.
Bumblebee: Dynamic kv-cache streaming submodular summarization for infinite-context
transformers. In COLM, 2024.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao
Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management
for large language model serving with pagedattention. In SOSP, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2309.06180.
Hanchen Li, Qiuyang Mang, Runyuan He, Qizheng Zhang, Huanzhi Mao, Xiaokun Chen,
Hangrui Zhou, Alvin Cheung, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Continuum: Efficient
and robust multi-turn llm agent scheduling with kv cache time-to-live, 2026. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2511.02230.
Kaiyuan Li, Xiaoyue Chen, Chen Gao, Yong Li, and Xinlei Chen. Balanced token pruning:
Accelerating vision language models beyond local optimization. In NeurIPS, 2025.
Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng, Xin Jin, Yanping
Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. AlpaServe:
Statistical multiplexing with model parallelism for deep learning serving. In OSDI, 2023.
Jiachen Liu, Jae-Won Chung, Zhiyu Wu, Fan Lai, Myungjin Lee, and Mosharaf Chowdhury.
Andes: Defining and enhancing quality-of-experience in llm-based text streaming services,
2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.16283.
Yuhan Liu, Hanchen Li, Yihua Cheng, Siddhant Ray, Yuyang Huang, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai
Du, Jiayi Yao, Shan Lu, Ganesh Ananthanarayanan, Michael Maire, Henry Hoffmann, Ari
Holtzman, and Junchen Jiang. Cachegen: Kv cache compression and streaming for fast
large language model serving. In SIGCOMM, 2024b.
Yuhan Liu, Yihua Cheng, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaoting Feng, Yuyang Huang,
Samuel Shen, Rui Zhang, Kuntai Du, and Junchen Jiang. Lmcache: An efficient kv cache
layer for enterprise-scale llm inference, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.09665.
Zaifeng Pan, Ajjkumar Patel, Zhengding Hu, Yipeng Shen, Yue Guan, Wan-Lu Li, Lianhui
Qin, Yida Wang, and Yufei Ding. Kvflow: Efficient prefix caching for accelerating llm-
based multi-agent workflows. In NeurIPS, 2025.
10


--- Page 11 ---
Preprint.
Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei Wu,
Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. Mooncake: Trading more storage for less computation —
a KVCache-centric architecture for serving LLM chatbot. In FAST, 2025.
Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng Zhang, Kuntai Du,
Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. Cacheblend: Fast large language model serving for rag with
cached knowledge fusion. In EuroSys, 2025.
Shan Yu, Jiarong Xing, Yifan Qiao, Mingyuan Ma, Yangmin Li, Yang Wang, Shuo Yang,
Zhiqiang Xie, Shiyi Cao, Ke Bao, et al. Prism: Unleashing gpu sharing for cost-efficient
multi-llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.04021, 2025.
Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar
Kamanuru, Jay Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James
Zou, and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-
improving language models. In ICLR, 2026a.
Wei Zhang, Zhiyu Wu, Yi Mu, Rui Ning, Banruo Liu, Nikhil Sarda, Myungjin Lee, and Fan
Lai. Jitserve: Slo-aware llm serving with imprecise request information. In NSDI, 2026b.
Yanqi Zhang, Yuwei Hu, Runyuan Zhao, John C. S. Lui, and Haibo Chen. Diffkv: Differenti-
ated memory management for large language models with parallel kv compaction. In
SOSP, 2025.
Wenting Zhao, Xiang Ren, Jack Hessel, Claire Cardie, Yejin Choi, and Yuntian Deng. Wild-
chat: 1m chatgpt interaction logs in the wild. In International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.01470.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu,
Yonghao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric P. Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and
Hao Zhang. Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world llm conversation dataset. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024a. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2309.11998.
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu,
Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying
Sheng. Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In NeurIPS,
2024b. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07104.
11
