--- Page 1 ---
Breaking Validity-Induced Boundaries to Expand Algorithm
Search Space: A Two-Stage AST-Based Operator for LLM-Driven
Automated Heuristic Evolution
Shengming Sun
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong
University
Xi’an, China
3245814902@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
Jialong Shi∗
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong
University
Xi’an, China
jialong.shi@xjtu.edu.cn
Abstract
Large Language Model (LLM) based automated heuristic design
(AHD) has shown great potential in discovering efficient heuristics.
Most existing LLM-AHD frameworks use semantic evolutionary
operators that rely entirely on the LLM’s pre-trained knowledge.
These one-stage methods strictly require the generated code to be
valid during the operation and often rely on a “thought-code” repre-
sentation. We argue that this end-to-end generation fundamentally
limits the exploration ability within the algorithm search space.
In this paper, we propose a two-stage, structure-based evolu-
tionary operator for LLM-AHD. In the first stage, our approach
directly performs crossover and mutation on the Abstract Syntax
Trees (ASTs) of the heuristic code, intentionally generating diverse
but often invalid structural variants. In the second stage, the LLM
is employed to repair these invalid heuristics into executable, high-
quality code. Depending on the underlying framework, either the
raw invalid variants or the repaired heuristics are integrated into
the population to preserve potential structural patterns. We demon-
strate that the proposed operator can significantly enhance the
search ability of state-of-the-art LLM-AHD algorithms, such as
EoH-S. Experimental results on the Traveling Salesman Problem
(TSP) and the Online Bin Packing Problem (OBP) show that our
method effectively improves both optimization performance and
convergence speed.
CCS Concepts
• Computing methodologies →Heuristic function construction.
Keywords
Automated Heuristic Design, Large Language Models, AST-based
operator, Evolutionary Computation, I-Code
ACM Reference Format:
Shengming Sun and Jialong Shi. 2026. Breaking Validity-Induced Boundaries
to Expand Algorithm Search Space: A Two-Stage AST-Based Operator for
∗† Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
GECCO ’26, San José, Costa Rica
© 2026 ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
LLM-Driven Automated Heuristic Evolution. In Proceedings of The Genetic
and Evolutionary Computation Conference 2026 (GECCO ’26). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 7 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Combinatorial optimization problems aim to find optimal solutions
in discrete search spaces, and most are NP-hard [5]. Heuristic al-
gorithms are widely used to solve such problems, but traditional
design relies heavily on expert experience and suffers from low
efficiency. In recent years, with the rapid development of large lan-
guage models (LLMs), automated heuristic design (AHD) based on
LLMs has made remarkable progress. Several evolutionary meth-
ods, such as EoH [1], EoH-S [3], MEoH [6], and ReEvo [2], have
achieved strong performance on various optimization tasks. Mean-
while, some studies have explored how prompt engineering affects
the effectiveness of LLM-based automatic algorithm design [14].
However, existing LLM-driven AHD methods face critical limi-
tations due to their evolutionary mechanisms. First, most current
evolutionary operators are semantic-based and rely heavily on the
LLMs’ pre-trained knowledge [15, 16]. This reliance makes it diffi-
cult to discover novel heuristic strategies that go beyond the models’
learned patterns. Second, these one-stage methods strictly require
the heuristic code to remain valid and executable throughout the
entire operation process. By forcing every intermediate generation
to be a valid program — often through a rigid “thought-code” rep-
resentation — these frameworks artificially restrict the available
search space. Together, the over-reliance on pre-trained semantics
and the strict requirement for continuous code validity severely
limit the exploration ability within the broader algorithm space,
often leading to limited diversity and premature convergence.
To overcome these limitations, this paper proposes an evolution-
ary operator framework based on Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs) [4].
In the first stage, we convert heuristic code into ASTs and directly
perform structural crossover and mutation. This step intentionally
generates invalid heuristic code variants (I-Codes) to break the
LLM’s pre-trained knowledge boundaries. In the second stage, the
LLM is employed purely to repair these invalid heuristics back into
executable code. By explicitly separating structural perturbation
from semantic repair, our method effectively expands the search
space and improves the overall exploration ability.
Our main contributions are as follows:
• As an exploratory study on breaking the knowledge bound-
aries of LLMs, we propose a two-stage, AST-based evolu-
tionary operator. This operator is designed not to replace
existing semantic operators, but to complement them by
arXiv:2604.16420v1  [cs.NE]  3 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
Shengming Sun and Jialong Shi
enabling structural modifications that effectively expand the
algorithm search space.
• We demonstrate the flexibility of the proposed operator by
integrating it as a complementary enhancement into three
representative LLM-AHD frameworks: EoH, ReEvo, and EoH-
S.
• We conduct extensive experiments on typical combinatorial
optimization problems (TSP and OBP). The results show that
the enhanced methods outperform the original versions in
optimization performance and convergence speed.
2
RELATED WORK
LLM-driven Automatic Heuristic Design:
The integration of
large language models and evolutionary computation has become
a key paradigm in automated heuristic design. Early work such as
FunSearch revealed the capability of LLMs in program search and
mathematical discovery [7]. Subsequently, Evolution of Heuristics
(EoH) combined LLMs with evolutionary algorithms using text-
level evolutionary operators for iterative heuristic generation and
refinement [1], while ReEvo enhanced this process with short-
term and long-term reflection mechanisms [2], and EoH-S further
extended the framework to diverse and complementary heuristic set
design [3]. More recently, Chen et al. proposed a Tuning-Integrated
Dynamic Evolution framework that decouples structural reasoning
from parameter optimization to mitigate premature convergence
and improve generated heuristics’ performance [17]. Collectively,
these methods establish LLM-driven evolutionary computation as
a highly effective approach for automated algorithm design.
Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs):
Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs)
have been widely adopted in program analysis, code generation,
and automated program repair [4]. By representing code in a tree
structure, ASTs enable robust and syntactically consistent struc-
tural modifications. Compared with naive text editing, AST-based
operations preserve structural logic while allowing meaningful
perturbations, making them ideal for generating diverse and struc-
turally valid variants [20]. Such properties have motivated their
use in code evolution and program synthesis.
Prompt Engineering Enhancing LLMs:
Prompt engineering
is the process of structurally processing inputs, which plays a cru-
cial role in automated heuristic design based on large language
models [19]. Studies have shown that many large language models
are highly sensitive to prompts, with their performance varying
significantly with different prompt templates [18]. As a successful
application example, the HiFo prompt employs two collaborative
prompt strategies—prospection and hindsight—to guide large lan-
guage models, enabling the generation of high-quality heuristics
and significantly accelerating the convergence speed [13]. Recently,
several studies have also indicated that the code description com-
ponent in prompts plays the most crucial role in guiding large
language models to generate novel heuristics [12].
3
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present our AST-based operator, a novel evo-
lutionary operator based on Abstract Syntax Trees that enables
large language models (LLMs) to transcend the limitations of their
inherent knowledge. The AST-based operator primarily consists
of three components: converting codes into ASTs, performing op-
erations on the trees, and interacting with LLMs to generate new
codes. Additionally, this section demonstrates the application of
the proposed operator in specific evolutionary frameworks (EoH,
EoH-S, ReEvo). The framework of the proposed AST-based operator
is shown in Figure 1.
3.1
Design Rationale of the AST-based Operator
Invalid Code: Research has shown that code description plays the
most critical role in prompts. In LLM-driven Automatic Heuristic
Design (AHD), the LLM only generates executable code, meaning
that the search space of the LLM is limited to executable code alone.
However, some invalid codes may provide new insights for the
LLM, which we refer to as I-Codes (invalid codes).
Although invalid code cannot be executed, it may still be valuable
for algorithm design. If we define the algorithm space 𝐻as the set
of strings capable of representing algorithmic ideas, and denote the
set of executable code as 𝑅and the set of invalid code as 𝐼, then
𝐼is much more densely distributed than 𝑅in this discrete space,
since randomly altering a single character in any executable code
will almost certainly result in invalid code. Under ideal conditions,
all code generated by large language models is executable, which
restricts the search space of heuristic automatic algorithm design
to a subset of 𝑅. Therefore, we aim to expand the search space by
generating invalid code via AST and then repairing such invalid
code into executable code using large language models.
In Figure 2, we illustrate the ideal scenario with an example.
There exist a valid region (containing valid code) and an invalid
region (containing invalid code) in the algorithm space, and their
relationship is roughly represented by light orange ellipses inside
black rectangles. A valid code can be transformed into an invalid
code (I-Code) through an AST operator, and the I-code can be con-
verted into a valid code via repair. It is assumed that we only have
the original code at the beginning. Starting from the original code,
the algorithm applies an AST operator and a repair process to reach
valid region 2 and find a valid code. Then, starting again from the
original code, it applies a different AST operator and repair process
to reach valid region 3 and find a new valid code. Furthermore,
starting from the new valid code, it applies an AST operator and
repair process to find the best code. However, if only semantic op-
erators are used and I-code is not accepted, the algorithm cannot
break through the validity-induced boundary and can only find
valid but similar code.
AST (Abstract Syntax Tree): An Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) is a
hierarchical tree-structured representation generated from source
code through lexical analysis and syntactic parsing. Each node
in the AST corresponds to a syntactic element such as a state-
ment, expression, variable, operator, or control structure, while
the edges represent grammatical dependencies between compo-
nents [8]. Compared with plain text, ASTs explicitly preserve the
logical structure and grammatical rules of code, enabling system-
atic and structural modifications rather than arbitrary string edits.
Based on this structural representation, we perform mechanical
and controllable evolutionary operations on heuristic code:
• Crossover: We randomly select one subtree from each AST
and exchange them to produce new hybrid structures. This


--- Page 3 ---
Breaking Validity-Induced Boundaries to Expand Algorithm Search Space: A Two-Stage AST-Based Operator for LLM-Driven Automated Heuristic Evolution
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
Figure 1: Framework of the AST-based operator. It comprises three core processes: (1) Heuristics to ASTs: Selected heuristics are
converted into semantic trees via syntax tree manipulation. (2) AST Operation: Tree crossover and mutation are executed on
the AST structure. (3) LLM Interaction: The new AST is converted into source code, integrated into the prompt, and supplied to
the LLM to generate novel heuristics.
Figure 2: Illustration of search space expansion via I-Codes. Black rectangles represent the entire algorithm space; light orange
ellipses denote valid regions; blank areas represent invalid regions. The AST operator bridges disjoint valid regions by traversing
the invalid space, which semantic operators cannot cross.


--- Page 4 ---
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
Shengming Sun and Jialong Shi
Algorithm 1: AST-Based Destruction Operators
Data: Valid codes 𝐶1, 𝐶2
Result: Invalid codes 𝐶del, 𝐶cross
// Parse code into Abstract Syntax Trees
1 𝑇1 ←CodeToAST(𝐶1);
2 𝑇2 ←CodeToAST(𝐶2);
// Random node deletion (destruction)
3 𝑇del ←RandomDeleteNode(𝑇1);
// Random subtree crossover (destruction)
4 𝑇cross ←RandomCrossover(𝑇1,𝑇2);
// Convert AST back to code (may produce invalid
code)
5 𝐶del ←ASTToCode(𝑇del);
6 𝐶cross ←ASTToCode(𝑇cross);
7 return 𝐶del, 𝐶cross
operation combines logical components from different heuris-
tics, creating novel code patterns that text-level methods
cannot generate [9].
• Mutation: We randomly select a non-root node from the
AST and delete it directly, which breaks the original logic
and generates structurally perturbed variants [9].
Since these operations modify code at the structural level, the gen-
erated ASTs are not guaranteed to be syntactically correct. After
performing crossover and mutation, we traverse the modified ASTs
and convert them back into string-form code. The resulting code is
allowed to be invalid (I-Code), which helps break the knowledge
constraints of LLMs and expand the search space of automated
heuristic design. Specifically, within the framework of automated
heuristic design, the operator is completed in two steps: AST-based
Destruction and LLM-based repair.
Algorithm 1 presents the AST-based destruction: converting
heuristics into Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs), then disrupting them
through crossover and mutation operations, followed by transform-
ing them into invalid codes (I-Codes).
Algorithm 2 illustrates the second step of the operator: first,
determining whether the I-Code needs to be repaired; if not, directly
adding the I-Code to the population; if repair is required, generating
a repair prompt by incorporating the I-Code as needed to guide
large language models (LLMs) in generating new heuristics, which
are then added to the population.
3.2
Application in EoH
Evolution of Heuristics (EoH) is an automated heuristic design
algorithm that integrates large language models and evolutionary
algorithms with five evolutionary operators [1]. To strengthen its
evolutionary capacity, we redesign these operators using an AST-
based approach. We introduce invalid heuristics into the evolution-
ary population and define a suitable fitness function to evaluate
individuals during iteration.
3.2.1
Redesigned Operators. EoH utilizes five evolutionary op-
erators (E1, E2, M1, M2, M3); in this work, we redesign these
Algorithm 2: LLM-Based Repair Operators
Data: Invalid Code (I-Code), Population, Large Language
Models (LLMs)
Result: Updated Population
// Judge whether the I-Code needs to be repaired
1 𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑑𝑅𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟←RepairNeed();
2 if needRepair = false then
// Add I-Code directly to the population
3
AddtoPopulation(𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛, 𝐼-𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒);
4 end
5 else
// Generate repair prompt incorporating
I-Code
6
𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡←GenerateRepairPrompt(𝐼-𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒);
// Guide LLMs to generate new heuristics
7
𝑛𝑒𝑤𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠←LLMGenerate(𝑟𝑒𝑝𝑎𝑖𝑟𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡, 𝐿𝐿𝑀𝑠);
// Add new codes to the population
8
AddtoPopulation(𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛,𝑛𝑒𝑤𝐶𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑠);
9 end
10 return 𝑃𝑜𝑝𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
operators on the basis of Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs). The re-
designed operators are classified into three categories according to
whether the operation objects and generated heuristics are invalid
heuristics.
Valid Codes to Invalid Codes (VI): Heuristic code is first con-
verted into an abstract syntax tree, on which structural crossover
and mutation are performed. The modified AST is then converted
back to code, which may be invalid, and is directly inserted into
the population as an invalid code.
Invalid Codes to Valid Codes (IV): Invalid codes are incorpo-
rated into the prompt, requiring the LLM to either repair them or
generate novel heuristics distinct from the original ones, which are
then added to the population as new codes.
Invalid Codes to Invalid Codes (II): Two strategies are adopted:
(1) transforming invalid codes into ASTs for structural operations,
then restoring them to code and directly adding them to the popu-
lation as invalid codes; (2) invoking the IV operator to generate
valid codes, followed by the VI operator to produce invalid codes.
3.2.2
Evolution. In one evolutionary iteration, we first convert the
code into an invalid code via the VI operator, then apply the II
operator several times to generate new invalid codes, and finally
transform the obtained invalid code back into a valid code using
the IV operator.
Since the evolutionary process relies on a fitness function to
evaluate codes [1], but invalid codes cannot be directly tested, we
define a new fitness function as follows:
𝑓(𝑢) =
( Í eval𝑖(𝑢)
𝑛
,
𝑢is valid
𝑓(𝑣),
𝑢is invalid
(1)
In this formula, 𝑢denotes the valid code or invalid code whose
fitness is to be evaluated, eval𝑖(𝑢) represents the test result of the
code on the 𝑖-th instance, and 𝑣denotes the code obtained by re-
pairing 𝑢using the LLM. When 𝑢is a valid code, its fitness value is


--- Page 5 ---
Breaking Validity-Induced Boundaries to Expand Algorithm Search Space: A Two-Stage AST-Based Operator for LLM-Driven Automated Heuristic Evolution
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
defined as the average of the test results over all instances. When 𝑢
is an invalid code, its fitness is computed by first invoking the LLM
to repair it and then evaluating the fitness of the repaired version.
Since the repair operation is inherently included in the operations
of our proposed operators, it is reasonable to use the repaired code
to assess the evolutionary potential of invalid codes.
3.3
Application in ReEvo
ReEvo achieves automated heuristic design through reflective evo-
lution, which uses short-term and long-term reflection to guide
the LLM in generating new heuristics, yet it is prone to becoming
trapped in local optima [2]. To alleviate this issue, we enhance the
mechanism that guides LLMs to generate novel heuristics based
on Abstract Syntax Trees (ASTs). For crossover operations, we first
convert codes into ASTs to perform structural crossover, then con-
vert the modified ASTs back into invalid code. The invalid code
is then repaired by the LLM under the guidance of short-term re-
flection. For mutation operations, we convert codes into ASTs to
perform structural mutation, restore them to invalid code, and then
fix the invalid code using the LLM with the guidance of long-term
reflection. In this way, the improved ReEvo can explore a wider
search space and better escape local optima.
3.4
Application in EoH-S
EoH-S is a paradigm for heuristic set design, which aims to gener-
ate highly complementary heuristic sets while adopting the evo-
lutionary operators of EoH [3]. In this work, we redesign these
evolutionary operators based on ASTs. Specifically, heuristic code
is first parsed into ASTs, where structural crossover and mutation
operations are performed to produce invalid code. The generated
invalid code is then fed into prompts to enable the LLM to either
repair it directly or generate new valid and diverse codes. By intro-
ducing AST-based structural modification, EoH-S gains stronger
exploration ability and produces more diverse and complementary
heuristic sets, thus improving its overall optimization performance.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we present experimental results of the improved
automatic heuristic design algorithm on several representative com-
binatorial optimization problems, including the Online Bin Packing
Problem (OBP) and the Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP). We
compare the performance of EoH, ReEvo, and EoH-S before and
after the proposed improvements, which validates the superior
effectiveness of the AST-based evolutionary operators.
4.1
Experimental Settings and Problems
Experimental Settings: In our experiments, EoH was set to 10
iterations with a population size of 5, ReEvo was configured with a
maximum number of heuristics of 400, and EoH-S was executed for
50 iterations with a population size of 10. Qwen-Flash was used as
the main large language model, and all the above parameters were
kept exactly the same before and after the operator improvement.
Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP): The Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP) is defined as finding the shortest closed route that
visits each city exactly once and returns to the initial starting point.
For this problem, we adopt a step-by-step constructive heuristic,
which iteratively selects the next city to be visited during path
construction. The performance of the proposed algorithm is di-
rectly evaluated based on the total path length [1]. The training
set consists of 128 random instances, where the number of cities
ranges from 10 to 200, and the node coordinates are uniformly sam-
pled within the interval [0, 1]. For the testing phase, three distinct
settings (c50, c100, c200, where 𝑐represents the number of cities)
are employed, with the number of cities ranging from 50 to 200
(consistent with the uniform distribution of the training set). Each
method is tested three times independently, and the average results,
including token consumption, are recorded for subsequent analysis.
Online Bin Packing (OBP): The core objective of the Online Bin
Packing (OBP) problem is to place sequentially arriving items into
bins of fixed capacity with the goal of minimizing the total number
of bins used. For this problem, we adopt a designed heuristic that
selects a suitable bin for each incoming item, with its performance
evaluated by the relative deviation from the lower bound of the
optimal bin number [10]. The training phase uses instance set I
which consists of 128 Weibull-distributed samples with bin capacity
100 and the number of items ranging from 200 to 2000. The testing
phase employs six distinct settings (n1k_c200, n1k_c500, n5k_c200,
n5k_c500, n10k_c200, n10k_c500, where 𝑛and 𝑐denote the number
of items and bin capacity, respectively) with each method tested
three times independently and the average performance metrics
reported for analysis [3].
4.2
Experimental Results and Analysis
Experimental Results: Experimental results demonstrate that the
proposed AST-based evolutionary operators consistently improve
the performance of all three baseline methods.
Table 1 shows the evaluation of the heuristics designed by the
methods on Online Bin Packing (OBP) instances. We can see that on
the OBP problem, the improved EoH and ReEvo outperform their
pre-improved versions on all instances, while the improved EoH-S
is superior to its pre-improved version on all instances except one
(n1k_c200).
Table 2 shows the evaluation of the heuristics designed by the
methods on Traveling Salesman Problem (TSP) instances. As can be
seen, for the TSP problem, the optimized EoH and ReEvo algorithms
outperform their original iterations on all instances. Meanwhile, the
optimized EoH-S algorithm outperforms its original version in all
instances except for one (c100). In addition, the token consumption
of all optimized algorithms is considerably lower than that of their
unoptimized predecessors.
These performance gains validate that AST-based structural op-
erations can effectively expand the search space, help generate
stronger heuristics, and reduce token consumption.
Analysis: The AST-based operator performs crossover and muta-
tion using abstract syntax trees, enabling the algorithm to break
free from the knowledge limitations of LLMs, better escape local op-
tima, and discover novel heuristics. Experimental results show that
the new operator performs best on ReEvo, likely because ReEvo is
an exploitation-oriented algorithm and the new operator provides
strong exploration capabilities, leading to optimal synergy; mean-
while, the stochastic nature of node manipulations on ASTs may
account for the relatively unstable performance observed across


--- Page 6 ---
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
Shengming Sun and Jialong Shi
Table 1: Performance comparison on Online Bin Packing (OBP) instances. 𝑛and 𝑐represent the number of items and the bin
capacity, respectively. “-i” denotes the enhanced version. Best results are in bold with a light gray background.
Methods
Training
Testing (𝑐= 200, 500)
(c100)
n1k_c200
n5k_c200
n10k_c200
n1k_c500
n5k_c500
n10k_c500
EoH
0.0501
0.0314
0.0223
0.0214
0.0139
0.0071
0.0067
EoH-i
0.0464
0.0241
0.0187
0.0176
0.0124
0.0063
0.0061
ReEvo
0.0442
0.0208
0.0152
0.0150
0.0130
0.0056
0.0053
ReEvo-i
0.0348
0.0152
0.0091
0.0086
0.0124
0.0043
0.0043
EoH-S
0.0339
0.0182
0.0113
0.0109
0.0124
0.0041
0.0040
EoH-S-i
0.0232
0.0340
0.0110
0.0080
0.0124
0.0033
0.0027
Table 2: Performance comparison on Traveling Salesman
Problem (TSP) instances. 𝑐represents the number of cities.
“-i” denotes the enhanced version. Best results are in bold
with a light gray background.
Methods
Training
Testing
Tokens
(c100)
c50
c100
c200
EoH
8.956
6.484
8.862
12.575
247010
EoH-i
8.900
6.376
8.847
12.517
202529
ReEvo
9.180
6.484
9.224
12.988
2405312
ReEvo-i
8.945
6.474
8.859
12.676
1736673
EoH-S
8.809
6.405
8.723
12.313
1493820
EoH-S-i
8.762
6.297
8.769
12.242
821698
runs. In addition, since the AST operations in the new operator do
not require the LLM, the prompts supplied to the LLM are shorter
and more focused, resulting in significant savings in token con-
sumption.
In summary, experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
AST-based operator design can effectively improve existing auto-
matic heuristic design frameworks. After enhancing EoH, ReEvo,
and EoH-S, the improved variants achieve better heuristic algo-
rithms with fewer tokens consumed. Although the improved meth-
ods are not sufficiently stable and perform slightly worse on several
instances, the overall results are generally in line with our expecta-
tions.
5
CONCLUSION
This work focuses on Automatic Heuristic Design and proposes
an evolutionary operator based on Abstract Syntax Trees (AST).
The operator framework mainly includes AST-based destruction
and LLM-based repair, and incorporates I-Codes into the evolution-
ary process. We used this operator to improve existing automatic
heuristic algorithms (EoH, ReEvo, EoH-S). Experiments on the On-
line Bin Packing Problem (OBP) and Traveling Salesman Problem
(TSP) show that the improved algorithms are significantly superior
to the original ones and consume significantly fewer tokens. This
indicates that our operator can effectively expand the search space,
find better heuristics, and reduce resource consumption. Future
work will focus on directed AST operations and the theoretical
improvement of I-Codes. This work not only proposes a new evo-
lutionary operator but also provides a new development idea for
LLM-driven automatic heuristic design.
References
[1] F. Liu, X. Tong, M. Yuan, et al. 2024. Evolution of Heuristics: Towards Efficient
Automatic Algorithm Design Using Large Language Model. In Proc. 41st Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML). ML Research Press, 32201–32223.
[2] H. Ye, J. Wang, Z. Cao, et al. 2024. Reevo: Large language models as hyper-
heuristics with reflective evolution. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 37 (2024), 43571–43608.
[3] F. Liu, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, et al. 2025. EoH-S: Evolution of Heuristic Set using
LLMs for Automated Heuristic Design. In Proc. 40th AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (AAAI). AAAI Press.
[4] W. Sun, C. Fang, Y. Miao, et al. 2023. Abstract syntax tree for programming
language understanding and representation: How far are we? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00413.
[5] M. R. Garey and D. S. Johnson. 1979. Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the
Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman.
[6] S. Yao, F. Liu, X. Lin, et al. 2025. Multi-objective evolution of heuristic using
large language model. In Proc. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39.
27144–27152.
[7] B. Romera-Paredes, M. Barekatain, A. Novikov, et al. 2024. Mathematical discov-
eries from program search with large language models. Nature 625, 7995 (2024),
468–475.
[8] B. Cui, J. Li, T. Guo, et al. 2010. Code comparison system based on abstract
syntax tree. In Proc. 3rd IEEE International Conference on Broadband Network and
Multimedia Technology (IC-BNMT). 668–673.
[9] J. R. Koza. 1994. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers
by natural selection. Statistics and Computing 4, 2 (1994), 87–112.
[10] S. Martello and P. Toth. 1990. Lower bounds and reduction procedures for the
bin packing problem. Discrete Applied Mathematics 28, 1 (1990), 59–70.
[11] S. M. Mousavi, S. Alghisi, and G. Riccardi. 2025. Llms as repositories of factual
knowledge: Limitations and solutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12774.
[12] Q. Huang, F. Ye, A. Shahane, et al. 2026. From Heuristic Selection to Automated Al-
gorithm Design: LLMs Benefit from Strong Priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02792.
[13] C. Chen, M. Zhong, Y. Fan, et al. 2026. Hifo-prompt: Prompting with hindsight
and foresight for llm-based automatic heuristic design. In Proc. 14th International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
[14] L. A. Loss and P. Dhuvad. 2025. From manual to automated prompt en-
gineering: Evolving LLM prompts with genetic algorithms. In Proc. IEEE
Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC). IEEE, Hangzhou, China, 1–8.
DOI:10.1109/CEC65147.2025.11043059.
[15] C. Gurkan, et al. 2025. Lear: Llm-driven evolution of agent-based rules. In Proc.
Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion (GECCO).
[16] A. Bhaskar, D. Friedman, and D. Chen. 2024. The heuristic core: Understanding
subnetwork generalization in pretrained language models. In Proc. 62nd Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Vol. 1. 14351–
14368.
[17] C. Chen, M. Zhong, Y. Fan, et al. 2026. TIDE: Tuning-Integrated Dynamic Evolu-
tion for LLM-Based Automated Heuristic Design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21239.
[18] J. He, M. Rungta, D. Koleczek, et al. 2024. Does prompt formatting have any
impact on llm performance? arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10541.
[19] B. Chen, Z. Zhang, N. Langrené, et al. 2025. Unleashing the potential of prompt
engineering for large language models. Patterns 6, 6 (2025).


--- Page 7 ---
Breaking Validity-Induced Boundaries to Expand Algorithm Search Space: A Two-Stage AST-Based Operator for LLM-Driven Automated Heuristic Evolution
GECCO ’26, July 13–17, 2026, San José, Costa Rica
[20] Y. Song, C. Lothritz, X. Tang, et al. 2024. Revisiting code similarity evaluation with
abstract syntax tree edit distance. In Proc. 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL). Vol. 2. 38–46.
