--- Page 1 ---
Self-Supervised Graph Neural Networks
for Full-Scale Tertiary Voltage Control
B. Donon, G. Jamgotchian, H. Kulesza
Department of R&D
RTE (R´eseau de Transport d’´Electricit´e)
Paris, France
L. Wehenkel
Department of EE & CS
Universit´e de Li`ege
Li`ege, Belgium
Abstract—A growing portion of operators’ workload is dedi-
cated to Tertiary Voltage Control (TVC), namely the regulation
of voltages by means of adjusting a series of setpoints and
connection status. TVC may be framed as a Mixed Integer Non
Linear Program, but state-of-the-art optimization methods scale
poorly to large systems, making them impractical for real-scale
and real-time decision support. Observing that TVC does not
require any optimality guarantee, we frame it as an Amortized
Optimization problem, addressed by the self-supervised training
of a Graph Neural Network (GNN) to minimize voltage violations.
As a first step, we consider the specific use case of post-processing
the forecasting pipeline used by the French TSO, where the
trained GNN would serve as a TVC proxy. After being trained
on one year of full-scale HV-EHV French power grid day-ahead
forecasts, our model manages to significantly reduce the average
number of voltage violations.
Index Terms—Amortized Optimization, Graph Neural Net-
works, Hyper Heterogeneous Multi Graphs, Tertiary Voltage
Control, Self-Supervised Learning.
I. BACKGROUND & MOTIVATIONS
In addition to monitoring active power flows throughout the
grid, operators are in charge of regulating voltage magnitudes
to keep them within an acceptable range. Too low or too high
voltages can lead to voltage instability, i.e. a black-out. To
regulate voltages, operators may adjust the voltage setpoints
of Secondary Voltage Regulations1 (SVRs) and of Ratio Tap
Changers (RTCs), and choose to connect or disconnect a series
of pre-identified shunts, lines and synchronous condensers.
Until recently, this complex real-time decision making prob-
lem – referred to as Tertiary Voltage Control (TVC) – only
took a marginal part of the operators’ daily routine. However,
ongoing changes occurring in the European energy ecosystem
– namely the growing share of renewable energies which
reduce active power flows and induce reactive power, the
burying of transmission lines, and new market mechanisms
– have drastically increased the rate and intensity of high
voltage events that require an operator’s decision. We aim at
developing a real-time automatic decision support tool to assist
operators in this vital and complex task.
1Closed-loop regulation that couples the reactive power of multiple gener-
ators to regulate the voltage of a single regulated bus.
A. Related Literature
By means of several more or less reasonable assumptions,
the TVC problem may be framed as an AC Optimal Power
Flow (AC-OPF) [2] problem, taking the form of a Mixed-
Integer Non Linear Program (MINLP) [3]. Unfortunately,
the significant size of the system (27 continuous and 882
discrete decision variables in our experiments) make state-
of-the-art approaches incompatible with real-time and full-
scale decision-making. Thus, the Power Systems community
has recently started exploring the use of methods from the
Deep Learning (DL) literature [4], which allow for very short
computational times, at the cost of a potentially expensive
training phase. In the case of TVC, even if recommended ac-
tions come without any sort of optimality guarantee, they can
always be checked for security by a power system simulator
before applying them in real operation.
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are a class of highly ex-
pressive parametric mappings capable of approximating any
function [5]. Directly training a DNN to imitate operators is
made impractical by the wide variety of observed behaviors.
Similarly, the imitation of a MINLP solver requires a large
amount of labeled data which cannot be generated on real-life
systems in a reasonable amount of time. A third idea is to train
a DNN in a self-supervised fashion, letting it discover by trial
and error interactions with a power system digital simulator
which are the most relevant actions in a given context. Some
previous work [6], [7], [8] frame the AC-OPF as a closed-loop
Reinforcement Learning (RL) [9] problem, while others [10]
acknowledge its open-loop and deterministic nature, falling in
line with the Amortized Optimization (AO) literature [11].
Real-life power grid operating conditions are Hyper Het-
erogeneous Multi Graphs (H2MGs) [12], whose topological
structures largely vary from one operating condition to the
other [13], whether it be because of maintenance, bus-splitting
or objects renaming. They cannot be properly handled by
most DNN architectures, which assume a constant number and
ordering of objects that compose the grid. Meanwhile, Graph
Neural Networks (GNNs) [14], [15] are a class of DNNs
especially designed to handle graph data and are robust to
object addition, removal and reordering, making them natural
candidates for power systems applications [16], [17], [18],
[19], [20]. The present work extends our previously-introduced
arXiv:2604.03087v1  [eess.SY]  3 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
GNN architecture called Hyper Heterogeneous Multi Graph
Neural Ordinary Differential Equation (H2MGNODE) [21],
so as to natively process real-life and full-scale data from the
French HV-EHV system without any substantial preprocessing
(at the exception of a rescaling of input features).
B. Contributions
The present work specifically considers the TVC problem in
the context of post-processing the existing forecasting pipeline,
a critical tool to anticipate issues and decide on preventive
actions. Although accurate in terms of active power injections,
the forecasting pipeline does very little to predict realistic
voltages, as it would require a somewhat faithful proxy of op-
erators’ TVC decisions. As a consequence, operation planners
are left unaware of incoming voltage issues that they could
have anticipated. We aim at training a GNN to find the best
actions to alleviate most voltage issues, so that operators can
focus on the ones that require their careful attention.
Major contributions of the present study include:
• A faithful and generic, H2MG-based, representation of
the cyber-physical model of real-life power grids;
• A comprehensive, GNN-based, AO methodology for the
self-supervised training of a TVC policy by interacting
with an industrial power system simulator.
• A large-scale experimental validation of the approach via
the training/validation/testing of a model on observational
data (about 170,000 operating states) of the full HV-EHV
French grid (about 7,000 buses), gathered over one year
of day-ahead forecasting activities.
C. Paper Organization
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II defines the practical optimization problem and transforms
it into an AO problem, Section III details the experimental
protocol and results, and Section IV summarizes the main
findings and outlines the next steps required to reach the
deployment of our proposed methodology.
II. METHODOLOGY
Let us detail how we transform the initial black-box opti-
mization problem into an AO problem.
A. Initial Optimization Problem
This work considers the problem of improving voltages
using a series of levers of different natures, spread across
a real-life cyber-physical system. To ensure a seamless and
faithful representation of the real-life data at hand, we choose
to frame operating conditions as Hyper Heterogeneous Multi
Graphs (H2MGs) [12].
a) Context Variable x: Let x ∈X be a real-life power
grid forecast – referred to as a context – which encompasses
both its structure and features. This H2MG is composed of
hyper-edges of different classes c ∈C = {Bus, Load, Battery,
Static Var Compensator (SVC), Voltage Source Converter
(VSC) Station, High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) Line,
Line, Line Controller, Shunt, Shunt Controller, Generator,
Secondary Voltage Regulator (SVR) Unit, SVR Zone, SVR Con-
troller, Two Windings Transformer (TWT), Ratio Tap Changer
(RTC), RTC Controller} (detailed in Table I). Hyper-edges are
interconnected via addresses Ax ⊂N through class-specific
ports.
Class
Ports (x)
Context Features (x)
Decision Features (y)
Bus
Bus
V , ϑ, Vnom, V , V , 1opt
-
Load
Bus
P, Q, I, ˚
P, ˚
Q
-
-
Battery
Bus
P, Q, I, ˚
P, ˚
Q, ˚
V , P, P, Q, Q, Regulation Mode
-
-
SVC
Bus
P, Q, I, ˚
V , ˚
Q, Regulation Mode, etc.
-
-
VSC Stations
Station, Bus
P, Q, I, ˚
V , ˚
Q, Q, Q, Regulation Mode, etc.
-
-
HVDC Line
Station1, Station2
˚
P, P, R, Droop, etc.
-
Line
Line, Bus1, Bus2
P1, Q1, I1, P2, Q2, I2, R, X, G, B, I1, I2, 1opt
-
Line Controller
Line
-
Connected
Shunt
Shunt, Bus
P, Q, I, G, B, etc.
-
Shunt Controller
Shunt
-
Switch Status
Generator
Gen, Bus
P, Q, I, ˚
P, ˚
Q, ˚
V , Q, Q, Regulation Mode, etc.
-
SVR Unit
Gen, Zone
Participate
-
SVR Zone
Zone, Regulated Bus
V , ϑ, Vnom, ˚
V
-
SVR Controller
Zone
-
∆˚
V
TWT
TWT, Bus1, Bus2
P1, Q1, I1, P2, Q2, I2, R, X, G, B, ρ, α, I1, I2, 1opt
-
RTC
TWT, Regulated Bus
-
-
RTC Controller
TWT
˚
V , Vnom
10%, 12%, 15%, 17%
TABLE I: List of hyper-edge classes that compose an operating condition x. Hyper-edges can have one, two or three ports.
When etc. is displayed, context features lists are non exhaustive for the sake of readability. They are however mostly compliant
with the features used in the PowSyBl framework [1], at the exception of the 1opt feature which identifies whether an object
is to be included in the objective function (see eqn. (1)-(4)). P, Q, I, V and ϑ respectively denote active power, reactive
power, current, voltage magnitude and phase angle after a first AC power flow simulation.˚· denotes a target setpoint, while ·
and · denote low and high limits. Vnom denotes a nominal voltage. R, X, G and B respectively denote resistance, reactance,
conductance and susceptance. In the context of this table, ρ and α denote transformation ratio and phase shift. Indices 1 and
2 denote origin and extremity ends when applicable.


--- Page 3 ---
b) Decision Variable y: For a given context x, variable
y contains decision features for each Line Controller, Shunt
Controller, SVR Controller and RTC Controller available in
x. It alters the operating condition x as follows.
• Line Controllers are associated with a binary decision
variable Connected that controls the connection status of
their associated Lines (see Figure 1a).
• Shunt Controllers are associated with a binary decision
variable Switch Status that controls whether the associated
Shunts status should be switched (see Figure 1b).
• SVR Controllers are associated with a continuous decision
variable ∆˚V that updates the preexisting regulated bus
voltage setpoints ˚V (see Figure 1c).
• RTC Controllers are associated with a one-hot (i.e. cat-
egorical) decision vector [10%, 12%, 15%, 17%] defining
the regulated bus voltage setpoint as either 100%, 102%,
105% or 107% of its nominal voltage (see Figure 1d),
which are the only possible values allowed by the voltage
management tool used by operators at RTE.
c) Objective Function f: Acknowledging that there is no
unique way of defining how good voltages are when applying
decision y in context x, we choose the following objective,
f(y; x) = fV (y; x) + fI(y; x) + fJ(y; x),
(1)
where fV (resp. fI) quantifies voltages (resp. current) viola-
tions and fJ quantifies Joule losses. Computing f involves the
following steps.
1) Load power grid context x.
2) Update the grid according to decision y.
3) Run a static AC simulation.
4) Extract voltage magnitudes, currents and Joule losses.
Then the following quantities are computed,
fV (y; x) = λV
X
e∈EBus
x
1opt,e×max(0, ϵV -ve, ve-1+ϵV )2,
(2)
fI(y; x) = λI
X
e∈ELine
x
∪ETWT
x
1opt,e×max(0, |ie|-1+ϵI)2,
(3)
fJ(y; x) = λJ
X
e∈ELine
x
∪ETWT
x
1opt,e×|P1,e + P2,e|,
(4)
where ∀e ∈EBus
x , ve = (Ve −V e)/(V e −V e) and ∀e ∈ELine
x
∪
ETWT
x
, ie = Ie/Ie, λV , λI and λJ are hyper-parameters, and
1opt,e is equal to 1 if the object should be included in the
objective function. Notice that the above quantities depend on
(x, y), although the dependency has been hidden for the sake
of conciseness.
We aim at solving the following black-box optimization
problem,
y⋆(x) ∈arg min
y
f(y; x).
(5)
B. Continuous Surrogate Optimization Problem
The lack of a proper gradient for objective function f
prevents us from directly employing deep learning tools,
for they essentially rely on gradient descent. Observing that
Problem (5) is a single-step Reinforcement Learning (RL)
problem [9], we propose to transform it as follows.
(a) Line Controller example. In the H2MG representation (right),
Lines (
) are 3rd order hyper-edges. Controllable Lines – such
as the red one in the SLD representation (left) – are connected via
their Line port to Line Controllers (
), which are 1st order hyper-
edges that bear the decision variable Connected.
(b) Shunt Controller example. In the H2MG representation (right),
Shunts (
) are 2nd order hyper-edges. Controllable Shunts – such
as the red one in the SLD representation (left) – are connected via
their Shunt port to Shunt Controllers (
), which are 1st order
hyper-edges that bear the decision variable Switch Status.
(c) SVR Controller example. SVR is a closed-loop regulation that
modifies the reactive power of a generator cluster to regulate the
voltage of a regulated bus. In the H2MG representation (right),
Generators (
) are 2nd order hyper-edges. Generators taking part
in the regulation – such as the red ones in the SLD representation
(left) – are connected via their Gen port to SVR Units (
) which
are 2nd order hyper-edges. The regulated Bus is connected via its Bus
port to an SVR Zone (
) which is a 2nd order hyper-edge. Finally,
the SVR Controller (
) is a 1st order hyper-edge connected to
the SVR Zone and SVR Units via its Zone port, and bears a decision
variable ∆˚V that updates the regulated bus’ voltage setpoint.
(d) RTC Controller example. RTCs are TWTs that modify their
transformation ratios to regulate the voltage of a bus. In the H2MG
representation (right), TWTs (
) are 3rd order hyper-edges. TWTs
that are also RTCs – such as the red one in the SLD representation
(left) – are connected via their TWT port to RTCs (
), which
are 2nd order hyper-edges also connected to the regulated bus on the
other side. Finally, controllable RTCs are connected via their TWT
port to RTC Controllers (
) which are 1st order hyper-edges that
bear a one-hot decision vector [10%, 12%, 15%, 17%] controlling the
voltage setpoint of the regulated bus. In general, not all TWTs are
RTCs, and not all RTCs are controllable.
Fig. 1: Illustration of the various levers for action. On the left part of each subfigure is displayed a Single Line Diagram (SLD)
of small simplistic systems where controllable devices are shown in red. On the right part is displayed the corresponding
H2MG representation, where dots (
) correspond to addresses and all other symbols are hyper-edges defined in Table I.


--- Page 4 ---
Let us introduce a continuous surrogate decision variable z,
along with a probability distribution ρ over the set of decisions
y. We choose to split z and ρ into class-specific components
(yc)c∈C′ and (ρc)c∈C′, where C′ = {Line Controller, Shunt
Controller, SVR Controller, RTC Controller} is the set of
controller classes.
ρ(y|z) =
Y
c∈C′
ρc(yc|zc).
(6)
Moreover, for a given controllable class c ∈C′, the surrogate
decision variable zc is split element-wise,
∀c ∈C′, ρc(yc|zc) =
Y
e∈Ec
x
ρc(ye|ze).
(7)
In the following, we introduce the definitions of the four
conditional probability distributions (ρc)c∈C′.
a) Line Controllers: For each e ∈ELine Controller
x
, the
decision is a binary variable ye ∈{0, 1}. Let us introduce
a continuous surrogate decision variable ze ∈R that induces
the following conditional distribution,
ρLine Controller(ye|ze) =
eyeze
1 + eze .
(8)
b) Shunt Controllers: Decision variables born by Shunt
Controllers being also binary variables, we use the exact same
approach as for Line Controllers.
c) SVR Controllers: For each e ∈ESVR Controller
x
, the
decision is a continuous variable ye ∈R. Let us introduce
a continuous surrogate decision variable ze ∈R that induces
the following conditional Gaussian distribution,
ρSVR Controller(ye|ze) =
1
σ
√
2π e−(ye−ze)2
2σ2
,
(9)
where σ is a fixed hyper-parameter.
d) RTC Controllers: For each e ∈ERTC Controller
x
, the de-
cision variable is a 4-dimensional one-hot vector ye ∈{0, 1}4
such that 1⊤.ye = 1. Let us introduce a continuous surrogate
decision variable ze ∈R4 that associates each category with a
score and induces the following conditional distribution,
ρRTC Controller(ye|ze) = ey⊤
e .ze
1⊤.eze .
(10)
Let us introduce qβ(·|x) as the Boltzmann distribution
derived from f and a temperature parameter β > 0,
∀y, qβ(y|x) = e−βf(y;x)
Zβ(x) ,
(11)
where Zβ(x) = P
y′ e−βf(y′;x). It associates higher probabil-
ities to decisions y that yield a low objective f(y; x).
Then let us choose as a surrogate objective function f β
ρ the
Kullback-Leibler divergence from ρ(·|z) to qβ(·|x),
f β
ρ (z; x) := DKL(ρ(·|z)∥qβ(·|x)),
= −Hρ(z) + βEy∼ρ(·|z) [f(y; x)] + log Zβ(x). (12)
where Hρ(z) is the entropy of ρ(·|z). We propose to replace
the initial black-box optimization problem (5) with the follow-
ing continuous surrogate optimization problem,
z⋆
β(x) ∈arg min
z
f β
ρ (z; x).
(13)
This change of problem is motivated by the intuition that
if z is a good solution of problem (13), then yρ(z) ∈
arg maxy ρ(y|z) should be a good solution of problem (5).
Moreover, given the factorization of ρ(y|z), yρ(z) may easily
be computed component-wise.
C. Surrogate Gradient Estimation
The surrogate objective function f β
ρ
is continuous and
differentiable w.r.t. z, which enables the use of gradient-based
methods. Using the log-trick (∇zϕ(z) = ϕ(z)∇z log ϕ(z)), its
derivative is expressed as follows,
gβ
ρ (z; x) := ∇zfρ(z; x),
= −∇zHρ(z) + βEy∼ρ(·|z) [f(y; x)∇z log ρ(y|z)] . (14)
Using equation (7), ∇zHρ(z) and ∇z log ρ(y|z) can be split
into class and hyper-edge specific terms,
∇zHρ(z) = (∇zeHρc(ze))c∈C′,e∈Ecx,
(15)
∇z log ρ(y|z) = (∇ze log ρc(ye|ze))c∈C′,e∈Ecx,
(16)
where all terms are defined in Table II.
Class
∇zeHρc(ze)
∇ze log ρc(ye|ze)
Line Controller
−ze ×
eze
(1 + eze)2
ye −
eze
1 + eze
Shunt Controller
−ze ×
eze
(1 + eze)2
ye −
eze
1 + eze
SVR Controller
0
1
σ2 (ye −ze)
RTC Controller
−ze × eze(1⊤.eze −eze)
(1⊤.eze)2
ye −
eze
1 + eze
TABLE II: Formulas for derivatives of the entropy and log-
probability for the four classes of levers.
While the entropy term in equation (14) has a closed-form
expression, the expectation can only be estimated, e.g. through
a Monte Carlo method,
ˆgMC(z; x) = −∇zHρ(z) + β
N
N
X
i=1
fi∇z log ρ(yi|z),
(17)
where fi = f(yi; x), with (yi)N
i=1 i.i.d. samples from ρ(·|z).
Unfortunately, this raw MC estimator is known to suffer from
a large variance and fails to capture a relevant and consistent
direction of improvement. The following adjustments allow
for a more relevant estimator.
• Instead of sampling the decision variables for all classes
of objects at the same time, we decompose the gradient
estimation by class. During the estimation of a class
gradient, we fix all decisions of other class to the most
probable decision.


--- Page 5 ---
• We replace scores fi from equation (17) with clipped
scores f ′
i defined as:
f ′
i = tanh
fi −f(yρ(z); x)
τ

,
(18)
where τ is a hyper-parameter and yρ(z) is the most
probable decision knowing z.
• In the case of binary and categorical variables, we sample
only unary modifications of yρ(z).
D. Amortized Optimization
We aim at solving problem (13) not only for a single
context x, but for a whole distribution p of contexts. Thus, we
introduce a mapping ˆzθ – parameterized by a vector θ – that
maps contexts x to surrogate decisions z. This mapping should
respect the H2MG structure of the data, and be compatible
with variations displayed in the real-life distribution p.
We reuse the H2MG-based Neural Ordinary Differential
Equation (NODE) [22] introduced in previous work [21],
which is a type of GNN especially designed to process
H2MGs. It relies on the continuous propagation of information
between direct neighbors, by associating each address a ∈Ax
with a time-varying latent vector ht
a ∈Rd, where t ∈[0, 1] is
an artificial time variable and d ∈N.
∀c ∈C, ∀e ∈Ec
x, ˜xe = Ec
θ(xe),
(19)
∀a ∈Ax,









ht=0
a
= [0, . . . , 0],
dht
a
dt =Fθ

ht
a,tanh



P
(c,e,o)
∈Nx(a)
M c,o
θ (ht
e, ˜xe)




,
(20)
∀c ∈C′, ∀e ∈Ec
x, [ˆzθ(x)]e = Dc
θ(˜xe, ht=1
e
),
(21)
where Nx(a) = {(c, e, o)|e ∈Ec
x, o(e) = a} is the neighbor-
hood of address a, he = (ho(e))o∈Oc is the concatenation of
the latent vectors of addresses it is connected to and functions
(Ec
θ)c∈C, Fθ, (M c,o
θ )c∈C,o∈Oc and (Dc
θ)c∈C′ are basic Multi-
Layer Perceptrons (MLPs).
We now consider the following AO problem,
θ⋆∈argmin
θ
Ex∼p

f β
ρ (ˆzθ(x); x)

.
(22)
For a given context x, the following holds,
∇θf β
ρ (ˆzθ(x); x) = Jθ [ˆzθ] (x)⊤.gβ
ρ (ˆzθ(x); x),
(23)
where Jθ [ˆzθ] (x) is the Jacobian matrix of the GNN ˆzθ
estimated via automatic differentiation. From this basic chain-
rule we derive a GNN training loop, shown in Algorithm 1
in the simplifying case of a size 1 minibatch. In the actual
implementation, multiple contexts are sampled in step (a) and
processed in parallel in steps (b) and (c), and the average
backpropagated gradient is employed to update θ in step (d).
During step (c), the optimization problem 5 is not fully solved.
Instead, we simply estimate a direction of improvement ˆg.
Algorithm 1 Amortized Optimization Training Loop
Require: p, θ, ˆzθ, ˆgβ
ρ , α
while not converged do
x ∼p
▷Context sampling (a)
ˆz ←ˆzθ(x)
▷GNN prediction (b)
ˆg ←ˆgβ
ρ (ˆz; x)
▷Gradient estimation (c)
θ ←θ −αJθ[ˆzθ](x)⊤.ˆg
▷Back-propagation (d)
III. CASE STUDY
We aim at providing a post-processing tool over the existing
power grid forecasting tool at RTE. This tool should take as
input a real-life power grid forecast – which usually displays
significant voltage violations – and output targets for the
previously introduced levers. Those targets should be applied
over the corresponding forecast, and then a static AC power
flow simulation should be run. The experiment described in
the present section is a major step towards this ambitious goal,
as training is performed using the real-life and full-scale data
available at RTE.
A. Datasets
In this study, we consider the power grid forecasts generated
every hour for the next 24 hours for the full French HV-EHV
system with a reduced model of neighboring countries. We
consider the following datasets.
• Train (from Sep. 1st to Nov. 30th 2024) : 149,249 contexts.
• Val (from Dec. 1st to Dec. 15th 2024) : 9,284 contexts.
• Test (from Dec. 16th to Dec. 31th 2024) : 9,264 contexts.
Power grid operating conditions (i.e. contexts) are framed as
H2MGs with at most 24,445 unique addresses and composed
of at most 7,643 Buses, 8,451 Loads, 14 Batteries, 7 SVCs, 12
VSC Stations, 6 HVDC Lines, 8,046 Lines, 360 Shunts, 6,075
Generators, 169 SVR Units, 27 SVR Zones, 2,476 TWTs and
1,522 RTCs. In terms of controllable hyper-edges, there are
at most 114 Line Controllers, 262 Shunt Controllers, 27 SVR
Controllers and 506 RTC Controllers. All features listed in
Table I are directly extracted from the data using PyPowSybl
[23], at the exception of the 1opt feature of buses, lines and
transformers. This feature serves to identify whether an object
should be included in the objective function or not. Here, it is
set to 1 for all (non fictitious) objects within France connected
to voltage levels higher than 63kV, and 0 otherwise.
B. Baseline
We compare our methodology to a so-called Init baseline,
defined as follows. Lines that are initially closed and that
can be opened remain untouched, while already opened lines
are removed from the file. Shunts are not altered from the
initial file. SVR voltage setpoints are set to the regulated bus
voltage from the initial file, plus a constant and uniform offset.
The latter offset is tuned to minimize the objective function
over the Train set. The rationale is that we wish our GNN to
perform better than a uniform and constant modification of
setpoints. In the initial forecast, RTC voltage setpoints take


--- Page 6 ---
continuous values, which we project into the allowed discrete
space {1, 1.02, 1.05, 1.07} in per unit. Notice that this Init
baseline is rather simple, as there is currently no other avail-
able method for the full-scale system. An ongoing concurrent
work aims at developing an expert system heuristics inspired
by typical operator routines.
C. Experimental Setup
Experiments are conducted using our open-source pipeline
EnerGNN2, that relies on JAX [24] and Flax [25]. Input
features are normalized using a piecewise linear approxi-
mation of the empirical cumulative distribution function, as
detailed in the supplementary material of [21]. H2MGNODE
hyper-parameters have been adjusted by trial-and-error for
lack of time to perform a comprehensive hyper-parameter
optimization. Encoders (Ec
θ)c∈C are Multi Layer Perceptrons
(MLPs) with 2 hidden layers of sizes (128, 128), an output
dimension of size 64 and Leaky ReLU activation functions.
Addresses latent vectors are of size 64. System (20) is solved
by Diffrax [26], using an explicit 1st-order Euler scheme
with ∆t = 0.005, and backpropagation is performed using
the recursive checkpoint adjoint method. Function Fθ is an
MLP without any hidden layer with a Leaky ReLU applied
over its output. Message passing functions (M c,o
θ )c∈C,o∈Oc
and decoders (Dc
θ)c∈C′ are MLPs with hidden layers of
sizes (128, 128) and Leaky ReLU activation functions. Back-
propagated gradients are processed by Adam [27] with a
learning rate of 1 × 10−4 and standard parameters.
Gradient estimation is performed using 8 samples for
Line Controllers and RTC Controllers, and 16 samples for
Shunt Controllers and SVR Controllers, β is set to 10−4
and τ to 0.1. The objective function f is parameterized by
λV
= λI = 1, λJ = 0.1 and ϵI = ϵV
= 0.05. The
AC simulator used is OpenLoadFlow [28], with transformer
voltage control activated, 100 maximum outer loops, SVR
activated (”K EQUAL PROPORTION”) and min (resp. max)
target and plausible voltages set to 0 (resp. 3), and standard
parameters. In the case of a non-convergence, the decision
y is associated with a prohibitive cost set to 100, so as to
saturate the tanh clipping. Notice that if the most probable
decision yρ(x) does not converge, then it is very unlikely
that samples will converge, making it impossible to define a
direction of improvement. In such a case, we choose to return
a null gradient. In order to increase the probability of having
well-defined gradients at the beginning of the training – where
GNN predictions are centered around 0 – we add a constant
offset to GNN outputs defined as follows.
• For Line Controllers and Shunt Controllers e, z′
e = ze−2,
which improves the probability of not disconnecting.
• For SVR Controllers, z′
e = ze + y0
e where y0
e is the same
offset used by the Init baseline. σ is set to 0.0025p.u.
• For RTC Controllers, z′
e = ze+2y0
e where y0
e is the same
one-hot vector used by the Init baseline.
2https://github.com/energnn/energnn
Training lasted 10,000 iterations, with minibatches of size
4, which takes 5 days using an NVIDIA A10 GPU for forward
and backward GNN computations (steps (b) and (d) from
Algorithm 1) and an AMD EPYC 9554 64-Core Processor
for sampling and gradient estimation (steps (a) and (c) from
Algorithm 1). Notice that here the full Train set has not been
explored by the model for lack of time. Models are evaluated
over the Validation set after each epoch and after every 1,000
iterations.
D. Results
As displayed in Table III, our GNN model reduces the
average number of voltage violations from 38.8 to 26.6. Notice
that the Init baseline mostly generates over-voltages (32.6
per context on average) and few under-voltages (6.18 per
context on average), while the GNN is more balanced with
∼13 over-voltages and under-voltages on average per context.
This overall improvement of voltage magnitudes is performed
without any significant impact on branch overflows and losses
caused by Joule’s effect on optimized branches. The average
number of branch overflows per context goes from 0.836 to
0.840 (i.e. a 0.6% increase), while the mean Joule losses go
from 16.20p.u. to 16.28p.u. (i.e. a 0.5% increase).
Statistics over the Test set of 9,264 contexts
Init
GNN
Mean # of Over-Voltages
32.6
13.6
Mean # of Under-Voltages
6.18
13.1
Mean # of Voltage Violations
38.8
26.6
Mean # of Branch Overflows
0.836
0.840
Mean Joule Losses (p.u.)
16.20
16.28
Mean % of Disconnected Lines
0.00%
0.845%
Mean % of Connected Shunt Capacitors
3.81%
3.90%
Mean % of Connected Shunt Inductors
74.6%
86.1%
Mean of SVR Voltage Setpoints (p.u.)
1.02
1.02
Std. dev. of SVR Voltage Setpoints (p.u.)
0.0281
0.0265
Mean % of RTCs at 100%
67.5%
68.3%
Mean % of RTCs at 102%
25.9%
31.7%
Mean % of RTCs at 105%
5.80%
0.00%
Mean % of RTCs at 107%
0.0835%
0.00%
TABLE III: Metrics and levers usage before and after the
action of the trained GNN model, over the Test set.
Figure 2 shows that the Init baseline yields up to ∼450
voltage violations per context, while the GNN yields at most
∼200 voltage violations. The slope in logarithmic scale in-
dicates that the GNN does a better overall job at reducing
the number of violations. Figure 3 displays the distribution of
normalized voltages (∀e ∈EBus, ve = (Ve −V e)/(V e −V e))
across all optimized buses from the whole Test set. The trained
GNN managed to reduce the upper tail of over voltages (where
ve > 1), at the cost of an increase of the lower tail (where
ve < 0). A deeper analysis of the results shows that most over
voltages are on the 225kV and 63kV voltage levels, while the
under voltages are mostly on the 400kV voltage level.
The GNN model exploits the different control levers at its
disposal in the following way.
• Line openings. The GNN very rarely opens transmission
lines (0.845% on average), although Figure 4a shows that
up to 12 lines can be opened by the GNN at the same


--- Page 7 ---
0
200
400
0
1×103
2×103
3×103
Init
GNN
(a) Linear scale for y-axis.
0
100
200
300
400
500
101
103
Init
GNN
(b) Logarithmic scale for y-axis.
Fig. 2: Histogram of voltage violation counts per context, over
the Test set. The red curve corresponds to initial values, and
the blue curve to the outcome of the GNN’s decision. (a) and
(b) display the same data on different y-axis scales.
0.5
0.0
0
5 ×104
0.0
0.5
1.0
0
1
×106
1.0
1.5
0
5 ×104
Init
GNN
Fig. 3: Histogram of normalized voltages over all buses and
all contexts from the Test set, ve = (Ve −V e)/(V e −V e).
Values out of the [0, 1] range correspond to voltage violations.
The left and right panels focus only on the distribution tails,
and share the same scale. The y-axis scale is linear.
time. Figure 4b shows that most lines are barely used,
while some are opened in more that 5% of contexts.
• Shunts state switching. The GNN almost never touches
the shunt capacitors – which increase voltages – (∼3.8%
of them are connected), while the percentage of connected
shunt inductors – which decrease voltages – goes from
74.6% to 86.1%. Some shunts are more used than others
(see Figure 4d): most of them are barely requested
to change states, while some are switched in 45% of
contexts from the Test set.
• SVR voltage setpoints. Figure 4e shows that the Init
baseline has two main modes, one around 1p.u. and the
other around 1.05p.u., while the GNN seems to exploit a
wider range of values, mostly spread between 0.97p.u.
and 1.05p.u. Despite this difference, their means and
standard deviations remain roughly the same (respectively
∼1.015p.u. and ∼0.027p.u.).
• RTC voltage setpoints. The GNN model never uses the
105% and 107% setpoints, and distributes its setpoints
between 100% (68.32%) and 102% (31.68%).
Notice that among the 9,264 contexts from the Test set,
the Init baseline makes the AC simulator converge in 98.7%
of them, while the GNN model makes it converge in 96.5%
of them. The convergence failures occur despite the use
of OpenLoadFlow [28], which is an industrial simulator
that implements many robustifying heuristics. All these non-
converging contexts were excluded from the above analysis.
At inference time, importing 4 power grid files, applying the
GNN model in parallel, modifying the files, running an AC
simulation and saving the updated files takes 12s using an A10
GPU and an AMD EPYC 9554 64-Core Processor.
0
5
10
0
2
×103
(a) Number of lines opened by
the GNN per context.
0%
2.5%
5%
0
5
×101
(b) Percentage of opening by the
GNN per line.
0
10
20
30
0
1
×103
(c) Number of shunts connected
or disconnected by the GNN per
context.
0%
20%
40%
0
1
×102
(d) Percentage of connection or
disconnection by the GNN per
shunts.
1.00
1.05
1.10
0
5
×104
Init
GNN
(e) SVR voltage setpoints.
1.00
1.02
1.05
1.07
0
2
×106
Init
GNN
(f) RTC voltage setpoints.
Fig. 4: Distributions of control levers’ setpoints and usages.
All y-axes are in logarithmic scale, so as to highlight outliers.
IV. CONCLUSION
The work presented in the present study focuses on tertiary
voltage control, with the specific aim of improving, in terms
of reactive power management, the forecasting pipeline used
at RTE in the context of operation planning. The objective is
to reduce the amount of voltage violations in a given forecast
by acting on continuous (SVR setpoints), binary (shunts and
lines) and categorical (RTC setpoints) control levers.
In the paper, we have explained in details how the H2MG
formalism may be used in order to represent in a faithful
fashion real-life power system operating conditions and control
problems. We describe a methodology that leverages a GNN
using the H2MG-based neural ordinary differential equation
model (H2MGNODE), trained in a self-supervised mode so
as to minimize an objective function evaluated by a (black-
box) simulator of the power system physics. We have ex-
perimentally validated this approach on a real-life and full-
scale use case, successfully decreasing the number of voltage
violations from 38.8 to 26.6 on average, as compared to a
simple baseline. These quite realistic experiments demonstrate
the feasibility of an AI-based decision support tool to assist
power system operators in the real world and in real-time.
However, multiple issues arose during the experiments. First
of all, the overall training is currently too slow to allow for a
proper hyper-parameter optimization. This problem could be
addressed by accelerating both the simulator and the GNN
core, or by increasing the parallelism by using more CPUs
and GPUs. More broadly, any notable progress in the context
of machine learning from a combination of observational data
and simulations shall be scrutinized and potentially leveraged
to speed-up the training stage.
Secondly, the static simulator based on AC power flow
computations used in the training loop failed to converge


--- Page 8 ---
in a significant number of contexts encountered during our
experiments, despite the many robustifying heuristics imple-
mented. Considered operating conditions push the simulator
far off its nominal operating domain. While this slowed down
the training / validation loops, it did, however, not prevent
the approach to learn useful TVC policies. In any case, the
self-supervised training loop is designed so as to be able
to take advantage of any future progress in terms of power
system simulators in a seamless way. Clearly, working on the
robustness and accuracy of digital twins of power systems is
needed to support the operators to manage operating contexts
that will be more and more often atypical. Our work on AI-
based decision support tools presented in this paper is in
perfect synergy with that other line of work.
REFERENCES
[1] Committers of PowSyBl, “PowSyBl (Power System Blocks), a Power
System Toolbox.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/powsybl/
[2] A. R. Castillo, “Essays on the ACOPF Problem: Formulations, Approxi-
mations, and Applications in the Electricity Markets,” Ph.D. dissertation,
Johns Hopkins University, 2016.
[3] Y. Fukuyama and H. Yoshida, “A Particle Swarm Optimization for
Reactive Power and Voltage Control in Electric Power Systems,” in
Congress on Evolutionary Computation, 2001.
[4] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and Y. Bengio, Deep Learning,
1st ed.
MIT Press Cambridge, 2016.
[5] K. Hornik, “Approximation Capabilities of Multilayer Feedforward
Networks,” Neural networks, 1991.
[6] B. L. Thayer and T. J. Overbye, “Deep Reinforcement Learning for
Electric Transmission Voltage Control,” in IEEE Electric Power and
Energy Conferenced, 2020.
[7] H. Hagmar, L. A. Tuan, and R. Eriksson, “Deep Reinforcement Learning
for Long-Term Voltage Stability Control,” arXiv: 2207.04240 [eess.SY],
2022.
[8] H. Zhen, H. Zhai, W. Ma, L. Zhao, Y. Weng, Y. Xu, J. Shi, and X. He,
“Design and Tests of Reinforcement-Learning-Based Optimal Power
Flow Solution Generator,” Energy Reports, 2022.
[9] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction,
2nd ed.
The MIT Press, 2018.
[10] X. Pan, M. Chen, T. Zhao, and S. H. Low, “DeepOPF: A Feasibility-
Optimized Deep Neural Network Approach for AC Optimal Power Flow
Problems,” arXiv: 2007.01002 [eess.SY], 2022.
[11] B. Amos, “Tutorial on Amortized Optimization,” arXiv: 2202.00665
[cs.LG], 2022.
[12] B. Donon, “Deep Statistical Solvers & Power Systems Applications,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Universit´e Paris-Saclay, 2022.
[13] RTE, “Rte7000,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://huggingface.co/
datasets/OpenSynth/RTE700
[14] F. Scarselli, M. Gori, A. C. Tsoi, M. Hagenbuchner, and G. Monfardini,
“The Graph Neural Network Model,” IEEE transactions on neural
networks, 2008.
[15] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. Van Den Berg, I. Titov,
and M. Welling, “Modeling Relational Data with Graph Convolutional
Networks,” in European semantic web conference.
Springer, 2018.
[16] W. Liao, B. Bak-Jensen, J. R. Pillai, Y. Wang, and Y. Wang, “A Review
of Graph Neural Networks and Their Applications in Power Systems,”
arXiv: 2101.10025 [cs.LG], 2021.
[17]
´Angela L´opez-Cardona, G. Bern´ardez, P. Barlet-Ros, and A. Cabellos-
Aparicio, “Proximal Policy Optimization with Graph Neural Networks
for Optimal Power Flow,” arXiv: 2212.12470 [cs.AI], 2025.
[18] D. Owerko, F. Gama, and A. Ribeiro, “Unsupervised Optimal Power
Flow Using Graph Neural Networks,” arXiv: 2210.09277 [eess.SY],
2022.
[19] J. Li, R. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, H. Lai, and Y. Zhang, “Deep
Reinforcement Learning for Optimal Power Flow with Renewables
Using Graph Information,” arXiv: 2112.11461 [cs.LG], 2022.
[20] F. Diehl, “Warm-Starting AC Optimal Power Flow with Graph Neural
Networks,” in NeurIPS Workshop on Tackling Climate Change with
Machine Learning, 2019.
[21] B. Donon, F. Cub´elier, E. Karangelos, L. Wehenkel, L. Crochepierre,
C. Pache, L. Saludjian, and P. Panciatici, “Topology-Aware Reinforce-
ment Learning for Tertiary Voltage Control,” Electric Power Systems
Research, 2024.
[22] T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural
Ordinary Differential Equations,” in NeurIPS, 2018.
[23] Committers of PyPowSyBl, “PyPowSyBl, a Python API for PowSyBl
Toolbox.” [Online]. Available: http://github.com/powsybl/pypowsybl
[24] J. Bradbury, R. Frostig, P. Hawkins, M. J. Johnson, C. Leary, D. Maclau-
rin, G. Necula, A. Paszke, J. VanderPlas, S. Wanderman-Milne, and
Q. Zhang, “JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy,” 2018.
[25] J. Heek, A. Levskaya, A. Oliver, M. Ritter, B. Rondepierre, A. Steiner,
and M. van Zee, “Flax: A neural network library and ecosystem for
JAX,” 2024.
[26] P. Kidger, “On Neural Differential Equations,” Ph.D. dissertation, Uni-
versity of Oxford, 2021.
[27] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization,”
in International Conference for Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[28] Committers
of
OpenLoadFlow,
“OpenLoadFlow,
a
Loadflow
for
PowSyBl Toolbox.” [Online]. Available: https://github.com/powsybl/
powsybl-open-loadflow
