--- Page 1 ---
DiP-SD: Distributed Pipelined Speculative Decoding
for Efficient LLM Inference at the Edge
Yaodan Xu, Sheng Zhou, Zhisheng Niu
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R. China
xyd21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {sheng.zhou, niuzhs}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—Speculative decoding has emerged as a promising
technique for large language model (LLM) inference by acceler-
ating autoregressive decoding via draft-then-verify. This paper
studies a new edge scenario with multi-user inference, where
draft tokens are generated locally on devices and subsequently
offloaded to a centralized edge server for batch verification.
The key challenge is to sustain high throughput under coupled
decisions of (i) batching and pipeline scheduling and (ii) per-
user draft token length. We propose DiP-SD, which exploits two
complementary parallelism dimensions: device-level distributed
drafting and phase-level draft–verify pipelining. We formulate
a throughput-maximization objective, defined as the expected
number of accepted tokens per unit time, and jointly optimize the
number of batches, user-to-batch assignment, and integer draft
lengths. To solve the resulting fractional mixed-integer program,
DiP-SD scans the batch number and iteratively alternates be-
tween an association subproblem and a draft-length subproblem.
Numerical results under a Qwen3-1.7B/Qwen3-32B device–edge
deployment show that DiP-SD achieves up to 17.89× throughput
over autoregressive decoding (AD) and 1.93× over AD with greedy
batching.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are now widely used in
interactive applications such as assistants, search, coding copi-
lots, and customer support. These services repeatedly invoke
LLM inference to generate responses, making throughput and
latency first-order system concerns. However, modern LLMs
are parameter-heavy and resource-intensive, creating a funda-
mental tension between high inference cost and low-latency
requirements for interactive use.
LLM inference is usually decomposed into a prefill stage
and an autoregressive decode stage. While prefill can be amor-
tized by caching and batching, decode remains latency-critical
because tokens must be generated sequentially, making total
latency proportional to output length. This token dependency
makes decode the main throughput bottleneck for interactive
services. Speculative decoding (SD) addresses this bottleneck
by using a draft-then-verify scheme: a fast draft model proposes
multiple draft tokens, and a stronger target model verifies them
in parallel. Foundational SD work has shown that carefully
designed accept/reject-and-resample procedures can preserve
the target distribution while generating multiple tokens per
target model call [1]–[3].
Recent SD research improves acceleration from several
directions. One line improves draft-target alignment and ac-
ceptance through distillation or online adaptation [4], [5].
Another line redesigns the draft and verification structure, e.g.,
Fig. 1. Edge deployment of distributed pipelined speculative decoding: user-
side devices run the draft model, and the edge server runs the target model for
verification.
feature-space drafting, dynamic draft trees, or multi-head or
self-speculative variants [6]–[9]. As SD moves to distributed
deployment, communication and synchronization become dom-
inant concerns, including adaptive window control, selective
feedback, and bandwidth-aware sparsification [10]–[13].
Deploying inference at the edge can further improve respon-
siveness by placing models closer to users and reducing end-to-
end delay. SD has also been explored in edge-oriented systems
with heterogeneous devices and networks [14]–[18], but a
key caveat is that SD does not automatically scale to multi-
user, high-concurrency workloads: throughput can degrade
when verification becomes a shared bottleneck [15], [19]. This
makes batching unavoidable, where batching means grouping
multiple inputs to the same model to be processed together
so that compute and overhead can be amortized to increase
throughput; however, existing edge SD systems typically adopt
simple batching policies, e.g., static batching in SLED [14] or
heuristic batch-size decisions in SPIN [15]. Beyond batching,
pipeline parallelism has been studied to reduce bubbles and
improve utilization: the authors of [20] pipeline draft and
target phases via micro-batches within each draft–verify round,
while FlowSpec [17] and PEARL [21] pipeline draft and target
execution within a single request.
In this paper, we focus on a distributed edge setting where
draft generation runs on multiple user-side devices locally
and verification runs on an edge server, as shown in Fig. 1.
This setting is increasingly practical because small LLMs have
been deployed on end devices (e.g., tablets and smartphones),
enabling local drafting with server-side verification. It creates
two coupled parallelism dimensions: device-level distributed
draft parallelism and phase-level draft–target pipeline paral-
arXiv:2604.20919v1  [cs.IT]  22 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
lelism. Unlike [20], which pipelines micro-batches within each
draft–verify round, we pipeline across multiple batches over
successive rounds, combining distributed drafting with batch-
level verification pipelining.
DiP-SD is the first SD scheme to exploit batch-level pipeline
parallelism between distributed drafting and centralized verifi-
cation, with co-optimized speculation length and batching. The
key control variables are the user-to-batch assignment, per-user
speculative length, and the number of batches, which are tightly
coupled by latency, memory, and communication constraints.
Although DiP-SD is motivated by edge inference, it also applies
to other SD deployments with distributed drafting and shared
verification.
To address this coupled optimization problem, we propose
a joint optimization framework. For each candidate number of
batches, we iteratively alternate between a batch association
subproblem and a draft-length subproblem, and select the
best solution over scanned batch counts. Extensive numerical
experiments show that the proposed scheme exhibits superior
performance across all test points.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A. Edge Deployment Scenario
We consider an edge inference system serving M user
requests, indexed by M = {1, . . . , M}. The system adopts a
distributed speculative decoding framework: lightweight draft
models are deployed on distributed edge devices, while a large-
scale target model (the verifier) resides on a centralized edge
server. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the draft and verification phases
are decoupled across heterogeneous compute resources. This
architecture naturally enables device-level parallelism during
drafting and phase-level pipelining between the devices and
the server. Specifically, in each speculation round, each device
sequentially generates a sequence of draft tokens, which are
subsequently transmitted to the edge server for concurrent
batch verification. The target model processes these tokens in a
single forward pass, and employs techniques such as rejection
sampling to determine their validity.
The iterative speculation process for each request follows a
four-stage cycle:
1) Local Drafting: Each edge device independently em-
ploys its lightweight draft model to generate a sequence
of tokens in a serial manner. These draft tokens are
subsequently offloaded to the edge server.
2) Batch Verification: The edge server validates the re-
ceived draft tokens through the target model in a single
forward pass. It identifies the first mismatched token
for each request, discards all subsequent incorrect pre-
dictions, and simultaneously produces one bonus token
following the last accepted position, ensuring at least one
token is generated per round. In our system, multiple
requests are grouped into batches and verified together
to amortize the overhead of target model inference.
3) Synchronization: The server transmits the verified to-
kens and the bonus token back to the respective device,
Fig. 2. Example of batching and pipelined verification. Requests are assigned
into N batches; each batch is verified at the edge server in sequence while
drafting proceeds in parallel at devices.
ensuring both sides are synchronized with the latest
generation state.
4) State Update: The device updates its local KV cache
and resumes the next drafting round, starting from the
newly received bonus token.
For the optimization, we introduce a batch count N with
index set N = {1, . . . , N}, where N ∈{2, . . . , M}. We use
“batch” to denote a set of requests verified together at the
edge server. Verification proceeds in N pipeline stages, where
stage n verifies batch n (thus n also indicates the verification
order/slot). Fig. 2 illustrates one example.
Request m has prefix length im, communication overhead
τ c
m, and acceptance parameter αm. Here τ c
m is the per-round
communication latency between the device and the edge server.
The communication link can be wireless or wired, and the SD
payload only contains drafted tokens and (when needed by the
verification protocol) a small amount of probability information
(e.g., draft token log-probabilities and sparse target logits),
so the transmitted volume is small and we consider τ c
m as a
constant. The prefix length im counts both the original input
prompt and the previously accepted tokens (i.e., the current
context length at the beginning of the optimization window).
We focus on optimizing the speculative decoding (decode)
process and omit prefill latency, since prefill is executed once
per request and can be treated as an additive constant. Since
each request spans hundreds of tokens and thus many SD
rounds, the set of active requests and system parameters are
approximately stationary within each optimization horizon.
Although the prefix length im grows by the number of accepted
tokens each round, this increment is small relative to the full
generation length, so we treat im as a constant.
B. Speculative Decoding Utility Model
Each user m selects integer draft length lm ∈N+. The
token acceptance rate αm ∈(0, 1) characterizes the statistical
alignment between the draft and target models. Given that this
rate inherently fluctuates across different tasks, we model the
acceptance rate as a user-specific parameter to account for such
heterogeneity. The expected number of accepted tokens of one


--- Page 3 ---
TABLE I
MAIN NOTATION IN THE SYSTEM MODEL.
Symbol
Meaning
M, M
user number and user index set
N, N
batch number and batch index set
im
prefix length of user m
lm
draft length of user m
αm
expected token acceptance rate of user m
xmn
assignment variable from user m to batch n
bn
batch size (number of users in batch n)
Ln, In
max draft length and max prefix length in batch n
td
n, tv
n
draft completion time and verification latency
Tn
stage duration
cm, βm, cv, βv
linear latency coefficients
JΞ, hΞ
1 , hΞ
2
decoder blocks / hidden dims for model Ξ ∈{d, v}
speculative round for user m is
um(lm) = 1 −αlm+1
m
1 −αm
,
(1)
where each draft token is accepted independently with prob-
ability αm (geometric acceptance model [1]), and one bonus
token is always generated regardless of acceptance outcomes.
The total expected accepted tokens across all users is
U(l) =
M
X
m=1
um(lm).
(2)
C. Transformer-Cost Primitives
Let Ξ ∈{d, v} denote draft and verification (target) models.
Model Ξ has JΞ decoder blocks, hidden dimension hΞ
1 , and
hidden dimension hΞ
2 in feed-forward network (FFN).
Following standard decoder-only cost scaling, we define
F d(i) = 4Jdhd
1
 2hd
1 + i + 1 + hd
2

,
(3)
F v(L, I) = 4Jvhv
1L(2hv
1 + I + L + hv
2) .
(4)
Intuitively, F d(·) and F v(·, ·) capture the compute intensity of
draft and verification for one round, growing with the context
length i and the batch-wise maximum draft length and prefix
length (L, I). Following [20], we model the per-step drafting
and verification latency as affine functions of the product bF:
Gm(b, F) = cmbF + βm,
(5)
Gv(b, F) = cvbF + βv.
(6)
The functions Gm(·, ·) and Gv(·, ·) characterize the latency
for drafting and verification, respectively. Parameters (c, β) are
obtained from profiling and capture per-compute scaling and
fixed overhead, and b is the batch size. This affine dependence
on batch size is consistent with empirical observations reported
in [22], [23].
D. Assignment and Batch-Aggregation Constraints
Binary assignment and one-batch-per-user constraints are
xmn ∈{0, 1},
∀m, n,
(7)
N
X
n=1
xmn = 1,
∀m.
(8)
Here xmn indicates whether user m is associated with batch
n (and thus verified in stage n). Draft lengths are positive
integers:
lm ∈N+,
∀m.
(9)
Batch size is
bn =
M
X
m=1
xmn,
bn ≥1,
∀n.
(10)
The condition bn ≥1 enforces valid fixed-N batching, i.e.,
each declared batch is active.
Batch-level max variables are represented by epigraph in-
equalities:
Ln ≥lmxmn,
∀m, n,
(11)
In ≥imxmn,
∀m, n.
(12)
Thus, (Ln, In) act as batch-wise maxima of speculative length
and prefix length.
E. Latency-Coupling Constraints
The per-user drafting latency is defined as:
τ d
m = lmGm
 1, F d(im)

,
∀m.
(13)
This formulation reflects that the drafting phase is executed
locally on each device without batching. Specifically, as the
drafting process is inherently serial, the total latency is calcu-
lated as the product of the draft length lm and the per-token
drafting time.
Batch draft time uses max-epigraph constraints:
td
n ≥xmn
 τ d
m + τ c
m

,
∀m, n.
(14)
so td
n captures when all requests in batch n have completed
drafting and communication.
Batch verification latency is
tv
n = Gv(bn, F v(Ln, In)) ,
∀n.
(15)
which depends on the batch size bn and the batch-wise maxima
(Ln, In) due to padding. Stage duration must cover verification:
Tn ≥tv
n,
∀n.
(16)
Here Tn is the stage duration in the pipeline schedule: it can
exceed tv
n to satisfy global precedence constraints and account
for pipeline bubbles.
The total pipeline span S is the steady-state cycle time over
which one complete SD round (all N batches) is processed:
S =
N
X
n=1
Tn.
(17)
Pipeline precedence requires the pipeline span to cover both
the draft completion time and the verification latency of batch
n:
S ≥td
n + tv
n,
∀n.
(18)


--- Page 4 ---
F. Memory Constraints at Edge Side
Since batching is not employed on the user side, we assume
that the memory footprint of the draft model remains well
within the device’s limits. Consequently, our analysis focuses
on the memory constraints at the edge server, which performs
batch processing for the target model inference. With FP16
precision, the model parameters occupy a memory footprint of
approximately:
Γv
p = Jv
 8(hv
1)2 + 4hv
1hv
2

.
(19)
KV-cache component for batch n is:
Γv
kv,n = 4Jvhv
1bnIn,
∀n.
(20)
The memory feasibility constraint is then:
Γv
p + Γv
kv,n ≤Γv
max,
∀n.
(21)
G. Overall Joint Optimization Objective
We define the throughput R as the expected number of
accepted tokens per unit time:
R ≜U(l)
S ,
(22)
where U(l) is defined in (2) and S is the total pipeline span in
(17). This formulation is valid under the stationary workload
assumption: since the pipeline schedule repeats across succes-
sive SD rounds within each optimization period, it suffices to
evaluate throughput over a single representative round.
The final design jointly optimizes assignment x, speculative
lengths l, batch count N, and other auxiliary variables:
P :
max
x,l,N,aux R
(23)
s.t. (7)–(21),
N ∈{2, . . . , M}.
(24)
III. PROPOSED JOINT SOLVER
A. Joint Solver Overview
The joint design problem is challenging because it involves
(i) integer decisions (user association and draft length) and (ii)
a throughput objective that is fractional in the total latency. We
solve it with a two-level joint solver. At the outer level, we
scan the number of batches N ∈{2, . . . , M}. For each fixed
N, we solve
P(N) :
max
x,l,aux R(N)
(25)
s.t. (7)–(21).
where R(N) is the throughput defined in (22) under fixed N.
To handle the coupling between user-to-batch association and
integer draft lengths, we apply alternating optimization:
x(r+1) ←arg min S(N, l(r)),
(26)
l(r+1) ←arg max R(N, x(r+1)).
(27)
The outer loop stops when l is unchanged and the throughput
change is below tolerance. Finally, we select the best solu-
tion over the scanned batch counts. The overall workflow is
summarized in Algorithm 1. Each subproblem reduces to a
mixed-integer linear program (MILP) that we solve using SCIP
through its Python interface PySCIPOpt [24], [25].
In implementation, we additionally impose practical variable
bounds to tighten the MILPs and improve numerical stability.
In particular, we use the bound parameters (Lub, Iub, Tub, Sub)
as upper bounds for draft lengths, prefix lengths, and auxiliary
timing variables.
B. x-Subproblem
Given fixed l, we solve
X(N, l) :
min
x,T,aux S
(28)
s.t. (7)–(8), (10)–(12),
(14)–(21).
This step decides batching assignment and batch-wise timing
variables under full feasibility constraints.
C. l-Subproblem: Binary Reformulation + Dinkelbach
Given fixed x, we solve
L(N, x) :
max
l
U(l)
S(l | x)
(29)
s.t. (9), (11), (13)–(21).
We constrain the draft length to lm ∈{1, . . . , Lub}, where
Lub denotes the upper bound. This constraint is justified
by the diminishing returns of the utility function um(lm)
as lm increases. Furthermore, empirical evidence from prior
speculative decoding studies [1], [2] suggests that the optimal
draft length typically falls within the range of 5–15. To handle
integer draft lengths efficiently, we use binary selectors:
ymk ∈{0, 1},
Lub
X
k=1
ymk = 1,
lm =
Lub
X
k=1
k ymk,
(30)
znk ∈{0, 1},
Lub
X
k=0
znk = 1,
Ln =
Lub
X
k=0
k znk.
(31)
For users in batch n, max-consistency is enforced by
Ln ≥lm,
∀m ∈Bn(x), ∀n,
(32)
where Bn(x) denotes the user set of the n-th batch.
Define lookup utility
umk = 1 −αk+1
m
1 −αm
,
U(y) =
M
X
m=1
Lub
X
k=1
umkymk.
(33)
We handle the fractional objective via the classic Dinkelbach
method [26]. At Dinkelbach iteration t, solve inner mixed-
integer problem:
max
y,z,aux U(y) −q(t)S(y, z)
(34)
s.t. (13)–(21), (30)–(32).


--- Page 5 ---
Algorithm 1: DiP-SD: Joint Optimization Solver
Require: M, parameter set, Lub, tolerances, solver
limits
Ensure : N ⋆, x⋆, l⋆, R⋆
1 for N ←2 to M do
2
Initialize l(0) and r ←0;
3
repeat
4
Solve x-subproblem with fixed l(r) to get
x(r+1);
5
Solve l-subproblem using (34)–(36) to get
l(r+1);
6
r ←r + 1;
7
until convergence;
8
Compute converged throughput R⋆(N);
9 Select N ⋆= arg maxN∈{2,...,M} R⋆(N);
10 return (N ⋆, x⋆, l⋆, R⋆);
Then update
q(t+1) =
U(y(t))
S(y(t), z(t)).
(35)
Stop when
U(y(t)) −q(t)S(y(t), z(t))
 ≤ϵ,
(36)
or an equivalent throughput-change threshold is met. Each
inner problem is a MILP. We solve these MILPs using
SCIP/PySCIPOpt [24], [25].
D. Batch-Count Selection and Final Deployment Decision
For each fixed N, let the converged throughput be R⋆(N).
Then we select
N ⋆= arg
max
N∈{2,...,M} R⋆(N).
(37)
E. Complexity Discussion
As shown in Algorithm 1, DiP-SD scans the batch count
and alternates MILP-based x and l updates for each fixed N
to maximize throughput. Let Iout be the number of alternating
iterations and Idin be Dinkelbach iterations. Per fixed N,
complexity is approximately
O
 Iout
 Cx(M, N) + IdinCl(M, N, Lub)

,
where Cx and Cl denote solver-dependent inner complexities.
The outer batch-count scan multiplies this by the number of
tested batch counts.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. System Setup
We evaluate DiP-SD using the Qwen3 model series [27].
Specifically, Qwen3-1.7B serves as the draft model on an
NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090, and Qwen3-32B serves as the
target model on an NVIDIA A100-80GB edge server. Their
TABLE II
DEFAULT SYSTEM PARAMETERS.
Parameter
Value
User number M
6
Scan range of N
2 to M
Acceptance rate αm
0.78
Prefix length im
512
Communication latency τ c
m
3.0
User-side latency parameters (cm, βm)
(4.0305 × 10−11, 33.8151)
Initial draft length lm
7
Draft model (Jd, hd
1, hd
2)
(28, 2048, 6144)
Verify model (Jv, hv
1, hv
2)
(64, 5120, 25600)
Verify timing (cv, βv)
(1.2077 × 10−11, 95.1074)
Memory cap Γv
max
8.0 × 1010
Bounds (Lub, Iub, Tub, Sub)
(20, 1024, 106, 3 × 106)
transformer dimensions, (Jd, hd
1, hd
2) and (Jv, hv
1, hv
2) respec-
tively, along with all other default parameters, are listed in
Table II. Latency parameters are obtained by profiling each
model on its respective hardware and fitting the measurements
to the affine latency model in (5)–(6). The default acceptance
rate is estimated from inference statistics over 100 sampled
prompts. All remaining experiments are conducted via nu-
merical simulation under the default parameters in Table II.
All latency parameters are in milliseconds (ms) and memory
parameters are in bytes (B).
We compare five methods:
• DiP-SD (proposed): joint solver that scans batch counts
and alternates x/l updates.
• AD: edge-only large model autoregressive decoding with-
out speculative drafting. No batching scheme is applied.
• AD w/ greedy batching: AD with greedy memory-
feasible batching: sort users by im in descending order,
then pack them into batches sequentially until the memory
bound would be violated.
• DiP-SD w/o batching: enforce N = M and one user per
batch; optimize only l.
• DiP-SD w/ fixed lm = 7: fix lm and optimize only x.
The primary metric is throughput, which is expected ac-
cepted tokens per unit time in our context. Since S is in ms,
R = U(l)/S has unit token/ms, and we report throughput with
1000 × R token/s.
B. Results
1) Homogeneous Setting: We first consider a homogeneous-
user setting, where all users share the same per-user parameters
at each test point. We conduct two groups of experiments:
1) throughput versus user number M (number of concur-
rent users), with M
∈{2, 4, . . . , 14}; and 2) throughput
versus token acceptance rate αm, with M
= 6, αm
∈
{0.70, 0.75, 0.80, 0.85, 0.90, 0.95}. Other parameters are set as
the default values in Table II.
Fig. 3(a) shows that the proposed DiP-SD consistently
achieves the highest throughput among all methods. The basic
AD scheme, lacking batching, has throughput independent of
user count. DiP-SD without batching exhibits throughput that


--- Page 6 ---
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
User Number M
50
100
150
System Throughput [token/s]
DiP-SD
DiP-SD w/ fixed lm = 7
DiP-SD w/o batching
AD w/ greedy batching
AD
(a) Throughput vs. user number M
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
Acceptance Rate ®m
20
40
60
80
100
120
System Throughput [token/s]
DiP-SD
DiP-SD w/ fixed lm = 7
DiP-SD w/o batching
AD w/ greedy batching
AD
(b) Throughput vs. acceptance rate αm (M = 6)
Fig. 3. Homogeneous-setting throughput comparison (token/s).
first increases with M and then plateaus. In contrast, batching-
enabled methods — DiP-SD, DiP-SD with fixed lm = 7,
and AD with greedy batching — all exhibit approximately
linear throughput growth with increasing M. This is because
the throughput numerator scales proportionally with M, while
newly added users are absorbed into existing batches with
negligible increase in total pipeline span S. The performance
gap between DiP-SD and AD with greedy batching widens
as M increases; at peak, DiP-SD achieves 1.38× over AD
with greedy batching and 17.89× over AD. Meanwhile, DiP-
SD with fixed lm = 7 underperforms DiP-SD, highlighting
the importance of draft length selection. Furthermore, DiP-SD
without batching is substantially outperformed by the three
batching-enabled methods when M ≥6, demonstrating the
critical role of batching in supporting concurrent multi-user
inference.
As illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the throughput of all SD-based
benchmarks exhibits a monotonic increase with the acceptance
rate αm. This is because a higher αm allows more drafted
tokens accepted per round. In contrast, the throughput of AD
baselines remains constant, as they do not leverage speculative
execution. The proposed DiP-SD scheme maintains the highest
throughput at all testpoints. Quantitatively, as αm increases
from 0.70 to 0.95 (with M = 6), the throughput of DiP-
SD grows from 74.13 to 117.56 token/s, representing a 1.59×
improvement. At its peak, the proposed DiP-SD achieves a
substantial speedup of 11.25× over the vanilla AD and 1.93×
Heterogeneous im
Heterogeneous αm Heterogeneous (cm, βm)
0
20
40
60
80
100
System Throughput [token/s]
DiP-SD
DiP-SD w/ fixed lm = 7
DiP-SD w/o batching
AD w/ greedy batching
AD
Fig. 4. Heterogeneous-setting throughput comparison over three single-factor
cases (token/s).
over the AD baseline with greedy batching, demonstrating
the superiority of our method in high-acceptance regimes.
However, for model pairs with a large size gap, the acceptance
rate is usually moderate. In our setting, the default αm is 0.78,
at which DiP-SD achieves around 1.38× throughput over AD
with greedy batching. It is also noted that DiP-SD with fixed
lm = 7 and DiP-SD without batching do not always outperform
AD with greedy batching: their performance crossover points
occur near αm = 0.75 and αm = 0.85, respectively, below
which the overhead of failed drafting offsets the gains of
speculation. This further confirms that adaptive draft length
and batching each make an essential contribution to throughput
improvement.
2) Heterogeneous
Setting:
We
next
evaluate
three
single-factor heterogeneous cases with fixted user number
M
=
6. Case 1 heterogenizes prefix length im with
values
{200, 320, 440, 560, 680, 800},
while
Case
2
considers non-uniform acceptance rates αm ranging from
{0.80, 0.82, 0.84, 0.86, 0.88, 0.90}. In Case 3, we heterogenize
the draft-side latency coefficients (cm, βm) by applying the
scale set {0.2, 0.5, 1.0, 3.0, 5.0, 7.0} to the default values.
Fig. 4 shows that DiP-SD remains the best-performing
method across all three heterogeneous cases, achieving up
to 8.09× throughput over AD and 1.39× over AD with
greedy batching. The proposed throughput ranges from 78.49
to 84.53 token/s across the three scenarios, with the αm-
heterogeneous case yielding the largest advantage. This gain
is primarily attributed to the inclusion of several users whose
acceptance rates exceed the default value, which directly raises
the expected number of accepted tokens per verification round.
From an architectural perspective, variations in αm fundamen-
tally affect the utility of speculation, whereas heterogeneity
in prefix length or latency coefficients primarily impacts the
latency components of the system. It is also worth noting that
DiP-SD-based methods suffer a pronounced throughput degra-
dation under heterogeneous (cm, βm): the imbalance across
user-side latencies disrupts the pipeline, enlarging the total span
and reducing pipeline efficiency.


--- Page 7 ---
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented DiP-SD, a joint optimization frame-
work for distributed pipelined speculative decoding. We max-
imize throughput, defined as the expected number of accepted
tokens per unit time, under latency, memory, and commu-
nication constraints. DiP-SD jointly optimizes user-to-batch
association and integer draft lengths via an outer scan over
the batch count and an alternating update between the two
subproblems. Numerical results show that DiP-SD consistently
achieves the highest throughput across all evaluated scenarios,
with substantial gains over baselines.
DiP-SD targets edge-first deployments, where multiple de-
vices host lightweight drafting and a nearby edge server per-
forms shared verification. This makes the framework suitable
for edge assistants, vehicle–road–edge collaborative inference,
and other low-latency interactive LLM applications. Beyond
edge serving, the framework also applies to general multi-
accelerator deployments with distributed drafting and shared
verification, covering both single-node and multi-node GPU
configurations. Future work includes real-world deployment
and online adaptation to nonstationary workloads.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported in part by the State Key Laboratory of
Internet of Things for Smart City (University of Macau) Open
Research Project under Grant SKL-IoTSC(UM)/ORP04/2026,
and in part by the Project of Tsinghua University-Toyota Joint
Research Center for AI Technology of Automated Vehicle
under Grant TTAD-2024-08-2.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Leviathan, M. Kalman, and Y. Matias, “Fast inference from transform-
ers via speculative decoding,” in Proceedings of the 40th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2023.
[2] C. Chen, S. Borgeaud, G. Irving, J.-B. Lespiau, L. Sifre, and J. Jumper,
“Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01318, 2023.
[3] H. Xia, T. Ge, P. Wang, S.-Q. Chen, F. Wei, and Z. Sui, “Speculative
decoding: Exploiting speculative execution for accelerating seq2seq gen-
eration,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2023, 2023.
[4] Y. Zhou, K. Lyu, A. S. Rawat, A. K. Menon, A. Rostamizadeh, S. Kumar,
J.-F. Kagy, and R. Agarwal, “Distillspec: Improving speculative decoding
via knowledge distillation,” in International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[5] X. Liu, L. Hu, P. Bailis, A. Cheung, Z. Deng, I. Stoica, and H. Zhang,
“Online speculative decoding,” in Proceedings of the 41st International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
[6] Y. Li, F. Wei, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “EAGLE: Speculative sampling
requires rethinking feature uncertainty,” in Proceedings of the 41st
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2024.
[7] Y. Li, F. Wei, C. Zhang, and H. Zhang, “EAGLE-2: Faster inference
of language models with dynamic draft trees,” in Proceedings of the
2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), 2024.
[8] T. Cai, Y. Li, Z. Geng, H. Peng, J. D. Lee, D. Chen, and T. Dao, “Medusa:
Simple LLM inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding
heads,” in Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2024.
[9] J. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Li, L. Shou, K. Chen, G. Chen, and S. Mehrotra,
“Draft & verify: Lossless large language model acceleration via self-
speculative decoding,” in Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2024.
[10] F. Yu, L. Li, B. McDanel, and S. Q. Zhang, “Dsd: A distributed
speculative decoding solution for edge-cloud agile large model serving,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.21669, 2025.
[11] J. Ning, C. Zheng, and T. Yang, “DSSD: Efficient edge-device de-
ployment and collaborative inference via distributed split speculative
decoding,” in ICML 2025 Workshop on Machine Learning for Wireless
Communication and Networks, 2025.
[12] C.
Zheng
and
T.
Yang,
“Communication-efficient
collaborative
llm inference via distributed speculative decoding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.04576, 2025.
[13] P. Bhattacharjee, F. Tian, M. Zhong, G. Zhang, O. Simeone, and
R. Tandon, “Conformal sparsification for bandwidth-efficient edge-cloud
speculative decoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09942, 2025.
[14] X. Li, D. Spatharakis, S. Ghafouri, J. Fan, H. Vandierendonck, D. John,
B. Ji, and D. S. Nikolopoulos, “Sled: A speculative llm decoding frame-
work for efficient edge serving,” in Proceedings of the Tenth ACM/IEEE
Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC), 2025.
[15] F. Chen, P. Li, T. H. Luan, Z. Su, and J. Deng, “Spin: Accelerating
large language model inference with heterogeneous speculative models,”
in Proceedings of the 44th IEEE International Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2025.
[16] Y. Venkatesha, S. Kundu, and P. Panda, “Fast and cost-effective
speculative edge-cloud decoding with early exits,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.21594, 2025.
[17] X. Liu, L. Luo, M. Tang, C. Huang, and X. Chen, “Flowspec: Continuous
pipelined speculative decoding for efficient distributed llm inference,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.02620, 2026.
[18] Y. Li, R. Kong, Z. Lyu, Q. Li, X. Chen, H. Cai, L. Yan, S. Wang, J. Zhao,
G. Zhu, L. Kong, G. Chen, H. Xiong, and D. Yin, “Flexspec: Frozen
drafts meet evolving targets in edge-cloud collaborative llm speculative
decoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.00644, 2026.
[19] X. Liu, C. Daniel, L. Hu, W. Kwon, Z. Li, X. Mo, A. Cheung, Z. Deng,
I. Stoica, and H. Zhang, “Optimizing speculative decoding for serving
large language models using goodput,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14066,
2024.
[20] B. Zhu, Z. Chen, L. Zhao, H. Shin, and A. Nallanathan, “Efficient llm
inference over heterogeneous edge networks with speculative decoding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.11331, 2025.
[21] T. Liu, Y. Li, Q. Lv, K. Liu, J. Zhu, W. Hu, and X. Sun, “Pearl:
Parallel speculative decoding with adaptive draft length,” in International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2025.
[22] Y. Xu, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Smdp-based dynamic batching for im-
proving responsiveness and energy efficiency of batch services,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, pp. 1–16, 2025.
[23] Y. Xu, J. Sun, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Smdp-based dynamic batching for
efficient inference on gpu-based platforms,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2023.
[24] T. Achterberg, “SCIP: Solving constraint integer programs,” Mathemati-
cal Programming Computation, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–41, 2009.
[25] S. Maher, M. Miltenberger, J. P. Pedroso, D. Rehfeldt, R. Schwarz, and
F. Serrano, “Pyscipopt: Mathematical programming in Python with the
SCIP optimization suite,” in Mathematical Software – ICMS 2016, 2016.
[26] W. Dinkelbach, “On nonlinear fractional programming,” Management
Science, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 492–498, 1967.
[27] A. Yang, A. Li, B. Yang, et al., “Qwen3 technical report,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
