--- Page 1 ---
LegoDiffusion: Micro-Serving Text-to-Image
Diffusion Workflows
Lingyun Yang†∗, Suyi Li†∗#, Tianyu Feng†, Xiaoxiao Jiang†, Zhipeng Di, Weiyi Lu, Kan Liu,
Yinghao Yu, Tao Lan, Guodong Yang, Lin Qu, Liping Zhang, Wei Wang†
†Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Alibaba Group
Abstract
Text-to-image generation executes a diffusion workflow com-
prising multiple models centered on a base diffusion model.
Existing serving systems treat each workflow as an opaque
monolith, provisioning, placing, and scaling all constituent
models together, which obscures internal dataflow, prevents
model sharing, and enforces coarse-grained resource man-
agement. In this paper, we make a case for micro-serving
diffusion workflows with LegoDiffusion, a system that de-
composes a workflow into loosely coupled model-execution
nodes that can be independently managed and scheduled.
By explicitly managing individual model inference, LegoD-
iffusion unlocks cluster-scale optimizations, including per-
model scaling, model sharing, and adaptive model paral-
lelism. Collectively, LegoDiffusion outperforms existing
diffusion workflow serving systems, sustaining up to 3×
higher request rates and tolerating up to 8× higher burst
traffic.
1
Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation using diffusion models en-
ables the creation of high-quality, contextually accurate im-
ages from textual description [33, 46, 52, 53, 74, 90]. A typical
T2I generation workflow integrates a base diffusion model
with multiple adapter models to form a pipeline. Execution
begins with text encoders that convert prompts into em-
beddings (Fig. 1-top). Conditioned on the embeddings, the
diffusion model iteratively generates latent representations
via a denoising process, which are subsequently decoded as
the final image. To refine visual attributes such as composi-
tion or artistic styles, T2I workflows increasingly incorpo-
rate adapter models, such as ControlNet [90] and LoRA [27],
alongside the base model [38, 41]. By augmenting the dif-
fusion process (Fig. 1), these adapters enable fine-grained
alignment with user intent and aesthetics [27, 79, 90, 91].
Despite the modular nature of diffusion workflows, exist-
ing inference systems, such as HuggingFace Diffusers [15]
and ComfyUI [7], primarily employ a monolithic serving prac-
tice, where the entire workflow, comprising the base model
and all associated adapters, is encapsulated into a monolithic
instance for provisioning and scheduling. The system treats
these workflow instances as opaque black boxes running
on a fixed set of GPUs, while remaining oblivious to the
workflow’s internal model executions and data exchanges.
*Equal contribution; # Corresponding author
Text encoders
Diffusion model
Decoder
Iterative denoising computation
A portrait of a lovely 
shorthair golden-shaded 
cat, sitting on a windowsill, 
capturing every fur detail.
Prompt
Reference image
A portrait of … capturing 
every fur detail.
Text encoders
Image encoder
attn
attn
attn
attn
attn
attn
Diffusion model
ControlNet
Decoder
A portrait of … capturing 
every fur detail.
Text encoders
Image encoder
ControlNet
Diffusion model
Decoder
Patch
attn
attn
attn
attn
Figure 1. Top: a basic diffusion workflow using Flux-
Dev [34]. Middle: add ControlNets [90] alongside the base
diffusion model, which process an additional input reference
image and pass the intermediaries to diffusion model to con-
trol the composition in image generation. Bottom: Further
add LoRA [27] to change image styles by patching LoRA
weights onto diffusion model weights.
While operationally simple, monolithic serving introduces
fundamental inefficiencies. First, it forces coarse-grained scal-
ing: if a single model becomes a bottleneck, the system must
replicate the entire workflow. Second, isolated monoliths pre-
clude model sharing. Production traces [38, 41] show that pop-
ular diffusion backbones and adapters are frequently reused
across workflows. However, monolithic serving forces each
workflow instance to maintain its own model copies, leading
to redundant memory footprints. Third, treating workflows
as opaque black boxes hides internal data dependencies, pre-
venting the system from automatically optimizing resource
allocation and pipelining. Finally, tight coupling increases
fragility: a single model failure crashes the entire workflow.
To address these limitations, we argue that the schedulable
unit for inference should be the individual model execution
node, not the entire diffusion workflow. Instead of mono-
lithic instances, the system should decompose workflows
into loosely-coupled microservices—each encapsulating a
specific component like a text encoder, diffusion backbone,
or adapter. This micro-serving architecture directly addresses
the inefficiencies of monolithic serving. First, it enables fine-
grained scaling: individual models can scale elastically based
on real-time demand, eliminating the resource waste of repli-
cating the entire pipeline. Second, it facilitates cross-workflow
1
arXiv:2604.08123v1  [cs.DC]  9 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
model sharing: distinct workflows can multiplex shared mod-
els, such as a common base model, avoiding redundant mem-
ory footprints. Third, by making model execution and data
flow explicit, the system regains visibility into the compu-
tation graph, enabling automated optimization of resource
allocation and pipelining. Decoupling the workflow also en-
ables fault isolation and fast failure recovery.
However, realizing micro-serving for diffusion workflows
presents non-trivial systems challenges. While prior frame-
works have successfully applied micro-serving to CPU-centric
data analytics [60, 70, 81, 83, 87] and LLM-based agentic
workflows [35, 43, 47, 63], applying this paradigm to diffu-
sion pipelines requires overcoming hurdles that these sys-
tems cannot handle. First, diffusion workflows exhibit com-
plex, iterative data dependencies between base models and
adapters, which cannot be expressively defined or easily
supported in existing frameworks. Second, decoupling these
tightly integrated model workflows necessitates massive,
latency-sensitive tensor communications across GPUs. Exist-
ing LLM or CPU micro-serving frameworks lack an efficient
data plane to manage these high-bandwidth transfers.
In this paper, we present LegoDiffusion, a system purpose-
built for the efficient micro-serving of diffusion workflow.
LegoDiffusion introduces three key designs:
Programming Interface & Compilation. LegoDiffusion
provides a Python-embedded domain-specific language (DSL)
for composing diffusion workflows. The DSL exposes primi-
tives for model initialization, inference, and diffusion-specific
operations for LoRA and ControlNet application [27, 90]. To
provide a unified support for diverse community-developed
models [30], LegoDiffusion wraps each model behind a
standardized interface that encapsulates its native loading
and inference logic. All primitives enforce strict input/out-
put typing, making data dependencies explicit and catching
errors at compile time. A graph compiler translates the work-
flow composition into a directed acyclic graph (DAG) of
loosely coupled workflow nodes. Each node represents a dis-
crete model inference operator that can be independently
provisioned and scheduled–the fundamental unit of micro-
serving.
Runtime & Data Plane. At runtime, LegoDiffusion ap-
plies lazy execution: upon each request, it analyzes the work-
flow DAG and dynamically recomposes the compute graph—
inserting or substituting nodes—to apply diffusion-specific
optimizations. Decomposing workflows into distributed nodes,
however, introduces high-bandwidth tensor transfers with
complex synchronization requirements (e.g., forwarding Con-
trolNet intermediates at specific denoising layers). To handle
this, we design a distributed data engine atop NVSHMEM [49]
that enables GPU-direct, zero-copy tensor movement over
high-speed interconnects. The engine provides two fetch
modes—eager and deferred—so that tensors arrive precisely
when needed without stalling execution. These mechanisms
are transparent to developers: once the compiler produces
the workflow DAG, the data engine automatically orches-
trates all inter-node tensor transfers.
Workflow Node Scheduling. The LegoDiffusion sched-
uler maps workflow nodes onto distributed executors using
three strategies that exploit micro-serving’s decomposition.
First, it enforces model-granular scaling: rather than repli-
cating entire workflows, LegoDiffusion scales only the
bottleneck models, avoiding redundant resource provision-
ing. Second, because a loaded model is workflow-agnostic,
the scheduler preferentially dispatches nodes to executors
that already hold the required model state, enabling multi-
tenant model sharing. Third, LegoDiffusion employs adap-
tive parallelism: it dynamically adjusts model parallelism at
scheduling time based on real-time cluster availability, right-
sizing resource allocation to maximize throughput without
incurring queuing delays.
We prototyped LegoDiffusion and evaluated it across a
diverse array of diffusion workflows, encompassing SD3 [18],
SD3.5-Large [62], Flux-Dev, and Flux-Schnell [34], along
with their respective adapters. Our experiments show that
LegoDiffusion’s micro-serving architecture significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art monolithic serving systems, sus-
taining up to 3× higher request rates and satisfying 6× more
stringent SLO, and tolerating 8× higher burst traffic, while
meeting latency SLOs for over 90% of requests. Crucially,
we verify that LegoDiffusion maintains full compatibility
with emerging diffusion-specific optimizations, such as ap-
proximate caching [4], achieving performance gains consis-
tent with their original monolithic implementations. We will
open-source LegoDiffusion after the double-blind review
process.
2
Background and Problem Statement
2.1
A Primer on Image Generation Workflow
Basic Workflows. As illustrated in Fig. 1-top, a basic text-
to-image (T2I) generation workflow consists of three models:
a text encoder, a base diffusion model, and a decoder-only vari-
ational autoencoder (VAE). The process begins with the text
encoder, which encodes a text prompt into a sequence of
semantic token embeddings. The system then initializes a la-
tent tensor with random Gaussian noise. Conditioned on the
text embeddings, the base diffusion model iteratively refines
this tensor through a series of denoising steps. Finally, the
denoised latent representation is passed to the VAE decoder,
which reconstructs the output image in pixel space.
Workflows with Adapters. To achieve fine-grained control
over visual attributes, such as spatial structure, diffusion
models are frequently augmented with adapter models [27,
38, 79, 89–91]. These adapters can be categorized into two
classes based on their execution patterns [38]:
2


--- Page 3 ---
Base D.M.
Base D.M.
Sync &
aggregate
C.N.
Base D.M.
Latent parallel
ControlNets parallel
Duplication
Figure 2. Latent parallelism and ControlNets parallelism.
1) Parallel Execution Adapters. The first class includes
adapters that operate in tandem with the base diffusion model
during inference, such as ControlNet [90] (Fig. 1-middle).
From a systems perspective, they introduce two complica-
tions: (1) their parameter sizes are often comparable to the
base model, introducing substantial model loading latency;
and (2) maximizing throughput often requires parallelizing
the adapter and base model across GPUs, which necessitates
intricate synchronization and data transfer patterns (§2.2).
2) Weight-Patching Adapters. The second class adapts
the base model through parameter-efficient fine tuning, such
as LoRA [27] and IC-Light [91] (Fig. 1-bottom). These adapters
patch the base model’s weights before inference, incurring no
additional computational overhead during subsequent denois-
ing steps. The trade-off is state management: once patched,
a diffusion model replica is specialized to a specific request
until its weights are restored or replaced. Serving such work-
flows therefore requires fetching adapter weights from re-
mote storage on demand [38], which can bottleneck loading
and complicate sharing model replicas across requests.
Data Dependencies in Diffusion Workflows. Diffusion
workflows exhibit intricate data dependencies induced by
performance-oriented parallelization strategies. These strate-
gies improve performance [19, 36, 38], but they also intro-
duce model-specific data transfers and synchronizations that
monolithic systems struggle to express or optimize (§4.3).
We highlight three common cases:
1) Latent Parallelism. Diffusion models typically use
classifier-free guidance (CFG) [26] to improve image quality
by executing two denoising passes at each step: one condi-
tioned on the prompt and one unconditional. Latent paral-
lelism accelerates CFG by parallelizing these two computa-
tions on separate GPUs [19, 36, 38]. However, this approach
introduces frequent “scatter-gather” synchronization, where
partial results must be aggregated at every denoising step
(Fig. 2). These high-frequency communication barriers can
erode the benefit of parallelism if not handled efficiently.
2) ControlNet Parallelism. To reduce the overhead of
ControlNets, serving systems often execute them in parallel
with the base diffusion model on separate GPUs [38] (Fig. 2).
This design introduces fine-grained data dependencies: Con-
trolNet feature maps must be transferred to, and consumed
by, specific layers of the base model during each denoising
step. The exact communication pattern depends on the base
model and becomes even more complex when multiple Con-
trolNets are used, producing fan-in/fan-out transfers that
are difficult to schedule efficiently.
3) Asynchronous LoRA loading. In production systems,
LoRA adapters are often stored remotely and must be fetched
on demand [38]. To hide this fetching cost, asynchronous
LoRA loading overlaps adapter retrieval with the early stages
of base-model inference. When the LoRA weights arrive, the
system must pause execution, hot-patch the base model in
GPU memory, and then resume computation [38]. This opti-
mization introduces non-deterministic timing and dynamic
state mutation: execution now depends on I/O completion,
forcing the system to coordinate mid-inference weight up-
dates without incurring synchronization stalls.
2.2
Monolithic Serving and Its Inefficiency
Existing diffusion serving systems, such as HuggingFace
Diffusers [15, 66], ComfyUI [11], SGLang-Diffusion [59],
vLLM-Omni [65], and xDiT [19], operate on a monolithic
paradigm. Whether employing Diffusers’ “single-file” ab-
straction* [16, 59, 65] or ComfyUI’s flexible node graph [12],
these frameworks encapsulate the entire generation pipeline,
comprising the base model, adapters, and control logic, into a
monolithic execution unit. Consequently, the serving system
provisions resources and schedules execution at the granular-
ity of the entire workflow, without managing internal model
invocations and data flows. While this monolithic serving
simplifies deployment, it has four fundamental limitations:
L1: Inefficient Scaling via Full Replication. Monolithic
serving treats the entire workflow as a scaling unit, enforcing
coarse-grained replication regardless of which component is
the actual bottleneck. This indiscriminate scaling is particu-
larly costly for diffusion workloads, where the base diffusion
model is typically the sole bottleneck under load spikes. In
standard pipelines [18, 34, 54], the full workflow footprint
is often 1.7× to 4× larger than the base model alone. Conse-
quently, scaling the entire monolith incurs significant over-
head: our experiments on NVIDIA H800 GPUs reveal that
monolithic replication using Diffusers [66] adds up to 80% in
loading latency and wastes up to 75% of GPU memory com-
pared to scaling only the bottlenecked component. Similarly,
with vLLM-Omni [65] and SGLang-Diffusion [59], scaling
an entire Flux-Dev pipeline adds up to 70% and 75% latency,
respectively, compared to scaling only Flux-Dev model.
L2: Inability to Share Common Models. Monolithic serv-
ing enforces strict isolation between workflow instances [7,
*SGLang-Diffusion, vLLM-Omni and xDiT explicitly reuse the pipeline de-
sign from Diffusers [16] to serve diffusion workflows [59, 65]. However,
they currently provide insufficient support to use adapters in their frame-
works [57, 58, 65].
3


--- Page 4 ---
SD3
Flux
Workflows
0.0
2.5
5.0
Loading Time (s)
4.0
5.2
0.4
2.9
Workflow
Base DM
10−2
10−1
100
Latency (s)
101
102
103
Throughput (QPS)
CLIP_G
CLIP_L
T5
SD3
VAE
C.N.
Figure 3. Left: Loading time of workflow scaling and base
diffusion model (DM) scaling. Right: Latency-throughput
tradeoff of models in a SD3 workflow. Both use H800 GPUs.
15], precluding model sharing. This design is fundamen-
tally inefficient given that production T2I workloads ex-
hibit highly skewed model popularity. Alibaba’s trace analy-
ses [38, 41] indicate that popular backbones (e.g., SDXL [54],
SD3 [18], and Flux-Dev [34]) appear in nearly all workflows,
while the top 5 ControlNets serve 95% of generation requests.
Under monolithic serving, each workflow instance must
maintain independent replicas of these massive models (2–24
GiB in FP16 [38]). This redundancy prevents memory multi-
plexing, resulting in excessive GPU memory consumption,
low GPU utilization, and load imbalance across replicas.
L3: Runtime Inefficiency. By encapsulating workflows as
opaque black boxes, monolithic serving eliminates system-
level visibility into internal model dependencies, data flow,
and execution logic. This opacity compels the system to
enforce rigid, workflow-level resource allocation, forfeiting
opportunities for fine-grained runtime optimization. Specifi-
cally, because models within a workflow exhibit heteroge-
neous arithmetic intensities and distinct latency–throughput
trade-offs (Fig. 3-right) [56], a static, per-workflow config-
uration is inherently suboptimal. Furthermore, monolithic
systems typically enforce a fixed degree of model parallelism.
Unlike automatic tuning strategies [39, 63], this static ap-
proach prevents the system from adapting to dynamic work-
loads or fluctuating GPU availability, leading to significant
performance degradation as quantified in §3.1 (Fig. 4-right).
L4: System Fragility and Maintenance Overhead. Mono-
lithic serving imposes high maintenance overheads by violat-
ing modular systems principles. The tight coupling of indepen-
dent components creates system fragility, where a failure in
a single sub-component cascades into a complete workflow
failure. This lack of fault isolation complicates debugging,
forcing developers to check the entire monolith to identify
root causes. Besides, under the monolithic architecture, up-
dating a single component necessitates holistic validation
and coordination across the entire workflow, unnecessarily
prolonging development and deployment cycles.
3
A Case for Micro-Serving
We advocate micro-serving diffusion workflows. Instead of
treating an entire workflow as a schedulable unit, micro-
serving decomposes the workflow into independently man-
aged model-execution components and gives the serving
system per-model control over scaling, sharing, and runtime
SD3
Flux
Models
0
10
Latency (s)
3.0
14.7
1.8
11.9
w/o sharing
w/ sharing
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Latency (s)
0.5
1.0
CDF
Parallelism=1
Parallelism=2
Adaptive
Figure 4. Left: Model sharing reduces request latency.
Right: Adaptive parallelization reduces request latency.
configuration. This design effectively addresses the inefficien-
cies of current monolithic serving systems (§3.1). However,
it introduces new challenges for diffusion workflows (§3.2).
3.1
Benefits of Micro-Serving
Per-Model Management. Micro-serving makes each model,
rather than the entire workflow, the unit of management.
This lets the serving system scale only the bottlenecked
model and choose resources according to each model’s latency–
throughput tradeoff, directly addressing L1 and part of L3.
As a result, the system avoids replicating non-bottleneck
components, reduces model-loading overhead, and better
matches heterogeneous models to available hardware. In
Fig. 3-left, we compare full-workflow scaling with scaling
only the base diffusion model on H800 GPUs. Because the
diffusion model is the bottleneck, full replication loads other
components unnecessarily. Scaling only the diffusion model
therefore reduces scaling latency by up to 90%.
Model Sharing. When different workflows invoke common
models [38], micro-serving lets the system share those loaded
replicas across workflows, directly addressing L2. Instead
of binding a model replica to the workflow that loaded it,
the system can multiplex compatible requests onto any resi-
dent replica. This reduces redundant replicas and improves
load balance, since requests can use identical models already
loaded elsewhere in the cluster. To show these benefits, we
serve a pair of workflows on two H800 GPUs: one with Con-
trolNet and one without. This setup creates model-sharing
opportunities for the text encoders and diffusion models. In
Fig. 4-left, we compare request latency with and without
model sharing for such workflow pairs, using SD3 and Flux
as the base diffusion model in separate experiments. Com-
pared with isolated workflow replicas, multiplexing already-
loaded models reduces request latency by up to 40% and GPU
memory footprint by up to 60%. Furthermore, base diffusion
models patched with adapters (e.g., LoRA, see §2.1) can still
be shared across requests requiring different LoRAs through
efficient patch swapping [38]. We elaborate on this in §7.3.
Adaptive Resource Configuration. Micro-serving exposes
model dependencies and execution choices to the runtime,
which lets the system tune resource configurations per model
instead of fixing one for the entire workflow. This directly
addresses L3. Automatic model parallelism is one example.
4


--- Page 5 ---
We deploy three SD3 workflows [18] on four H800 GPUs un-
der three settings: Parallelism=1 fixes the parallelism degree
at 1 and leaves acceleration opportunities unused; Paral-
lelism=2 always applies latent parallel proposed in [19, 38],
which speeds up image generation without quality loss but
requires a pair of GPUs (§2.1); and Adaptive selects the par-
allelism degree at runtime according to GPU availability.
As shown in Fig. 4-right, the tradeoff is clear: Parallelism=1
yields consistently higher latency because it forgoes parallel
speedup, whereas Parallelism=2 introduces queuing when
later requests wait for an available GPU pair, producing a
stepped CDF curve. Compared with the static configurations,
Adaptive’s automatic parallelization tuning accelerates aver-
age request serving by 1.3× and 1.2×, respectively.
Modular Development. Micro-serving also improves mod-
ularity, directly addressing L4. By serving workflow models
as independent components, it gives developers clearer fail-
ure boundaries and cleaner update paths. They can modify,
validate, and debug one model without reasoning about the
entire workflow, and they can test individual components
in isolation. This reduces maintenance overhead and makes
bugs easier to localize.
3.2
Challenges of Micro-Serving
Despite these benefits, micro-serving diffusion workflows
cannot be built by directly reusing existing microservice sys-
tems for analytics, general task runtimes, or LLM agents [14,
40, 47, 60, 63, 70, 81, 83, 87]. Diffusion workflows couple
heterogeneous models through iterative denoising, adapter
patching, and diffusion-specific parallelism, creating require-
ments these systems do not target.
First, the system needs an abstraction that is expressive
for developers yet structured for backend analysis. Analytics
DAG systems such as Spark [83] and generic task runtimes
such as Ray [47] can express tasks and dependencies, but
not adapter–base-model interactions, deferred tensor depen-
dencies, or patching operations (§2.1).
Second, the system must compile a workflow into exe-
cutable model-level tasks while preserving diffusion-specific
optimizations. LLM-centric systems such as Parrot and Ayo [40,
63] primarily optimize autoregressive inference through pre-
fix sharing and streamed decoding [93]. Diffusion workflows
instead require a compiler that preserves denoising struc-
ture and supports caching, asynchronous LoRA loading, and
specialized multi-GPU parallelization [4, 19, 36, 38].
Third, the runtime must be GPU-native and diffusion-
aware. Data analytics and microservice systems largely as-
sume CPU execution and host-memory dataflow [14, 60, 70,
81, 83, 87], whereas diffusion workflows exchange CUDA ten-
sors across GPUs, rely on asynchronous and interleaved data
movement, and require a dedicated data engine.
Workflow Composition
Workflow requests
workflow_id: “sdxl_txt2img”,
prompt : “A cat …”,
seed: 0, …
Register
Invoke
Workflow Registry
Graph Compiler
Scheduler
Coordinator
Enqueue
Data Store
Executor
Dispatch
Data Store
Executor
Data
Transfer
Figure 5. An overview of LegoDiffusion.
Finally, micro-serving only pays off if the scheduler can
exploit diffusion-specific opportunities at runtime. Exist-
ing systems do not directly support model-granular scaling,
cross-workflow model sharing, adaptive parallelization, or
SLO-aware admission control. These challenges drive our
design of a diffusion-specific programming interface, graph
compiler, runtime/data engine, and scheduler in §4 and §5.
4
System Design of LegoDiffusion
In this section, we present LegoDiffusion, an efficient serv-
ing system for micro-serving diffusion workflows. LegoD-
iffusion comprises four components: a programming in-
terface for workflow composition and model integration
(§4.1), a graph compiler that decomposes workflows into ex-
ecutable nodes and applies diffusion-specific optimizations
(§4.2), a runtime with a GPU-native data engine for work-
flow execution (§4.3), and an orchestrator for scheduling
and resource management (§5). Together, these components
optimize cluster-level serving performance while accommo-
dating existing model acceleration techniques [29].
System Overview. Fig. 5 presents an overview of LegoDif-
fusion. At the frontend, model developers integrate individ-
ual models by subclassing a Model base class, and workflow
developers compose these models into workflows and regis-
ter them with the system ( 1○). End users invoke registered
workflows ( 2○) by submitting requests with inputs such as
textual prompts and random seeds.
At the backend, the graph compiler transforms a workflow
into a set of loosely coupled workflow nodes ( 3○), which are
dispatched by the scheduler across a cluster of distributed
executors ( 4○). Each executor owns one GPU and uses an
efficient data engine for inter-node communication ( 5○).
4.1
Programming Model for Developers
LegoDiffusion’s programming model targets two audiences.
Model developers integrate individual models and adapters
by subclassing a Model base class; they implement model-
specific logic without reasoning about how their models are
composed into a workflow. On the other hand, workflow
developers assemble models into end-to-end workflows by
instantiating models and invoking them; they do not man-
ually wire a DAG (directed acyclic graph). Instead, LegoD-
iffusion adopts an implicit workflow programming model:
model invocations and the I/O interfaces declared in each
5


--- Page 6 ---
Class
API
Description
Model
__init__()
Create a model instance
__call__()
Express a model invocation in the frontend
setup_io()
Define model inputs and outputs
load()
Load the model in the backend
execute()
Execute model inference in the backend
add_patch()
Attach a patchable adapter to a model
rm_patch()
Remove a patchable adapter from a model
Workflow
__init__()
Create a workflow instance
add_input()
Add a workflow input placeholder
add_output()
Add a workflow output placeholder
Table 1. Primitives in LegoDiffusion’s Python library for
defining models and composing diffusion workflows.
Model subclass are sufficient for the graph compiler (§4.2)
to infer the workflow DAG and optimize execution auto-
matically. This contrasts with explicit-DAG systems such
as ComfyUI [11], where developers must manually specify
every node and edge.
Model Integration. To keep pace with the proliferation of
models and acceleration techniques [29], LegoDiffusion
provides a Model base class that standardizes model and
adapter integration while encapsulating all workflow-facing
logic.
A model developer subclasses Model and implements three
methods (Table 1): setup_io() declares the model’s typed
inputs and outputs, which are visible to the compiler; load()
initializes the model on a given device; and execute() runs
inference. Because these are the only methods a model devel-
oper writes, model integration is decoupled from workflow
construction: a model developer never reasons about how
the model is wired into a larger workflow.
The base class handles workflow integration automatically.
Its __call__() method records each model invocation as a
workflow node and derives data dependencies from the I/O
interface declared in setup_io(). This separation captures
a key design principle: model developers specify what a
model consumes and produces; LegoDiffusion uses that
specification to place the model into an inferred workflow
graph.
Fig. 6 illustrates this split with a simplified Flux integra-
tion: the base Model class (top) is provided by the frame-
work, while the Flux subclass (bottom) contains only model-
specific code.
Workflow Composition. Workflow developers compose
workflows declaratively: they declare workflow inputs and
outputs, instantiate models, and invoke them. They never
explicitly wire a DAG; the graph compiler (§4.2) infers all data
dependencies from model invocations and the I/O interfaces
declared in setup_io(), then optimizes the resulting graph.
Fig. 7 shows a workflow for the Flux example in Fig. 1-
bottom. Creating a Workflow instance (line 2) establishes a
scope (maintained by WorkflowContext); subsequent model
1 ## No need to modify it , invisible to model developers ##
2 class Model:
3
def __init__(self , ** kwargs):
4
self.setup_io ()
5
# store associated weight -patching adapters
6
self._patches = []
7
8
# Make the class callable to create workflow node
9
def __call__(self , ** kwargs):
10
workflow = WorkflowContext.get_current_workflow ()
11
workflow_node = WorkflowNode(op=self , ** kwargs)
12
workflow.add_workflow_node(workflow_node)
13
return workflow_node.get_outputs ()
14
15
@abstractmethod
16
def setup_io(self):
17
pass
18
19
def add_patch(self , patch):
20
self._patches.append(patch)
21
22
def rm_patch(self , patch):
23
self._patches.remove(patch)
24
25 ## Model developers start here ##
26 class Flux(Model):
27
def setup_io(self):
28
# define inputs
29
self.add_input("latents", torch.Tensor)
30
self.add_input("prompt_embeds", torch.Tensor)
31
# define "deferred" inputs , detailed in Sec. 4.3.2
32
self.add_input("controlnet_inputs", torch.Tensor ,
deferred=True)
33
# define outputs
34
self.add_output("noise_pred", torch.Tensor)
35
36
def load(self , model_path , device):
37
model = SD3Transformer2DModel.from_pretrained(
38
...
39
).to(device)
40
return {"transformer": model}
41
42
@torch.no_grad ()
43
def execute(self , model_components , ** kwargs):
44
transformer = model_components["transformer"]
45
noise_pred = transformer (** kwargs)[0]
46
return {"noise_pred": noise_pred}
Figure 6. A simplified case of integrating Flux with LegoD-
iffusion.
calls within that scope are automatically recorded as work-
flow nodes. Workflow inputs are declared with add_input(),
and intermediate values such as prompt_embeds flow di-
rectly between model calls. The loop (line 23) shows that
iterative denoising is expressed naturally in Python, while
LegoDiffusion captures the structure needed for backend
execution. After construction, the workflow developer regis-
ters the workflow with LegoDiffusion for later invocation
by end users.
4.2
Graph Compiler
The graph compiler ( 3○) lowers a registered workflow into
a topologically sorted DAG of schedulable workflow nodes
and applies optimization passes before execution.
6


--- Page 7 ---
1 # create a workflow instance
2
workflow = Workflow(name="flux_txt2img_workflow")
3 # initialize models. All inherit the Model class
4
latents_generator = LatentsGenerator ()
5
text_enc = FluxTextEncoder(model_path=model_path)
6 flux = Flux(model_path=model_path)
7
controlnet = ControlNet(model_path=controlnet_path)
8 lora = LoRA(model_path=lora_path)
9 vae = FluxVAE(model_path=model_path)
10 # initialize input placeholders for the workflow
11 seed = workflow.add_input(name="seed", data_type=int)
12
prompt = workflow.add_input(name="prompt", data_type=str)
13
num_denoising_steps = workflow.add_input(name="
num_denoising_steps", data_type=int)
14
ref_image = workflow.add_input(name="ref_image",
data_type=Image)
15 # add_patch () registers a LoRA adapter with the flux ,
16 flux.add_patch(lora)
17 # Invoke models and establish their I/O dependencies.
18 # Model invocation is expressed via __call__ ().
19
latents = latents_generator(seed)
20
prompt_embeds = text_enc(prompt)
21
ref_image = vae(image=ref_image , mode="encode")
22 # Perform iterative denoising computation.
23 for i in range(num_denoising_steps):
24
controlnet_outputs = controlnet(latents ,
prompt_embeds , ...)
25
noise_pred = flux(latents , prompt_embeds ,
controlnet_outputs , ...)
26
latents = denoise(noise_pred , latents)
27
output_img = vae(latents , mode="decode")
28
workflow.add_output(output_img , name="output_img")
Figure 7. A simplified diffusion workflow using Flux [34].
DAG Construction. As described in §4.1, each model invo-
cation during workflow composition is recorded as a work-
flow node with typed I/O declared in setup_io(). The com-
piler resolves data dependencies among these nodes and pro-
duces a topologically sorted DAG. Topological order guaran-
tees correct execution and exposes optimization opportuni-
ties: nodes without mutual dependencies can run in parallel
to reduce latency, and nodes that invoke the same model can
be batched to improve throughput (§4.3).
Optimization Passes. After constructing the DAG, the com-
piler applies a series of graph-rewriting passes. Each pass
pattern-matches on node properties (e.g., model type, adapter
attachments) and may insert, remove, or replace nodes. This
design makes the compiler extensible: adding a new opti-
mization requires only a new pass, without modifying the
core lowering logic. The compiler also applies per-model
optimizations such as torch.compile() within individual
nodes. Below, we illustrate two diffusion-specific passes and
evaluate them in §7.4.
1) Approximate caching [4] reduces the number of de-
noising steps by initializing from a pre-cached image of a sim-
ilar prompt instead of random noise (§2.1). When a prompt
cache is configured, the compiler replaces the random-latent-
initialization node with a cache-lookup node, requiring no
changes to the workflow definition.
2) Asynchronous LoRA loading [38] overlaps LoRA
adapter retrieval with the early stages of diffusion model
inference (§2.1). When the compiler detects an add_patch()
attachment on a model, it rewrites the workflow graph by
inserting (1) an initial node that triggers asynchronous LoRA
loading and (2) a check node after each diffusion-model node
that tests whether the adapter is ready to be patched in.
The workflow developer writes only add_patch(lora); the
compiler can insert the asynchronous-loading machinery
automatically.
4.3
LegoDiffusion’s Runtime
4.3.1
Micro-Serving Control Plane. Given the topologi-
cally sorted DAG from the compiler, the runtime executes
each request through a node-level control plane. Under micro-
serving, each workflow node is independently schedulable
on any executor once its non-deferred inputs are satisfied;
the runtime can also configure parallelism and resource al-
location per node based on the node’s encapsulated model
and available hardware.
Request Execution Lifecycle. Workflows are compiled
once at registration time; the compiled DAG is instantiated
only when a request arrives [3, 48, 71, 83] ( 2○in Fig. 5). The
control plane enqueues all root nodes (those with no up-
stream dependencies) and enters a dispatch loop. In each
cycle, the scheduler selects ready nodes and dispatches them
to executors ( 4○). When an executor completes a node, it
reports the result to the control plane, which marks down-
stream nodes whose inputs are now satisfied as ready. This
loop continues until all nodes complete and the workflow
output is returned to the end user. The scheduler’s placement
and batching policies are detailed in §5.
4.3.2
Distributed Data Engine. Micro-serving introduces
frequent data movement between nodes. In typical diffusion
workflows such as SD3 [18] and Flux models [34], CUDA
tensors account for over 99% of transferred data (see Fig. 11-
right); for example, an SDXL workflow with a single Con-
trolNet transfers 5.3 GiB [38]. Host-memory staging through
PCIe is prohibitively slow at this scale.
To avoid CPU staging, LegoDiffusion deploys a distributed
data engine with a per-executor local data store (Fig. 5). The
stores are built on NVSHMEM [49], which provides one-
sided GPU communication over NVLink and RDMA, en-
abling zero-copy sharing within an executor and high-speed
transfers across executors.
Data Fetch Modes. Diffusion workflows exhibit diverse
data-movement patterns due to their parallelization strate-
gies (§2.1). LegoDiffusion supports two fetch modes: eager,
where an input must be ready before a node begins execu-
tion, and deferred, where a node starts execution and fetches
the input at the point of consumption.
1) Eager data fetch. By default, inputs are fetched eagerly:
a node cannot begin until all its eager inputs are available.
In Fig. 8, the text-encoder node on Executor 1 produces a
7


--- Page 8 ---
C.N. infer.
Flux infer.
Text encoder
infer.
Coordinator
Executor 1
Executor 2
Time
Tensor metadata
Metadata transfer
Tensors
Tensor transfer
Data store
Layer0
Layer0
Deferred inputs
Eager fetch: Executer 2 fetches prompt embedding(
) from Executer 1
Deferred fetch: Executer 1 fetches ControlNet output(
)from Executer 2
Produce tensor
Add tensor
Figure 8. Illustrating data fetch. For simplicity, we primarily
illustrate tensor fetch process in data store. C.N.: ControlNet.
prompt embedding ( 1○) and places it in its local data store
( 2○). When the coordinator schedules the downstream Con-
trolNet node on Executor 2, it forwards the embedding’s
metadata ( 3○). Executor 2 uses this metadata to fetch the
tensor into its own store ( 4○). The ControlNet node then
reads the embedding from its local store ( 5○) and begins
execution—only after the fetch completes, a guarantee en-
forced by eager fetching.
2) Deferred data fetch. Model developers can mark an
input as deferred (line 32 in Fig. 6), indicating that it needs
not be ready when a node starts inference. A deferred input
is implemented as a fetch function invoked at the point of
consumption: it returns immediately if the data is available,
or blocks until the data arrives.
This mode is tailored to diffusion workflows where Con-
trolNet computation is interleaved with the base model (Fig. 1-
middle). At runtime (Fig. 8), the ControlNet output consumed
mid-way through Flux inference is marked as a deferred in-
put (dashed tensor, 6○). Flux begins execution without it.
When Flux reaches the consumption point, the ControlNet
output has been produced and placed in Executor 2’s store
( 7○); its metadata is forwarded to Executor 1 ( 8○), which
fetches the tensor into its local store ( 9○) for Flux to con-
sume. Without deferred fetching, Flux could not start until
ControlNet completes, eliminating the parallelism between
the two models.
Note that tensor metadata, including a tensor’s pointer,
is tiny (on the order of KiB). Executors can piggyback it on
node-completion notifications, allowing the coordinator to
track global tensor placements with little overhead.
Design Properties. The data engine is transparent to both
model developers and workflow developers: once the com-
piler lowers a workflow into nodes, the engine automati-
cally orchestrates all inter-node data movement. All inter-
mediate data is immutable—tensors produced during dif-
fusion workflow execution are consumed once and never
updated [38, 66]—which obviates consistency protocols and
simplifies fault tolerance. The engine reclaims tensors as
soon as no downstream node requires them, reducing mem-
ory pressure. If an executor fails, LegoDiffusion recon-
structs lost data by re-executing the affected nodes, follow-
ing a similar approach to prior cluster computing frame-
works [47, 81, 83].
5
Workflow Node Scheduling
The scheduler is the component that translates micro-serving
into runtime actions ( 4○in Fig. 5). It sits between the com-
piled workflow DAGs and the executor cluster, maintaining
a global queue of workflow nodes and making three online
decisions in each scheduling cycle: (1) which same-model
nodes to batch together and which executors to route them
to, exploiting model sharing across workflows; (2) how many
GPUs to allocate per batch, adapting parallelism to current re-
source availability; and (3) whether to admit or reject incoming
requests to preserve SLO attainment. Algorithm 1 summarizes
the scheduling loop; the remainder of this section describes
how the scheduler makes each decision.
To make these decisions, the scheduler maintains two
key data structures that the runtime keeps up to date. A
model state table records, for every executor, which models
are currently loaded in GPU memory. Executors piggyback
their model states on node-completion notifications to the
coordinator, so the table is updated without extra RPCs. A set
of per-model latency profiles, collected offline, provides stable
estimates [73] of data-fetch time, model-loading time, and
inference time for each model under various batch sizes and
parallelism degrees. Following prior work [10, 37, 39, 55, 88],
the scheduler orders the ready queue by first-come-first-
serve (FCFS). For nodes with the same arrival time (e.g.,
nodes from the same request), it further prioritizes those at
shallower depths in the DAG. Since optimal ordering requires
foreknowledge of future arrivals [23, 88], FCFS is a simple,
neutral baseline that isolates LegoDiffusion’s gains from
scheduling policy. The scheduler is a pluggable module; other
policies can be substituted.
5.1
Cross-Workflow Batching and Model Sharing
In each scheduling cycle, the scheduler pops the FCFS-earliest
node 𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑from the ready queue and inspects its model field.
It then scans the remaining ready nodes for any that refer-
ence the same model, regardless of the originating workflow,
and groups them into a single batch of up to 𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥entries. The
per-model 𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥is determined offline by profiling batching
efficiency: beyond a model-specific threshold, larger batches
increase latency with diminishing throughput gain [10]. Be-
cause matching is by model identity rather than by workflow,
a single batch may contain nodes from multiple workflows—
this is how the scheduler realizes model sharing (§3.1).
After forming a batch, the scheduler must select an execu-
tor (Line 13 –17). For each candidate executor 𝑒, it computes
a latency score from three profiled components: (1) 𝐿𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎, the
cost of fetching the batch’s input tensors from their produc-
ing executors via the data engine (§4.3.2); (2) 𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑, the cost of
loading the required model into GPU memory; and (3) 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑟,
the estimated inference time for the batch. The model state
table makes 𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑zero for any executor that already hosts
the required model, so the scoring function naturally routes
8


--- Page 9 ---
Algorithm 1: Scheduling Algorithm
1 while True do
// Admission control runs asynchronously (§5.3)
2
Admit or reject arrived requests;
// Identify ready nodes
3
𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦←nodes with satisfied dependencies from queue;
4
𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙←currently available executors;
5
if 𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦= ∅or 𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙= ∅then
6
continue;
7
Sort 𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦by (arrival time, node depth);
8
𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑←𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦.𝑝𝑜𝑝(0);
// Batch same-model nodes (§5.1)
9
𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥←profiled max batch size for 𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙;
10
𝐵𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ←{𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑} ∪{𝑛′ ∈𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦| 𝑛′.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙=
𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙and |𝐵𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ| < 𝐵𝑚𝑎𝑥};
// Choose parallelism degree (§5.2)
11
𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥←max useful parallelism for 𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙;
12
𝑘←min(|𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙|, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥);
// Score and select executors
13
for 𝑒∈𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙do
14
𝐿𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎←CalcDataFetchLatency(𝐵𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ, 𝑒);
15
𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑←𝑒hosts 𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙? 0 :
CalcLoadTime(𝑛ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑.𝑚𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑙);
16
𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑟←CalcInferenceTime(𝐵𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎ, 𝑒, 𝑘);
17
𝑒.𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒←𝐿𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎+ 𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑎𝑑+ 𝐿𝑖𝑛𝑓𝑒𝑟;
18
𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡←top 𝑘from 𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙with min scores;
19
Dispatch 𝐵𝑎𝑡𝑐ℎto 𝐸𝑡𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑡(triggers model load if needed);
batches to executors with warm models. When no executor
hosts the model, the scheduler selects the executor with the
lowest total score and triggers a model load—loading only
the single needed model, not the entire workflow, unlike
monolithic scaling (L1 in §2.2). We evaluate the throughput
and latency gains from model sharing in §7.3.
5.2
Adaptive Parallelism
LegoDiffusion exploits two forms of diffusion-specific par-
allelism (§2.1) through scheduling decisions.
Inter-Node Parallelism. When the compiler produces a
DAG in which two nodes have no eager data dependency—
for example, a ControlNet and its corresponding base-model
node connected only by a deferred input (§4.3.2)—both nodes
enter 𝑄𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑑𝑦simultaneously once their non-deferred inputs
are satisfied. The scheduler dispatches them to separate ex-
ecutors in the same or adjacent loop iterations, so they exe-
cute concurrently. Runtime data exchange between the two
nodes is handled by deferred data fetch: the base model begins
execution immediately, and retrieves the ControlNet output
mid-inference when it becomes available (Fig. 2-right).
Intra-Node Parallelism. A single model invocation can
also be split across multiple GPUs via latent parallelism [19,
36, 38], which partitions the input tensor and distributes the
shards to 𝑘executors for parallel inference (Fig. 2-left). The
scheduler chooses the parallelism degree 𝑘per batch by a
work-conserving heuristic: it sets 𝑘= min(|𝐸𝑎𝑣𝑎𝑖𝑙|, 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥),
where 𝑘𝑚𝑎𝑥is the maximum useful parallelism for the model
(determined offline). This rule uses all currently available
GPUs without waiting for more to free up, maximizing paral-
lelism while avoiding extra queueing delay [39, 63]. Because
the scheduler makes this decision per batch, different invo-
cations of the same model can run at different parallelism
degrees depending on instantaneous cluster load. The sched-
uler then selects the 𝑘lowest-scoring executors, dispatches
the batch with a parallelism descriptor, and each executor
processes its assigned input shard. We evaluate intra- and
inter-node parallelism in §7.3.
5.3
SLO-Aware Admission Control
Admitting requests beyond system capacity inflates queue-
ing delays and causes cascading SLO violations. LegoDiffu-
sion prevents this with an early-abort admission policy that
leverages micro-serving’s per-node visibility into request
progress.
When a new request arrives, the scheduler estimates its
end-to-end completion time. Because the control plane tracks
which nodes of each inflight request have completed, the
scheduler can compute, for every inflight request, the sum
of profiled latencies along its remaining critical path. It
admits the new request only if the estimated completion
time—accounting for current queueing depth—satisfies the
request’s latency SLO. Otherwise, the request is rejected
immediately, preserving resources for already-admitted re-
quests. This early-abort policy is feasible only under micro-
serving: in monolithic serving, the system has no visibility
into sub-workflow progress and cannot estimate remain-
ing work at fine granularity. The admission control runs
asynchronously and does not block the scheduling loop. We
quantify its effect on SLO attainment in §7.3.
6
Implementation
We have implemented LegoDiffusion with a FastAPI [20]
frontend and a distributed GPU-based inference engine. The
frontend (approx. 1,000 LoC in Python) exposes an intuitive
programming interface for users to compose and register
diffusion workflows (§4.1). Users can invoke registered work-
flows with customized image generation parameters, such
as prompts and reference images, similar to the OpenAI
API [51]. We currently support diffusion workflows for popu-
lar models including the SD3 family [18] and Flux family [34].
LegoDiffusion’s backend runtime consists of a coordina-
tor and distributed executors (Fig. 5), totaling 4,000 lines
of Python code. The data engine is implemented in 1,000
lines of C++/CUDA code using NVSHMEM [49]. Aside from
CUDA tensors, communication between the coordinator and
distributed executors is facilitated via ZeroMQ [2].
9


--- Page 10 ---
Table 2. Evaluation Settings. We use workflows of rep-
resentative diffusion models. S1–S4 represent single-model
deployments, each including three workflow variants: a Basic
workflow (text encoders, diffusion model, and decoder), plus
two using adapters (Basic + C.N. 1 and Basic + C.N. 2). S5–S6
represent mixed-model deployments. C.N.: ControlNet.
Setting
Diffusion Model
Workflow
Single-model Deployments (3 workflows each)
S1
SD3 [18]
(Basic, +C.N. 1, +C.N. 2)
S2
SD3.5-Large [62]
(Basic, +C.N. 1, +C.N. 2)
S3
Flux-Schnell [34]
(Basic, +C.N. 1, +C.N. 2)
S4
Flux-Dev [34]
(Basic, +C.N. 1, +C.N. 2)
Mixed-model Deployments (6 workflows each)
S5
SD3 + SD3.5-Large
S1’s + S2’s
S6
Flux-Schnell + Flux-Dev
S3’s + S4’s
7
Evaluation
We evaluate LegoDiffusion with the following highlights:
• LegoDiffusion outperforms state-of-the-art baselines,
sustaining up to 3× higher request rates, satisfying 6×
more stringent SLOs, reducing GPU requirements by up to
3×, and tolerating 8× higher burst traffic, all while main-
taining over 90% SLO attainment (§7.2).
• Microbenchmarks isolate the contribution of each schedul-
ing mechanism and validate compatibility with emerging
diffusion optimizations (§7.3, §7.4).
• LegoDiffusion introduces negligible system overhead
(§7.5).
7.1
Experimental Setup
Diffusion Workflows and Testbed. We use 12 diffusion
workflows composed from four popular base models: SD3 [18],
SD3.5-Large [62], Flux-Dev [34], and Flux-Schnell [34]. They
exhibit diverse computational characteristics, with parame-
ter counts spanning 2.5B to 12B and denoising steps ranging
from 4 to 50. In Table 2, we categorize these workflows into
six evaluation settings (S1–S6) to assess system performance
under varying degrees of workload heterogeneity. We use
a real testbed of 8 to 32 NVIDIA H800 GPUs to evaluate
performance and a 256-GPU simulator to analyze scalability.
Baselines. We primarily compare LegoDiffusion with Dif-
fusers, the most representative monolithic-serving system
(§2.2)[15, 66], as our goal is to compare micro-serving with
the prevailing monolithic design. While other systems [19, 59,
65] support more parallelism methods and high-performance
kernels, they largely inherit Diffusers’s monolithic pipeline
design and these optimizations are orthogonal to LegoDif-
fusion.
To compare against a broader monolithic design space,
we include monolithic-serving system variants by adopting
techniques from multi-model serving systems [23, 88] for
workflow orchestration. For a fair comparison, the baselines
use FCFS scheduling and workflow-level admission control.
• Diffusers represents a static deployment strategy. Each
workflow is executed monolithically and statically bound
to dedicated GPUs [15, 66]. It cannot share models across
workflows, adapt parallelism at runtime.
• Diffusers-C implements a swap-based serving strategy
by adapting Clockwork [23] to Diffusers. Leveraging
the predictable end-to-end latency of diffusion workflows,
it treats each monolithic workflow as a swappable DNN
model unit, dynamically loading and unloading workflows
into GPU memory on demand. Because the swap unit is an
entire workflow, it cannot share individual models across
workflows or adapt parallelism within a workflow.
• Diffusers-S incorporates the planning-and-scheduling frame-
work of Shepherd [88] to orchestrate instances, modeling
each monolithic diffusion workflow as a distinct model unit.
Like Diffusers-C, it schedules whole workflows and thus
cannot exploit per-model sharing or adaptive parallelism.
Workloads. We use a real-world T2I production trace [38].
To rigorously evaluate under diverse conditions, we vary re-
quest arrival rates, SLO targets, traffic burstiness, and testbed
sizes, effectively simulating a wide spectrum of real-world
traffic patterns and performance requirements.
Metrics. Our primary metric is SLO attainment: the fraction
of requests completed within their specified latency deadline.
We set the default deadline to 2× the solo inference latency
of each workflow (SLO Scale = 2), which is tight given that
any queueing or resource contention will cause violations.
Unlike prior works [4, 19, 36, 38], LegoDiffusion does not
alter the computation performed during diffusion inference
and therefore requires no evaluation of the image quality.
7.2
End-to-End Performance
As Fig. 9 shows, LegoDiffusion consistently outperforms
all baselines across six settings, four traffic dimensions, and a
range of testbed sizes. At high request rates, LegoDiffusion
achieves over 90% SLO attainment in settings where the
strongest baseline drops below 3%.
SLO Attainment vs. Rate. We evaluate LegoDiffusion
and the baselines by varying the request rate while keeping
the SLO scale (2.0) and traffic burstiness fixed. As shown in
Fig. 9 (a)–(f) and (j), LegoDiffusion consistently achieves
higher SLO attainment across varying rate scales. Compared
to Diffusers-S, the strongest baseline, LegoDiffusion sus-
tains up to a 3× higher request rate while meeting a 90%
SLO attainment target. At low request rates, all systems
achieve high SLO attainment; however, as the rate increases,
baseline performance plunges due to coarse-grained work-
flow scaling and inability to share common models (§2.2).
In contrast, LegoDiffusion’s gains stem from two mech-
anisms: model sharing (§5.1) enables batching nodes from
all three workflows onto shared model replicas, avoiding re-
dundant loading; adaptive parallelism (§5.2) further reduces
10


--- Page 11 ---
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Rate Scale
0
50
90
100
SLO Attainment (%)
(a) S1 @ 8 GPUs
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
2.0
Rate Scale
(b) S2 @ 8 GPUs
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
Rate Scale
(c) S3 @ 8 GPUs
1.0
1.5
2.0
4.0
Rate Scale
(d) S4 @ 8 GPUs
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Rate Scale
(e) S5 @ 16 GPUs
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.0
Rate Scale
0
50
90
100
SLO Attainment (%)
(f) S6 @ 16 GPUs
1.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0 10.0 12.0
SLO Scale
(g) S6 @ 16 GPUs
2.0
4.0
8.0
16.0
CV Scale
(h) S6 @ 16 GPUs
8.0
16.0
24.0
32.0
Number of GPUs
(i) S6 @ 8-32 GPUs
0.5
1.0
2.0
4.0
8.0
Rate Scale
(j) S6 @ 32 GPUs
Diffusers
Diffusers-C
Diffusers-S
LegoDiffusion
Figure 9. End-to-end performance across six settings (S1–S6 in Table 2), evaluated under varying request traffic rates (a–f, j),
SLO requirements (g), traffic burstiness (h), and testbed sizes (i).
per-request latency at low-to-moderate rates by distributing
inference across idle GPUs.
Next, we present evaluations that vary the SLO scale, traf-
fic burstiness, and testbed size, respectively. We focus on the
Flux model family (S6), widely adopted models [31] repre-
sentative of recent advances in the field.
SLO Attainment vs. SLO Scale (16 GPUs). In Fig. 9(g),
we fix the rate scale at 1.0 and evaluate using the original
production trace. Even at a strict SLO scale of 1.0, LegoDif-
fusion achieves substantially higher SLO attainment than
the baselines. At this scale, the deadline is tight enough that
only intra-node parallelism—splitting the base model across
two GPUs (§5.2)—can bring per-request latency below the
target; baselines, which run each workflow on a single GPU,
cannot meet this deadline regardless of scheduling policy.
At an SLO scale of 2.0, LegoDiffusion satisfies the SLO for
over 90% of requests, whereas the baselines require an SLO
scale of 12.0 to reach the same level. We observe a sharp
increase in baseline SLO attainment when the SLO scale
rises from 1.0 to 2.0, because this relaxation begins to absorb
the inherent overheads of monolithic serving (§2.2). Beyond
that point, baseline improvements are gradual. In contrast,
LegoDiffusion benefits more effectively from relaxed SLOs,
achieving 1.4× higher SLO attainment than the strongest
baseline at an SLO scale of 4.0.
SLO Attainment vs. CV (16 GPUs). In Fig. 9 (h), we fix the
rate scale at 0.25 and the SLO scale at 2.0. Following prior
work [23, 39], we slice the original trace into time windows
and fit the arrivals to a Gamma Process parameterized by the
coefficient of variation (CV). Scaling the CV and resampling
allows us to control traffic burstiness. Higher CVs indicate
burstier traffic, which exacerbates queuing delays and in-
creases SLO violations. As shown, LegoDiffusion gracefully
handles highly bursty traffic, sustaining high attainment
even at an 8× larger CV compared to the baselines. When
traffic subsides, the work-conserving parallelism heuristic
(§5.2) drains the queue faster by assigning more GPUs per
request, creating headroom before the next burst. Admission
SD3.5 Flux-S SD3.5 Flux-S
Intra-Node Parallel Inter-Node Parallel
0.0
0.5
1.0
Normalized Latency
0.53
0.56
0.75
0.90
1-GPU
2-GPU
S1
(RS=8)
S2
(RS=2)
S3
(RS=8)
S4
(RS=0.9)
0
25
50
75
SLO Attainment (%)
44
50
69
63
0.4
1.0
5.5
23.7
W/ A.C.
W/o A.C.
Figure 10. Left: Normalized latency of LegoDiffusion
across different numbers of available GPUs with intra-/inter-
node parallelism (§5). Flux-S: Flux-Schnell. Right: Effective-
ness of admission control (A.C.) in settings S1-4. RS: Rate
Scale.
1K
8K
64K 512K 4M 32M256M
Block Size (Bytes)
10−2
10−1
100
Overhead (ms)
25M
1.6
6.6
Create (NVLink)
Create (RDMA)
Fetch (NVLink)
Fetch (RDMA)
102
104
106
Tensor Size (Bytes)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
CDF
4
0.5M
25M
SD3
Flux-Dev
Figure 11. Left: Data fetching latency of varying sizes of
tensor blocks. Right: The distribution of tensor block sizes
found in typical SD3 and Flux workflows.
control (§5.3) then protects admitted requests during the
spike itself by rejecting those that would violate their SLOs.
SLO Attainment vs. Testbed Size. Finally, in Fig. 9 (i), we
fix the rate scale at 0.5 and the SLO scale at 2.0, varying the
testbed size under the original production trace. LegoDif-
fusion requires up to 3× fewer GPUs to achieve a 90% SLO
attainment target. This high resource efficiency is driven by
our micro-serving design. Unlike monolithic serving systems
that rigidly partition resources at the workflow level, LegoD-
iffusion enables fine-grained model scaling and serving, as
well as model sharing, which effectively treats all GPUs as
a unified pool. This eliminates resource over-provisioning,
and ensures every available GPU cycle is utilized efficiently.
7.3
Microbenchmarks
We isolate the benefits of LegoDiffusion’s micro-serving
(§3).
Model Sharing. Diffusion models patched with LoRAs can
be shared across requests, significantly reducing the memory
11


--- Page 12 ---
Table 3. Effective LOC and adaptive-runtime support.
Technique
LOC / (Support adaptive adjustment?)
Katz [38]
xDiT [19]
LegoDiffusion
Latent parallel
92 (No)
68 (No)
74 (Yes)
ControlNet parallel
127 (No)
N.A.
79 (Yes)
Async LoRA loading
182 (Yes)
N.A.
61 (Yes)
footprint and latency overhead compared to loading a new
model. We validate this using SD3 and a typical LoRA [42].
While the LoRA occupies 886 MiB of memory and takes 100
ms for swapping [38], this saves the 3.9 GiB of memory and
430 ms of latency incurred by loading a fresh SD3 model.
Intra-Node Parallelism. LegoDiffusion natively integrates
latent parallelism [19, 36, 38] with intra-node parallelism
(§5.2), enabling accelerated diffusion model inference across
two GPUs. As shown in Fig. 10-left, our intra-node imple-
mentation achieves a speedup of up to 1.9×. This aligns with
findings in [36, 38] and validates LegoDiffusion’s capability
to support state-of-the-art optimizations.
Inter-Node Parallelism. As discussed in §4.3.2, LegoD-
iffusion implements a deferred data fetch mechanism to
enable ControlNet parallelization [38], a key form of inter-
node parallelism described in §5.2. As shown in Fig. 10-left,
LegoDiffusion’s inter-node parallelism accelerates work-
flow execution across different models by up to 1.3×, consis-
tent with results in [38]. Note that the gains with Flux models
are limited because their ControlNets are small (only 6% of
the base model size) and have negligible latency compared
to the base model.
Admission Control. We evaluate the effectiveness of LegoD-
iffusion’s admission control (§5.3) in optimizing SLO at-
tainment. In Fig. 10-right, enabling admission control across
the four settings (Table 2) prevents system overload under
high request rates. By proactively aborting requests that
are destined to violate SLOs, LegoDiffusion increases SLO
attainment from a mere 0.4% to 44% in setting S1.
Programmability. LegoDiffusion provides an intuitive
programming model for composing complex workflows. Fol-
lowing [93], we quantify developer productivity using ef-
fective Lines of Code (LoC). We compare LegoDiffusion
against Katz [38] and xDiT [19], two popular diffusion model
serving engines that support parallel acceleration. As shown
in Table 3, LegoDiffusion requires comparable or lower
implementation effort to express these optimizations, while
additionally supporting adaptive runtime behavior that the
baselines do not.
7.4
Case Study
We next show that LegoDiffusion supports emerging opti-
mizations tailored for diffusion models described in §4.2.
Approximate Caching. In LegoDiffusion, we implement
Nirvana’s [4] approximate caching optimization (§2.1). Fol-
lowing prior work [4, 38], we use a SDXL workflow and
configure to reduce 20% and 40% denoising computation,
respectively. The optimization achieves speedups of 1.13×
and 1.43× with its original implementation on Diffusers,
and comparable speedups of 1.17× and 1.42× on LegoDif-
fusion, evidencing LegoDiffusion’s effective support for
the optimization.
Async LoRA Loading. We implement Katz’s [38] asynchro-
nous LoRA loading design in LegoDiffusion and evalu-
ate it against the original Diffusers implementation, using
SDXL [54] with a papercut-style LoRA [64]. Our implemen-
tation reduces LoRA loading overhead from 0.5 seconds to
0.05 seconds, matching the results reported in [38].
7.5
System Overhead
Execution Overhead. Micro-serving introduces additional
overhead due to inter-node communication and control-
plane coordination. We quantify this overhead by comparing
LegoDiffusion against monolithic baselines on four work-
flows: SD3, SD3.5-Large, Flux-Dev, and Flux-Schnell. Across
all cases, the maximum end-to-end overhead is 150 ms. Given
that these diffusion workloads typically take 2–20 seconds
to complete, this additional cost is negligible.
Control-Plane Scalability. To show LegoDiffusion’s con-
trol plane remains efficient at large scale, we conduct simulation-
based experiments on a 256-GPU setup under high concur-
rency, with 500 inflight requests. Across two representative
workloads, Flux-Dev and SD3.5-Large, the coordinator ac-
counts for only 3.4% and 2.7% of total execution time, respec-
tively, indicating that the control plane does not emerge as
the dominant bottleneck at this scale.
Data Transmission Latency. We further isolate the cost
of intermediate tensor movement in Fig. 11. The left panel
shows the latency of tensor serialization and transmission
over a range of tensor sizes, and the right panel reports
the actual intermediate tensor sizes produced by SD3 and
Flux-Dev workflows with ControlNet. Even for the largest in-
termediate tensors, transmission latency remains below 1 ms,
confirming that the inter-GPU bandwidth is not a bottleneck
for LegoDiffusion’s fine-grained execution model.
8
Discussion and Related Works
Scalability and Fault Tolerance. In LegoDiffusion, one
coordinator manages 𝑁executors (Fig. 5). To avoid a co-
ordinator bottleneck as 𝑁grows, LegoDiffusion shards
executors across multiple coordinators, each managing a
disjoint subset of workflows that share models, preserving
sharing opportunities. A cluster management service [1, 32]
handles coordinator discovery and failure detection. Execu-
tor failures are tolerated naturally: the coordinator reassigns
affected nodes to other executors.
Diffusion Model Serving Systems. Existing serving sys-
tems [7, 15, 59, 65] follow a monolithic design with limited
adapter support [57, 58, 65] (§3.2). Several works accelerate
12


--- Page 13 ---
individual workflow execution: Nirvana [4] reduces denois-
ing steps via cached images; DistriFusion [36] and xDiT [19]
exploit multi-GPU parallelism; Katz [38] parallelizes Con-
trolNets and asynchronously loads LoRAs; TetriServe [44]
and TridentServe [73] adapt sequence parallelism for latency
SLOs. However, several of these [4, 36, 44, 73] lack adapter
support prevalent in production [38, 41], and none target
cluster-level multi-workflow deployment. LegoDiffusion’s
micro-serving approach is complementary (§4.2, §7.4).
Other Model Serving Systems. Prior work on model serv-
ing has improved latency [13, 68], throughput [6, 76], and
resource efficiency [24, 67, 69, 75, 85] across DNNs and
LLMs [5, 8, 9, 17, 22, 25, 28, 45, 50, 61, 72, 77, 78, 80, 82, 84, 92].
LegoDiffusion complements them by focusing on text-to-
image serving, which has distinct computational and work-
flow characteristics. Prior work on online multi-model serv-
ing has further explored model placement [39, 88], request
scheduling [23, 88], and dynamic scaling [21, 86]. In §7, we
integrate representative techniques from them with existing
diffusion workflow serving systems [15]. Despite their effec-
tiveness, LegoDiffusion outperforms with its micro-serving
approach, which fundamentally addresses the limitations of
monolithic serving. Also, LegoDiffusion is compatible with
these optimizations.
9
Conclusions
We presented LegoDiffusion, an efficient micro-serving sys-
tem for diffusion workflow. LegoDiffusion has three key
designs: (1) a programming model that transforms workflow
compositions into loosely coupled nodes; (2) a specialized
runtime and data plane that streamline data communication
to facilitate micro-serving; and (3) a scheduler that realizes
the benefits of micro-serving at the cluster level. Collectively,
LegoDiffusion outperforms existing monolithic serving sys-
tems, sustaining up to 3× higher request rates and tolerating
8× higher burst traffic, with the same performance require-
ments.
References
[1] 2025. Apache ZooKeeper. https://zookeeper.apache.org/.
[2] 2025. ZeroMQ. https://github.com/zeromq/pyzmq.
[3] Martín Abadi, Paul Barham, Jianmin Chen, Zhifeng Chen, Andy Davis,
Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Geoffrey Irving,
Michael Isard, Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Rajat Monga, Sherry
Moore, Derek G. Murray, Benoit Steiner, Paul Tucker, Vijay Vasudevan,
Pete Warden, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. 2016.
TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine Learning. In Proc.
OSDI.
[4] Shubham Agarwal, Subrata Mitra, Sarthak Chakraborty, Srikrishna
Karanam, Koyel Mukherjee, and Shiv Kumar Saini. 2024. Approximate
Caching for Efficiently Serving Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In
Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[5] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference
with Sarathi-Serve. In Proc. OSDI.
[6] Sohaib Ahmad, Hui Guan, Brian D. Friedman, Thomas Williams,
Ramesh K. Sitaraman, and Thomas Woo. 2024.
Proteus: A high-
throughput inference-serving system with accuracy scaling. In Proc.
ACM ASPLOS.
[7] BentoML. 2025.
comfy-pack: Serving ComfyUI Workflows as
APIs. https://www.bentoml.com/blog/comfy-pack-serving-comfyui-
workflows-as-apis.
[8] Hongtao Chen, Weiyu Xie, Boxin Zhang, Jingqi Tang, Jiahao Wang,
Jianwei Dong, Shaoyuan Chen, Ziwei Yuan, Chen Lin, Chengyu Qiu,
Yuening Zhu, Qingliang Ou, Jiaqi Liao, Xianglin Chen, Zhiyuan Ai,
Yongwei Wu, and Mingxing Zhang. 2025. KTransformers: Unleashing
the Full Potential of CPU/GPU Hybrid Inference for MoE Models. In
Proc. SOSP.
[9] Le Chen, Dahu Feng, Erhu Feng, Yingrui Wang, Rong Zhao, Yubin
Xia, Pinjie Xu, and Haibo Chen. 2025. Characterizing Mobile SoC for
Accelerating Heterogeneous LLM Inference. In Proc. SOSP.
[10] Lequn Chen, Zihao Ye, Yongji Wu, Danyang Zhuo, Luis Ceze, and
Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2024. Punica: Multi-tenant LoRA serving. In
Proc. MLSys.
[11] ComfyUI. 2025. ComfyUI: The most powerful and modular visual AI en-
gine and application. https://github.com/comfyanonymous/ComfyUI.
[12] ComfyUI. 2025. Understand the concept of a node in ComfyUI. https:
//docs.comfy.org/essentials/core-concepts/nodes.
[13] Daniel Crankshaw, Xin Wang, Guilio Zhou, Michael J. Franklin,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2017. Clipper: A low-latency
online prediction serving system. In Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[14] Jeffrey Dean and Sanjay Ghemawat. 2004. MapReduce: Simplified
Data Processing on Large Clusters. In Proc. OSDI.
[15] HuggingFace Diffusers. 2025.
Create a server.
https://github.
com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/docs/source/en/using-
diffusers/create_a_server.md.
[16] HuggingFace Diffusers. 2025. Philosophy. https://huggingface.co/
docs/diffusers/en/conceptual/philosophy.
[17] Jiangfei Duan, Runyu Lu, Haojie Duanmu, Xiuhong Li, Xingcheng
Zhang, Dahua Lin, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. 2024. MuxServe: Flexi-
ble Spatial-Temporal Multiplexing for Multiple LLM Serving. In Proc.
ICML.
[18] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas
Müller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic
Boesel, Dustin Podell, Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, and Robin Rom-
bach. 2024. Scaling Rectified Flow Transformers for High-Resolution
Image Synthesis. In Proc. ICML.
[19] Jiarui Fang, Jinzhe Pan, Xibo Sun, Aoyu Li, and Jiannan Wang. 2024.
xDiT: an Inference Engine for Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) with
Massive Parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.01738 (2024).
[20] FastAPI. 2025. FastAPI. https://github.com/fastapi/fastapi.
[21] Yao Fu, Leyang Xue, Yeqi Huang, Andrei-Octavian Brabete, Dmitrii
Ustiugov, Yuvraj Patel, and Luo Mai. 2024.
ServerlessLLM: Low-
Latency Serverless Inference for Large Language Models. In Proc.
OSDI.
[22] Shiwei Gao, Qing Wang, Shaoxun Zeng, Youyou Lu, and Jiwu Shu.
2025. WEAVER: efficient multi-LLM serving with attention offloading.
In Proc. ATC.
[23] Arpan Gujarati, Reza Karimi, Safya Alzayat, Wei Hao, Antoine Kauf-
mann, Ymir Vigfusson, and Jonathan Mace. 2020. Serving DNNs like
Clockwork: Performance predictability from the bottom up. In Proc.
USENIX OSDI.
[24] Jashwant Raj Gunasekaran, Cyan Subhra Mishra, Prashanth Thi-
nakaran, Bikash Sharma, Mahmut Taylan Kandemir, and Chita R. Das.
2022. Cocktail: A multidimensional optimization for model serving in
cloud. In Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[25] Yongjun He, Haofeng Yang, Yao Lu, Ana Klimović, and Gustavo Alonso.
2025. Resource multiplexing in tuning and serving large language
models. In Proc. ATC.
13


--- Page 14 ---
[26] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. 2021. Classifier-Free Diffusion Guid-
ance. In Proc. NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and
Downstream Applications.
[27] Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi
Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-Rank
Adaptation of Large Language Models. In Proc. ICLR.
[28] Zhengding Hu, Vibha Murthy, Zaifeng Pan, Wanlu Li, Xiaoyi Fang,
Yufei Ding, and Yuke Wang. 2025. HedraRAG: Co-Optimizing Gen-
eration and Retrieval for Heterogeneous RAG Workflows. In Proc.
SOSP.
[29] HuggingFace. 2025.
Accelerate inference of text-to-image diffu-
sion models. https://huggingface.co/docs/diffusers/en/tutorials/fast_
diffusion.
[30] HuggingFace. 2025. HuggingFace Models. https://huggingface.co/
models?pipeline_tag=text-to-image&sort=downloads.
[31] HuggingFace. 2025. HuggingFace Models. https://huggingface.co/
models?pipeline_tag=text-to-image&sort=likes.
[32] Patrick Hunt, Mahadev Konar, Flavio P. Junqueira, and Benjamin Reed.
2010. ZooKeeper: Wait-free Coordination for Internet-scale Systems.
In Proc. ATC.
[33] Xuan Ju, Xian Liu, Xintao Wang, Yuxuan Bian, Ying Shan, and Qiang
Xu. 2024. BrushNet: A plug-and-play image inpainting model with
decomposed dual-branch diffusion. In Proc. ECCV.
[34] Black Forest Labs. 2024. FLUX. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/
flux.
[35] LangChain. 2025. LangChain. https://www.langchain.com.
[36] Muyang Li, Tianle Cai, Jiaxin Cao, Qinsheng Zhang, Han Cai, Junjie Bai,
Yangqing Jia, Ming-Yu Liu, Kai Li, and Song Han. 2024. DistriFusion:
Distributed parallel inference for high-resolution diffusion models. In
Proc. IEEE/CVF CVPR.
[37] Suyi Li, Hanfeng Lu, Tianyuan Wu, Minchen Yu, Qizhen Weng,
Xusheng Chen, Yizhou Shan, Binhang Yuan, and Wei Wang. 2025.
Toppings: CPU-Assisted, Rank-Aware Adapter Serving for LLM Infer-
ence. In Proc. USENIX ATC.
[38] Suyi Li, Lingyun Yang, Xiaoxiao Jiang, Hanfeng Lu, Zhipeng Di, Weiyi
Lu, Jiawei Chen, Kan Liu, Yinghao Yu, Tao Lan, Guodong Yang, Lin Qu,
Liping Zhang, and Wei Wang. 2025. Katz: Efficient Workflow Serving
for Diffusion Models with Many Adapters. In Proc. USENIX ATC.
[39] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng,
Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
and Ion Stoica. 2023. AlpaServe: Statistical Multiplexing with Model
Parallelism for Deep Learning Serving. In Proc. OSDI.
[40] Chaofan Lin, Zhenhua Han, Chengruidong Zhang, Yuqing Yang, Fan
Yang, Chen Chen, and Lili Qiu. 2024. Parrot: Efficient Serving of
LLM-based Applications with Semantic Variable. In Proc. OSDI.
[41] Yanying Lin, Shuaipeng Wu, Shutian Luo, Hong Xu, Haiying Shen,
Chong Ma, Min Shen, Le Chen, Chengzhong Xu, Lin Qu, and Kejiang
Ye. 2025. Understanding Diffusion Model Serving in Production: A
Top-Down Analysis of Workload, Scheduling, and Resource Efficiency.
In Proc. ACM SoCC.
[42] linoyts. 2025. Yarn_art_SD3_LoRA. https://huggingface.co/linoyts/
Yarn_art_SD3_LoRA.
[43] LlamaIndex. 2025. LlamaIndex. https://www.llamaindex.ai.
[44] Runyu Lu, Shiqi He, Wenxuan Tan, Shenggui Li, Ruofan Wu, Jeff J. Ma,
Ang Chen, and Mosharaf Chowdhury. 2026. TetriServe: Efficiently
serving mixed DiT workloads. In Proc. ACM ASPLOS.
[45] Yixuan Mei, Yonghao Zhuang, Xupeng Miao, Juncheng Yang, Zhihao
Jia, and Rashmi Vinayak. 2025. Helix: Serving Large Language Mod-
els over Heterogeneous GPUs and Network via Max-Flow. In Proc.
ASPLOS.
[46] Modal. 2025. How OpenArt scaled their Gen AI art platform on hun-
dreds of GPUs. https://modal.com/blog/openart-case-study.
[47] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tumanov,
Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang, William Paul,
Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. 2018. Ray: A Distributed Framework
for Emerging AI Applications. In Proc. OSDI.
[48] Dung Nguyen and Stephen B. Wong. 2000. Design patterns for lazy
evaluation. In Proc. SIGCSE.
[49] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA OpenSHMEM Library (NVSHMEM) Docu-
mentation. https://docs.nvidia.com/nvshmem/api/index.html.
[50] Gabriele Oliaro, Xupeng Miao, Xinhao Cheng, Vineeth Kada, Ruohan
Gao, Yingyi Huang, Remi Delacourt, April Yang, Yingcheng Wang,
Mengdi Wu, Colin Unger, and Zhihao Jia. 2025. FlexLLM: A system
for co-serving large language model inference and parameter-efficient
finetuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18789 (2025).
[51] OpenAI. 2020. OpenAI API. https://openai.com/index/openai-api/.
[52] OpenAI. 2025. Introducing 4o Image Generation. https://openai.com/
index/introducing-4o-image-generation/.
[53] OpenAI. 2025. OpenAI DALL·E 2. https://openai.com/index/dall-e-2/.
[54] Dustin Podell, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Andreas Blattmann, Tim
Dockhorn, Jonas Müller, Joe Penna, and Robin Rombach. 2024. SDXL:
Improving Latent Diffusion Models for High-Resolution Image Syn-
thesis. In Proc. ICLR.
[55] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Feng Ren, Mingxing
Zhang, Yongwei Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. 2025. Mooncake:
Trading More Storage for Less Computation — A KVCache-centric
Architecture for Serving LLM Chatbot. In Proc. FAST.
[56] Pol G. Recasens, Yue Zhu, Chen Wang, Eun Kyung Lee, Olivier Tardieu,
Alaa Youssef, Jordi Torres, and Josep Ll. Berral. 2024. Towards Pareto
Optimal Throughput in Small Language Model Serving. In Proc. Eu-
roMLSys.
[57] sgl project. 2026. diffusion: add-ons support (lora & controlnet). https:
//github.com/sgl-project/sglang/issues/13790.
[58] sgl project. 2026. [Roadmap] Diffusion (2025 Q4). https://github.com/
sgl-project/sglang/issues/12799.
[59] sgl project. 2026. SGLang Diffusion. https://github.com/sgl-project/
sglang/tree/main/python/sglang/multimodal_gen.
[60] Arjun
Singhvi,
Arjun
Balasubramanian,
Kevin
Houck,
Mo-
hammed Danish Shaikh, Shivaram Venkataraman, and Aditya
Akella. 2021. Atoll: A Scalable Low-Latency Serverless Platform. In
Proc. SoCC.
[61] Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dongming Li, and
Yiying Zhang. 2025. Preble: Efficient Distributed Prompt Scheduling
for LLM Serving. In Proc. ICLR.
[62] stabilityai. 2025. stable-diffusion-3.5-large. https://huggingface.co/
stabilityai/stable-diffusion-3.5-large.
[63] Xin Tan, Yimin Jiang, Yitao Yang, and Hong Xu. 2025. Towards End-
to-End Optimization of LLM-based Applications with Ayo. In Proc.
ASPLOS.
[64] TheLastBen. 2025. Papercut Style, SDXL LoRA. https://huggingface.
co/TheLastBen/Papercut_SDXL.
[65] vllm project. 2026. vLLM Omni. https://github.com/vllm-project/vllm-
omni.
[66] Patrick von Platen, Suraj Patil, Anton Lozhkov, Pedro Cuenca, Nathan
Lambert, Kashif Rasul, Mishig Davaadorj, Dhruv Nair, Sayak Paul,
William Berman, Yiyi Xu, Steven Liu, and Thomas Wolf. 2022. Diffusers:
State-of-the-art diffusion models. https://github.com/huggingface/
diffusers.
[67] Luping Wang, Lingyun Yang, Yinghao Yu, Wei Wang, Bo Li, Xianchao
Sun, Jian He, and Liping Zhang. 2021. Morphling: Fast, near-optimal
auto-configuration for cloud-native model serving. In Proc. ACM SoCC.
[68] Yiding Wang, Kai Chen, Haisheng Tan, and Kun Guo. 2023. Tabi: An
efficient multi-level inference system for large language models. In
Proc. ACM EuroSys.
[69] Yuke Wang, Boyuan Feng, Zheng Wang, Tong Geng, Kevin Barker, Ang
Li, and Yufei Ding. 2023. MGG: Accelerating graph neural networks
with fine-grained intra-kernel communication-computation pipelining
on multi-GPU platforms. In Proc. USENIX OSDI.
14


--- Page 15 ---
[70] Zibo Wang, Pinghe Li, Chieh-Jan Mike Liang, Feng Wu, and Francis Y.
Yan. 2024. Autothrottle: A Practical Bi-Level Approach to Resource
Management for SLO-Targeted Microservices. In Proc. NSDI.
[71] Wikipedia. 2025. Lazy evaluation. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lazy_
evaluation.
[72] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu,
and Xin Jin. 2024. LoongServe: Efficiently Serving Long-Context Large
Language Models with Elastic Sequence Parallelism. In Proc. SOSP.
[73] Yifei Xia, Fangcheng Fu, Hao Yuan, Hanke Zhang, Xupeng Miao, Yijun
Liu, Suhan Ling, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. 2025. TridentServe: A Stage-
level Serving System for Diffusion Pipelines. arXiv:2510.02838
[74] Yuhao Xu, Tao Gu, Weifeng Chen, and Arlene Chen. 2025. OOTDiffu-
sion: Outfitting Fusion Based Latent Diffusion for Controllable Virtual
Try-On. Proc. AAAI (2025).
[75] Lingyun Yang, Yongchen Wang, Yinghao Yu, Qizhen Weng, Jianbo
Dong, Kan Liu, Chi Zhang, Yanyi Zi, Hao Li, Zechao Zhang, Nan Wang,
Yu Dong, Menglei Zheng, Lanlan Xi, Xiaowei Lu, Liang Ye, Guodong
Yang, Binzhang Fu, Tao Lan, Liping Zhang, Lin Qu, and Wei Wang.
2025. GPU-disaggregated serving for deep learning recommendation
models at scale. In Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[76] Yanan Yang, Laiping Zhao, Yiming Li, Huanyu Zhang, Jie Li, Mingyang
Zhao, Xingzhen Chen, and Keqiu Li. 2022. INFless: A native server-
less system for low-latency, high-throughput inference. In Proc. ACM
ASPLOS.
[77] Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng
Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. 2025. CacheBlend:
Fast Large Language Model Serving for RAG with Cached Knowledge
Fusion. In Proc. EuroSys.
[78] Xiaozhe Yao, Qinghao Hu, and Ana Klimovic. 2025. DeltaZip: Efficient
Serving of Multiple Full-Model-Tuned LLMs. In Proc. EuroSys.
[79] Hu Ye, Jun Zhang, Sibo Liu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang. 2023. IP-Adapter:
Text compatible image prompt adapter for text-to-image diffusion
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.06721 (2023).
[80] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and
Byung-Gon Chun. 2022.
Orca: A distributed serving system for
transformer-based generative models. In Proc. USENIX OSDI.
[81] Minchen Yu, Tingjia Cao, Wei Wang, and Ruichuan Chen. 2023. Fol-
lowing the Data, Not the Function: Rethinking Function Orchestration
in Serverless Computing. In Proc. NSDI.
[82] Yifan Yu, Yu Gan, Nikhil Sarda, Lillian Tsai, Jiaming Shen, Yanqi Zhou,
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Fan Lai, Hank Levy, and David Culler. 2025. IC-
Cache: Efficient Large Language Model Serving via In-context Caching.
In Proc. SOSP.
[83] Matei Zaharia, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Tathagata Das, Ankur Dave,
Justin Ma, Murphy McCauly, Michael J. Franklin, Scott Shenker, and
Ion Stoica. 2012. Resilient Distributed Datasets: A Fault-Tolerant
Abstraction for In-Memory Cluster Computing. In Proc. NSDI.
[84] Shaoxun Zeng, Minhui Xie, Shiwei Gao, Youmin Chen, and Youyou
Lu. 2025. Medusa: Accelerating Serverless LLM Inference with Materi-
alization. In Proc. ASPLOS.
[85] Chengliang Zhang, Minchen Yu, Wei Wang, and Feng Yan. 2019. MArk:
Exploiting cloud services for cost-effective, SLO-aware machine learn-
ing inference serving. In Proc. USENIX ATC.
[86] Dingyan Zhang, Haotian Wang, Yang Liu, Xingda Wei, Yizhou Shan,
Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2025. Fast and Live Model Auto Scaling
without Caching, In Proc. OSDI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.17246.
[87] Hong Zhang, Yupeng Tang, Anurag Khandelwal, Jingrong Chen, and
Ion Stoica. 2021. Caerus: NIMBLE Task Scheduling for Serverless
Analytics. In Proc. NSDI.
[88] Hong Zhang, Yupeng Tang, Anurag Khandelwal, and Ion Stoica. 2023.
Shepherd: Serving DNNs in the wild. In Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[89] Lvmin Zhang. 2025. Fooocus. https://github.com/lllyasviel/Fooocus.
[90] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2023. Adding Con-
ditional Control to Text-to-Image Diffusion Models. In Proc. IEEE/CVF
ICCV.
[91] Lvmin Zhang, Anyi Rao, and Maneesh Agrawala. 2025. Scaling In-the-
Wild Training for Diffusion-based Illumination Harmonization and
Editing by Imposing Consistent Light Transport. In Proc. ICLR.
[92] Wei Zhang, Ziyu Wu, Yi Mu, Rui Ning, Banruo Liu, Nikhil Sarda,
Myungjin Lee, and Fan Lai. 2026. JITServe: SLO-aware LLM Serving
with Imprecise Request Information. In Proc. USENIX NSDI.
[93] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff
Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang:
Efficient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs. In Proc.
NIPS.
15
