--- Page 1 ---
Collaborative Task and Path Planning for Heterogeneous Robotic
Teams using Multi-Agent PPO
Matthias Rubio1, Julia Richter1, Hendrik Kolvenbach1, and Marco Hutter1
Abstract— Efficient robotic extraterrestrial exploration re-
quires robots with diverse capabilities, ranging from scientific
measurement tools to advanced locomotion. A robotic team
enables the distribution of tasks over multiple specialized
subsystems, each providing specific expertise to complete the
mission. The central challenge lies in efficiently coordinating
the team to maximize utilization and the extraction of scientific
value. Classical planning algorithms scale poorly with problem
size, leading to long planning cycles and high inference costs due
to the combinatorial growth of possible robot-target allocations
and possible trajectories. Learning-based methods are a viable
alternative that move the scaling concern from runtime to
training time, setting a critical step towards achieving real-time
planning. In this work, we present a collaborative planning
strategy based on Multi-Agent Proximal Policy Optimization
(MAPPO) to coordinate a team of heterogeneous robots to
solve a complex target allocation and scheduling problem.
We benchmark our approach against single-objective optimal
solutions obtained through exhaustive search and evaluate
its ability to perform online replanning in the context of a
planetary exploration scenario.
Index Terms— Path Planning for Multiple Mobile Robots
or Agents; Space Robotics and Automation; Reinforcement
Learning
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned surface exploration may require not only dif-
ferent locomotion techniques to overcome harsh terrain but
also a variety of scientific equipment and specific devices for
physical interaction with the environment. However, a single
robot has only a limited capacity. Therefore, distributing
task-specific components across a team of specialized robots
allows multiple tasks to be performed in parallel, reducing
overall mission time [1].
In 2021, the Perseverance rover deployed the helicopter
Ingenuity on Mars, achieving the first powered flight on
another planet [2]. This groundbreaking mission proved
that the use of multiple agents with alternative locomotion
techniques has the potential to enhance future planetary
exploration missions. Similarly, Arm et al. used a team of
legged robots with complementary skills to perform an Earth-
based resource prospecting study [3]. The team was able of
performing different tasks in a short time frame, showing
that collaboration increases efficiency compared to single-
robot exploration [1].
However, in the latter example, the task allocation and
task sequence were determined manually by five human
operators. As this becomes more complicated for more robots
and tasks, especially under the communication delays and
constraints of planetary missions, manual planning needs to
1Robotic Systems Lab (RSL), ETH Z¨urich, Z¨urich, Switzerland
IEEIII.at
so
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meet for 
collaborative 
tasks
Lander
Time
 
T1
T1
 T2
T2
 T3
T3
Replanning on 
newly detected 
tasks
T4
Waiting
Original Plan
Executed Plan
Drone
Rover
Legged
Fig. 1: An illustrative plan for a collaborative robot fleet with different
specializations, such as flying, walking, or driving. During the mission the
drone and the legged robot find new tasks and replan to minimize mission
time.
be replaced by an algorithm that coordinates the team on a
global scale.
A. Challenges of Multi-Robot Planning
For single-robot path planning, there are many possible
algorithmic approaches which S´anchez-Ib´a˜nez et al. sys-
tematically categorize [4]. Graph search algorithms, such
as A*, make up a well-known subgroup in addition to
sampling-based methods. Richter et al. show how to use
a multi-objective A* global path planning algorithm for an
exploration mission on the moon [5].
However, single-robot path planning algorithms fail to
address the additional complexities in multi-agent scenarios.
Besides finding an efficient path, the algorithm also needs to
arXiv:2604.01213v1  [cs.RO]  1 Apr 2026


--- Page 2 ---
allocate a subset of tasks and determine a specific execution
order for each robot. Since multiple robots can interact and
collaborate, the algorithm additionally needs to schedule the
robots appropriately to avoid potential conflicts or exploit
synergies between them.
In a space exploration mission, not all the information is
known a priori, and new regions of interest, terrain changes,
or robot failures lead to unexpected situations. Hence, a fully
autonomous robot team should be able to replan and adapt
on site according to the available and incoming information.
Especially for exploration on another planet, this prevents
unnecessary communication delays and idle times while
extending the available time for scientific investigation. Due
to limited computational resources, such an algorithm also
has to adhere to the tight real-time constraints posed by space
systems.
Prior work has framed the problem in different ways, e.g.,
as a multi-traveling salesman problem (MTSP), and taken
first steps towards learning-based solutions. Nevertheless,
existing methods are limited to assigning agents to targets
based on individual path costs and then scheduling them in
a separate step, making it difficult to handle both aspects
within a single solver. In contrast, our work introduces
a fully learning-based method that unifies path planning,
task allocation, and scheduling for heterogeneous multi-robot
teams. The main contributions can be summarized as follows.
• A MAPPO-based reinforcement learning framework for
cooperative multi-agent path planning, task allocation,
and scheduling.
• Benchmark against an optimal exhaustive search base-
line, demonstrating competitive performance with im-
proved scalability.
• Validation of fast replanning in dynamic environments,
highlighting applicability to space exploration missions.
• Open-source release of the learning framework.1
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In
Section III, our method is thoroughly explained, including a
formal description of the problem and the training strategy.
The implementation and results on performance and replan-
ning capabilities are presented in Section IV, and finally the
limitations of the method and recommendations for future
work are discussed in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
A. MTSP and Algorithmic Approaches
A well-known formulation of path planning problems that
includes target allocation is the MTSP, where its numerous
variations are listed in [6]. Exact methods to solve the MTSP
include constraint programming [7] and integer programming
algorithms [8]. The problem can also be extended to require
collision-free paths, such as in [9], where Ma et al. present a
conflict-based min-cost-flow algorithm on a time-expanded
graph, or in [10], where Turpin et al. show how to decouple
the target assignment and scheduling problem to solve those
1https://github.com/leggedrobotics/multi_
robot_global_planner
parts sequentially. In general, exact methods are able to find a
globally optimal solution. However, they tend to scale poorly
with the number of agents and targets and therefore result
in long computation times, which can go up to hours, as
stated in [6]. This issue makes it hard to perform continuous
replanning on constrained computational resources, such as
on a space exploration rover.
The state-of-the-art methods in the literature to solve
MTSP problems are metaheuristic algorithms, such as
NSGA-II [11] or particle-swarm optimization techniques,
e.g., ant colony optimization [12] or the artificial bee colony
algorithm [13,14]. Metaheuristic algorithms are popular be-
cause they can be implemented in a computationally efficient
way. However, they do not guarantee finding an optimal
solution in finite time or even a valid solution at all. Since the
problem still scales with the number of agents and targets,
a trade-off between computation time and solution quality
is inevitable. Jiang et al. address this using their multi-
agent planning framework, which consists of two different
algorithms that exhibit the trade-offs between plan quality
and computational efficiency [15].
Recent work tries to investigate the capabilities of
learning-based approaches, where the scaling problem
shifts from runtime to training time, enabling the efficient
use of computational resources in advance and having almost
constant inference times. This can be particularly interesting
for space applications that require real-time computation.
The standard MTSP is solved using a reinforcement learning
approach in [16] and [17], where the problem is separated
into two stages. The first stage is a graph neural network
that learns how to allocate targets to agents, and the sec-
ond stage consists of a standard single-traveling salesman
problem solver that is also used to supervise the network
learning process. This method has been shown to outperform
metaheuristic methods in solution quality from small-scale
problems up to tens of agents and hundreds of cities. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge, there are no full learning-
based approaches trying to extend the MTSP to a case
with collaborative tasks, which would include appropriate
scheduling of the robots.
B. Learning Collaborative Strategies
To include the full range of subproblems (target allo-
cation, scheduling, and replanning), the problem can be
framed within the context of a collaborative game-theoretic
approach. In this context, rather than seeking the optimal so-
lution in a large search space, the focus shifts to identifying a
general strategy that can be learned empirically and followed
consistently by the agents. This motivates the question of
whether learning-based methods can be employed to learn
such strategies and to what extent they approach optimality.
An unsupervised approach to multi-agent path planning
is presented in [18] (PRIMAL) and extended in [19] (PRI-
MALc). The proposed algorithms learn a decentralized strat-
egy to navigate towards targets while avoiding collisions.
This concept was also explored in the context of socially
aware navigation for multi-robot teams [20].


--- Page 3 ---
They demonstrated how robots can be trained to navigate
efficiently in a crowded environment while ensuring safety
and comfort for humans around the robots. The learning ar-
chitecture consists of a spatial-temporal graph neural network
that can compute an embedding expressing the human-robot
and robot-robot interactions, and an underlying multi-agent
proximal policy optimization (MAPPO) algorithm ( [21,22])
that learns how to compute the actions for each robot. Ac-
cording to [21], MAPPO has been demonstrated in different
baseline environments such as the multi-agent particle-world
environments (MPE), the StarCraft multi-agent challenge,
Google Research Football and the Hanabi challenge. It is
therefore a competitive baseline in cooperative multi-agent
learning and provides a promising foundation for applying
to the target allocation and scheduling problem in an explo-
ration task.
III. METHOD
To learn a strategy that solves the planning problem, we
construct a virtual environment containing agents and targets.
Agents have the freedom to choose their actions at each step
with the goal of solving all targets.
A. Training Environment
The training environment is modeled as a discrete 2D grid
(Figure 2) on which the agents q ∈Q, |Q| = N can move
using one of the actions A = {up, down, left, right, stay}.
Each target t ∈T , |T | = M requires a set of skills S ∈
P(S), where P(S) is the power set of all the skills sets.
The targets must be solved by either one of the required
skills (OR type) or by all of them (AND type). Each agent
provides a set of skills that can be used to solve a target. A
target t ∈TS(j) is solved if, for a time step j, all the required
skills of the target are in the same position as the target itself.
Agents complete an environment if the number of unsolved
targets is zero, that is, |TU(j)| = 0. Furthermore, the action
space stays the same throughout the map, even at the border.
If an agent attempts to move beyond the boundaries of the
map, it will be reverted to the last valid cell it occupied, and
the invalid action will be ignored.
B. Observations
First, the positions of the targets and all agents are
included in the observation of an agent as shown in Equa-
tion (2). The symbol p ∈N2
0 denotes an absolute position
on the grid and rt
q ∈Z2 is the relative position between an
agent q and a target t. The subscripts i and k are the indices
of the agents and targets, and N = |Q| and M = |T | are
the number of agents or targets, respectively.
g(rt
q) =
(
rt
q
if t ∈TU(j)
[0, 0]
if t ∈TS(j)
(1)
opos
qi
= [pqi, ..., pqN, g(rt1
qi), ..., g(rtM
qi )]
(2)
To indicate that a target is solved, its relative position is auto-
matically set to zero by the function g(rt) in Equation (1) for
all agents. The observation structure is kept agent-specific,
denoted by the subscript qi, always having the position of
the current agent in the first entry of the array. Enforcing this
structure allows the actor network to associate the observing
agent with its position.
In order to solve the targets efficiently, agents need in-
formation about the skill sets of the other agents and the
skill demands of each target. Since multiple skills can be
associated with an agent or a target, the observations in
Equation (3) are encoded as skill sets written as Sqi or Stk.
In practice, skill sets are enumerated and assigned to integer
values by a predetermined function f(S) : P(S) →N0.
oskill
qi
= [f(Sqi), ..., f(SqN), f(St1), ..., f(StM)]
(3)
Finally, targets must be distinguished by their type (AND
or OR type) to indicate whether collaboration is necessary.
In Equation (4), the types h are encoded as 1 (AND type)
or 0 (OR type).
ogoalT ype = [ht1, ..., htM]
(4)
The complete observation for an agent qi is a concate-
nation of the previously mentioned observations and can be
written as:
oqi = [opos
qi , oskill
qi
, ogoalT ype]
(5)
Note that the observation of an agent depends on the
number of agents and targets that exist in the environment.
Although this design choice prevents variation in numbers
during training, it eliminates the need for a separate encoding
algorithm or network to handle dynamically sized observa-
tions.
C. Rewards
In the following, the different reward terms used in the
training are discussed. To help the agents navigate towards
the sparsely distributed targets, an attraction reward (AR) is
introduced, which is spread around a target with an increas-
ing value towards the center. The agent receives this reward
at each time step, if the target is unsolved and the agent
has at least one matching skill with the target, which can be
expressed as the condition P = (t ∈TU(j))∧(|Sqi∩St|) > 0.
The reward function for one target is shown in Equation (6),
where rt is the relative distance from agent qi to target t and
CAR is a constant parameter that determines the spread of
the attraction reward. The attraction reward in Equation (7) is
averaged over all the targets to be solved in the environment
and normalized with respect to the maximum number of steps
Tmax.
hqi(t) =
(
exp(−CAR · ∥rt∥2)
if P
0
otherwise
(6)
rAR
qi
=
1
M · Tmax
X
t∈T
hqi(t)
(7)
Once a target is reached and solved, there is a fixed payout
for all agents, regardless of whether they contributed to
solving the target. This prevents competition among agents.


--- Page 4 ---
GRU
Rewards
States
Actions


Collect
Trajectories
Collect
Minibatches
Add new targets to
observation buffers
MAPPO
Dense
Dense
Dense
GRU
Dense
Dense
Dense
Single agent
Training update
Agent team
Episodes
Fig. 2: This figure illustrates the complete workflow, highlighting both the execution (green) and training (yellow) phases. The execution block details the
network architectures and the placement of the replanning step. The training block shows the MAPPO update sequence. The colored arrows differentiate
data flow, specifying whether it applies to all agents, a single agent, or represents aggregated data for training. Furthermore, the environment is visualized
as a grid, including the agents and targets with their provided or required skills (colored dots). The targets are marked with a green square, which can
have a black border indicating a collaborative target (AND type).
The target reward (TR) function is shown in Equation (8)
where j refers to the current time step. If all the targets are
solved, the collected rewards sum up to 1.
rT R
qi
=
(
1
M
if t ∈TU(j −1) ∧t ∈TS(j)
0
otherwise
(8)
To give more importance to skills, a fixed penalty (WC) is
added if agents step on a target that does not have a common
skill, as shown in Equation (9).
rW C
qi
=
X
t∈TU
(
−1
if (∥rt∥2 = 0) ∧(|Sqi ∩St| = 0)
0
otherwise
(9)
To ensure efficient completion of targets, specifically mini-
mizing the number of required steps, agents are subjected to a
nominal cost per movement (SC), which can be formalized as
shown in Equation (10). The action that leads to the current
state is written as u(j −1).
rSC
qi
=
(
0
if u(j −1) = stay
−1
otherwise
(10)
In addition to a minimal number of steps, agents are
expected to complete the targets in a minimum time frame,
which is introduced as shown in Equation (11). The solve-
time cost (TC) decreases with the number of solved goals
and is normalized by the number of total targets M and the
maximum number of steps Tmax in the episode. It follows
that if the agents solve all the targets during an episode, the
cost vanishes.
rT C
qi
=
|TU(j)|
M · Tmax
(11)
Finally, the terminal bonus incentivizes agents to complete
an environment further by rewarding them for solving all
targets, as shown in Equation (12).
rT B
qi
=
(
1
if (TS(j −1) ⊂T ) ∧(T ⊆TS(j))
0
otherwise
(12)
The complete reward for an agent computed at each time
step is shown in Equation (13) where each reward term is
weighted by a constant parameter w ∈R, which allows the
relative influence of the rewards to be adjusted in training.
rqi = [rAR
qi , rT R
qi , rW C
qi
, rSC
qi , rT C
qi , rT B
qi ]⊤
w = [wAR, wT R, wW C, wSC, wT C, wT B]
rfull
qi
= w · rqi
(13)


--- Page 5 ---
Training
AR
TR
WC
SC
TC
BR
Bootstrap
✓
✓
✓
×
×
×
Refinement
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
TABLE I: Activated rewards during training. AR: Attraction Reward, TR:
Target Reward, WC: Wrong Target Cost, SC: Step Cost, TC: Solve Time
Cost, BR: Bonus Reward
D. Learning Architecture
As stated in Section II-B, we use the MAPPO algorithm
[21,22], due to its proven performance in cooperative multi-
agent settings. We follow Lowe et al. [22], using an actor-
critic structure for the MAPPO networks. The actor and
critic networks have a gated recurrent unit (GRU), wrapped
by dense layers, as shown in Figure 2. The critic learns
a joint value function in a centralized way by taking a
concatenation of all the agent observations. On the other
hand, the actor execution is decentralized and outputs a
probability distribution over the action space. In our case,
the actor learns a strategy for an agent with arbitrary skills
that can be applied to any agent on the team.
E. Training Strategy
The step and solve time costs are initially discouraging.
This can create an exploration bottleneck early in training,
where agents fail to discover rewarding behaviors and instead
converge to a degenerate policy that minimizes penalty by
remaining stationary. To overcome this initial difficulty, the
training is divided into two parts, the so-called bootstrap
and refinement. In bootstrap, agents learn how to navigate
to targets based on their skills. In refinement, they learn how
to solve the targets efficiently. The rewards are activated as
listed in Table I.
During refinement training, the attraction reward is main-
tained to help agents finalize their navigation strategy. Its
significantly lower value, compared to other reward terms,
is designed to mitigate its effect towards the end of training.
In all training runs, the initial positions and the skill sets
for the agents and targets, as well as the target types,
are randomized. However, to ensure that an environment is
solvable, the agent team is always given at least one of each
required skill.
F. Implementation
Our pipeline was implemented using the JaxMARL frame-
work [23], which provides baseline training algorithms and
template environments for multi-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. The number of environment steps, the number of mini-
batches, the number of parallel environments, and the total
training steps were manually tuned with respect to the
quality of the solution and the GPU hardware constraints.
The parameters used for the different policies (with varying
numbers of targets) are listed in Table II. The reward weights
for the policies are shown in Table III. Depending on which
training phase, the weights were set to zero according to the
activation rules in Table I.
Π5T
Π6T
Π7T
nENV
16’384 / 30’720
16’384 / 26’880
16’384 / 24576
nST EP S
128
128
128
nT RAIN
572 / 1271
572 / 2034
1668 / 3814
nMINI
16 / 32
16 / 28
16 / 32
Seed
2 / 4
2
2
TABLE II: Modified MAPPO training parameters in top-down order are
environments trained in parallel / max steps per environment, epochs / batch
size / random generator seed.
CAR
wAR
wT R
wW C
wSC
wT C
wT B
Π5T
0.0075
1.0
1.0
0.25
0.3
0.5
0.2
Π6T
0.0075
1.0
1.0
0.25
0.3
0.5
0.2
Π7T
0.04
1.0
1.0
0.25
0.3
0.5
0.2
TABLE III: Reward weights for the baseline policy.
IV. RESULTS
The main results were obtained by training three agents
with two different skills acting on a 32x32 map. Agents had
two possible skills, implying three possible skill sets. Targets
requiring both skills could be of type AND or OR.
To analyze how well the method scales with the number of
targets, we evaluated three different policies, Π5T , Π6T , Π7T ,
with agents solving five to seven targets. Due to the fixed
observation size, as mentioned in Section III-B, the three
policies had to be trained separately. During training, actions
were sampled from a weighted probability distribution com-
puted by the actor network to allow for a certain amount of
exploration. For the evaluation, the action with the maximal
probability was applied at each time step.
The actor-critic networks, with approximately 245’000
kernel parameters, were trained on an Nvidia GeForce RTX
4090 GPU. Inference times for the trained network and the
baseline were measured on a MacBook Pro with an i5 @
2.3 GHz with 8GB of RAM.
A. Evaluation Metrics
We introduce a set of metrics to quantify the overall
performance of our method. In the results, the metrics will be
averaged over a series of randomly generated environments
to obtain a statistical evaluation and marked with a bar M
accordingly.
1) Success Rate: The success rate represents the number
of solved environments Ksolved versus the total number of
simulated environments Ksims. In solved environments, all
targets were solved.
Msuccess = Ksolved
Ksims
(14)
2) Solve Time: Tsolved is the number of time steps until
the agents have solved all the targets, and Tmax is equal
to the maximum number of environment steps nST EP S as
listed in Table II. Therefore, the difference in the metric Mst
represents how much time is left before the environment is


--- Page 6 ---
Π5T
Π6T
Π7T
Msuccess
0.99
0.95
0.91
MRL
st

MES1
st
0.86
0.81
0.73
MRL
tte

MES2
tte
0.92
0.91
0.84
TABLE IV: Performance comparison between three policies with a different
number of targets, and the optimal solutions ES1 w.r.t. solve time (st)
and ES2 w.r.t. the total team effort (tte). Optimal performance would be
represented by a value of 1.
marked as unsolved. We use the difference to allow for a
relative comparison with the baseline algorithm.
Mst = Tmax −Tsolved
(15)
3) Total Team Effort: The total team effort is defined as
the sum of all agent movements. Similarly to the solve time,
we define the metric Mtte as the negative counterpart, which
is the sum of movements that agents have left after all targets
were solved. The function rstep was defined in Section III-A
and evaluates to 1 for each moving action at time step j.
Mtte =
X
q∈A

Tmax −
Tsolved
X
j=1
|rstep
qi
(j)|


(16)
B. Policy vs. Optimal Solution
Although our multi-agent reinforcement learning (RL)
policy is trained for a multi-objective goal, we compare
its performance to optimal solutions found via exhaustive
search (ES) in Table IV. This approach provides a quan-
titative benchmark, demonstrating how closely our policy’s
performance on each metric approaches its theoretical best-
case scenario. We compute two sets of optimal solutions,
optimizing ES1 with respect to Mst and ES2 with respect
to Mtte. For each policy, we averaged the metrics over 100
different simulated environments.
The success rate for all policies is greater than 90%, which
shows that most environments are solved. Furthermore, the
three trained policies achieve greater optimality with respect
to total team effort (92%, 91%, 84%) than with respect to
the solve time (86%, 81%, 73%). This indicates that the
chosen reward weights led to a policy that favors team effort
over solving the targets in minimal time. Furthermore, the
numbers reveal a decreasing performance across all metrics
as the number of targets increases, which is consistent with
the problem’s growing complexity.
C. Comparison of Inference Time
A notable advantage of a learning-based method is that
the inference time remains constant and is independent of the
problem’s initial conditions. This is because a single forward
pass through the network has a time complexity of O(1).
This property enables real-time operation in a resource-
constrained environment. In contrast, exact methods, such
as the ES approach, exhibit an inference time that scales
exponentially with the number of agents, targets, or skills.
Furthermore, the inference time of these methods varies
significantly based on the initial conditions.
In Figure 3, we show a comparison between the inference
times for the ES approach, our policy at runtime, and the
corresponding training time for a varying number of targets.
The inference time for the RL policy was measured by
running a simulation to its limit, which in our case is 128
steps, i.e., forward passes. For both approaches, the time was
averaged over 10 simulations.
The graph reveals an exponential increase of approxi-
mately 1.5 orders of magnitude for the ES solving time,
whereas the RL training time grows at around 0.25 orders
of magnitude. However, the RL training time is orders of
magnitude beyond the ES solving time.
π5
π6
π7
Policy by Number of Targets
100
101
102
103
104
log(t), t: Measured Time in Seconds
ES inference time
RL inference time
RL training time
Fig. 3: RL inference and training time measurements compared to the
inference time of the ES approach with respect to the trained policies by
number of solved targets.
D. Replanning Capability
Having a short and constant inference time for the network
opens the possibility of performing online replanning on
newly discovered targets. As described in Section III-B, the
observation size is fixed and the number of targets cannot
be changed for a pretrained network. Thus, we use the
observation as a buffer, where new incoming targets replace
those that have already been solved.
For this experiment, we used Π5T as a baseline and an
additional policy Π5T 5R that was trained such that the agents
had to solve the five initial targets and an additional five re-
planned targets in an episode. The new targets were randomly
generated with different positions, skill sets and goal types
and were added to the observation as soon as one of the initial
targets had been solved. All training parameters and reward
weights were kept the same, as was the training strategy.
Both policies were simulated over 1000 environments to
solve five initial and five additional targets.
As listed in Table V, the results for both policies are very
similar, showing that explicitly training with newly incoming
targets does not improve performance. Note that the success
rate Msuccess in Table V is lower compared to the results
shown in Section IV-B, because an episode was only marked


--- Page 7 ---
Msuccess
Mst
Mtte
Π5T
84.2 %
85.70 ± 20.1
232.5 ± 72.8
Π5T 5R
84.1 %
85.73 ± 20.9
220.0 ± 81.3
TABLE V: Baseline policy Π5T versus a policy Π5T 5R that was trained
including the possibility of obtaining new targets during an episode. Simu-
lated over 1000 random (seed=10) environments with an episode length of
128.
as successful if the agents could solve 10 targets instead of
five, while the maximum duration of the episode was still
128.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Policy Performance
In Section IV-B, we compared our method against two
optimal solutions obtained by ES. The learned policies
achieved up to 86% optimal solution quality with respect
to the solve time and up to 92% with respect to the total
team effort. These results demonstrate that a reinforcement
learning policy can approximate near-optimal performance
with significantly lower computational cost at runtime. The
higher optimality with respect to total team effort compared
to solve time indicates that the chosen reward weights biased
the policies toward minimizing overall effort rather than
completion time. In addition, performance across all metrics
decreases as the number of targets increases, reflecting the
growing complexity of the problem.
Still, the final success rate leaves room for improvement.
Training with a longer episode length could have helped to
explore more edge cases and increase performance. How-
ever, GPU memory limitations imposed a trade-off between
episode length (i.e., exploration horizon) and the number of
environments that could be trained in parallel.
As is common in reinforcement learning, reward tuning
was a central challenge. When increasing the number of
targets, we observed that the previously tuned parameters re-
mained applicable only up to a certain number, beyond which
re-adjustment of the weights is necessary. For example, the
intensity of the attraction reward needed to be reduced when
training with more targets to prevent mutual cancellation of
target rewards due to excessive overlap.
B. Inference Time
When the RL method is deployed on real hardware, the
inference time of a fixed-size network remains constant for
an increasing number of targets. This property can prove ad-
vantageous when designing real-time embedded systems. In
contrast, exact methods scale exponentially with the number
of agents, targets, or skills and are highly sensitive to initial
conditions. However, the findings in Figure 3 also show that
the inherent complexity of the problem is not eliminated,
but instead is shifted and condensed to the training phase.
Training times and computational demands scale rapidly with
the number of targets, agents, and skills, slowing down policy
development. Moreover, the corresponding scaling rate in
Section IV-C is likely higher, since the performance de-
creased when additional targets were introduced (Table IV),
suggesting that the training was not fully exploited.
C. Replanning
By using the observation as a buffer and replacing solved
targets with new ones, our method demonstrated its ability
to perform online replanning. In real-world missions, this
could be applied iteratively, rather than calculating a com-
plete solution upfront. Plans would be generated for shorter
horizons and dynamically adjusted as agents observe new
targets. Such an iterative process reduces the number of for-
ward passes, thereby improving the method’s computational
efficiency.
D. Limitations
The main limitation of this approach is the fixed ob-
servation size of the current architecture, which limits the
number of targets as well as the team size, thus restricting
scalability. The work of Wang et al. [20], which used a graph
neural network to learn an embedding for social awareness
in a multi-robot team, offers a possible starting point for
computing observations that are independent of the number
of entities. Another idea is presented by Hafner et al. in
DreamerV3 [24], where they showed how to extend an actor-
critic approach with an additional auto-encoder to learn a
world model representation given an instantaneous partial
observation of the agent.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work explored a reinforcement learning approach to
the multi-agent global path planning and scheduling problem,
where agents learn an emergent strategy for team coordina-
tion and scheduling to efficiently solve a set of targets on a
grid. Using a MAPPO-based centralized training framework,
we derived decentralized policies that achieved near-optimal
solution quality.
We observed that with a learning-based method, the com-
plexity of the problem is shifted from runtime to training
time. This property can be especially interesting for real-time
systems with limited onboard compute, as inference requires
only constant-time forward passes. Furthermore, the policy
demonstrated the ability to online replanning by using the
observation as a buffer for newly incoming targets.
Looking forward, a key step toward generalization and
scalability is to design an observation structure that is
independent of the number of agents and targets. Such
representations would enable the discovery of a general
policy applicable to different team sizes, numbers of targets,
and skill compositions.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Arm, H. Kolvenbach, and M. Hutter, “Comparison of legged single-
robot and multi-robot planetary analog exploration systems,” in IAC
2023 Conference Proceedings. International Astronautical Federation,
2023, p. 78381.
[2] J. Balaram, M. M. Aung, and M. P. Golombek, “The ingenuity
helicopter on the perseverance rover,” Space Science Reviews, vol.
217, 2021.


--- Page 8 ---
[3] P. Arm, G. Waibel, J. Preisig, T. Tuna, R. Zhou, V. Bickel, G. Ligeza,
T. Miki, F. Kehl, H. Kolvenbach, and M. Hutter, “Scientific exploration
of challenging planetary analog environments with a team of legged
robots,” Science Robotics, vol. 8, 2023.
[4] J. R. S´anchez-Ib´a˜nez, C. J. P´erez-Del-pulgar, and A. Garc´ıa-Cerezo,
“Path planning for autonomous mobile robots: A review,” Sensors,
vol. 21, 2021.
[5] J. Richter, H. Kolvenbach, G. Valsecchi, and M. Hutter, “Multi-
objective global path planning for lunar exploration with a quadruped
robot,” 2023.
[6] O. Cheikhrouhou and I. Khoufi, “A comprehensive survey on the
multiple traveling salesman problem: Applications, approaches and
taxonomy,” 2021.
[7] M. Vali and K. Salimifard, “A constraint programming approach for
solving multiple traveling salesman problem,” 2017.
[8] K. Sundar and S. Rathinam, “Algorithms for heterogeneous, multiple
depot, multiple unmanned vehicle path planning problems,” J. Intell.
Robotics Syst., vol. 88, no. 2–4, p. 513–526, 2017.
[9] H. Ma and S. Koenig, “Optimal target assignment and path finding
for teams of agents,” 2016.
[10] M. Turpin, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Concurrent assignment and
planning of trajectories for large teams of interchangeable robots,”
in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 842–848.
[11] Y. Shuai, S. Yunfeng, and Z. Kai, “An effective method for solving
multiple travelling salesman problem based on nsga-ii,” Systems Sci-
ence and Control Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 121–129, 2019.
[12] A. K. Pamosoaji and D. B. Setyohadi, “Novel graph model for solving
collision-free multiple-vehicle traveling salesman problem using ant
colony optimization,” Algorithms, vol. 13, 2020.
[13] X. Dong, Q. Lin, M. Xu, and Y. Cai, “Artificial bee colony algorithm
with generating neighbourhood solution for large scale coloured trav-
eling salesman problem,” IET Intelligent Transport Systems, vol. 13,
pp. 1483–1491, 2019.
[14] V. Pandiri and A. Singh, “A swarm intelligence approach for the
colored traveling salesman problem,” Applied Intelligence, vol. 48,
pp. 4412–4428, 2018.
[15] Y. Jiang, H. Yedidsion, S. Zhang, G. Sharon, and P. Stone, “Multi-robot
planning with conflicts and synergies,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 43,
2019.
[16] Y. Hu, Y. Yao, and W. S. Lee, “A reinforcement learning approach
for optimizing multiple traveling salesman problems over graphs,”
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 204, 2020.
[17] Y. Guo, Z. Ren, and C. Wang, “imtsp: Solving min-max multiple
traveling salesman problem with imperative learning,” 2024.
[18] G. Sartoretti, J. Kerr, Y. Shi, G. Wagner, T. K. S. Kumar,
S. Koenig, and H. Choset, “Primal: Pathfinding via reinforcement
and imitation multi-agent learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 4, no. 3, p. 2378–2385, Jul. 2019. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2019.2903261
[19] Zhiyaoa and Sartoretti, “Deep reinforcement learning based multi-
agent pathfinding,” 2020.
[20] W. Wang, L. Mao, R. Wang, and B.-C. Min, “Multi-robot cooperative
socially-aware navigation using multi-agent reinforcement learning,”
2023.
[21] C. Yu, A. Velu, E. Vinitsky, J. Gao, Y. Wang, A. Bayen, and
Y. Wu, “The surprising effectiveness of ppo in cooperative, multi-
agent games,” 2021.
[22] R. Lowe, Y. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, P. Abbeel, and I. Mordatch,
“Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environ-
ments,” 2017.
[23] A. Rutherford, B. Ellis, M. Gallici, J. Cook, A. Lupu, G. Ingvarsson,
T. Willi, A. Khan, C. S. de Witt, A. Souly, S. Bandyopadhyay,
M. Samvelyan, M. Jiang, R. T. Lange, S. Whiteson, B. Lacerda,
N. Hawes, T. Rocktaschel, C. Lu, and J. N. Foerster, “Jaxmarl: Multi-
agent rl environments in jax,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.10090, 2023.
[24] D. Hafner, J. Pasukonis, J. Ba, and T. Lillicrap, “Mastering diverse
domains through world models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.04104,
2023.
