--- Page 1 ---
Automated Reformulation of Robust Optimization via
Memory-Augmented Large Language Models
Jinbiao Chen1, Shuang Jin2, Guoyun Zhang3,4, Junyu Zhang1, Guanyi Wang1,∗, Hanzhang Qin1,3,∗
1Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Management, National University of Singapore
2Department of Data and Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong
3Institute of Operations Research and Analytics, National University of Singapore
4Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
bill.cjb@nus.edu.sg, jinsh7@hku.hk, zhang.guoyun@u.nus.edu
junyuz@nus.edu.sg, guanyi.w@nus.edu.sg, hzqin@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Robust optimization (RO) provides a principled framework for decision-making
under uncertainty, but its practical use is often limited by the need to manually
reformulate uncertain optimization models into tractable deterministic counterparts.
Recent large language models (LLMs) have been shown promising for automating
optimization formulation, yet RO reformulation remains challenging because it
requires precise multi-step reasoning and mathematically consistent transforma-
tions. To facilitate systematic evaluation of LLM-based reformulation, for which
no dedicated benchmark currently exists, we develop AutoRO-Bench, a benchmark
featuring an automated data generation pipeline for the core RO reformulation task
and a curated dataset for the RO application task. To address the reformulation
challenge, we propose Automated Reformulation with Experience Memory (Au-
toREM), a tuning-free memory-augmented framework that autonomously builds
a structured textual experience memory by reflecting on past failed trajectories
through a tailored offline adaptation procedure. AutoREM requires neither domain-
specific expert knowledge nor parameter updates, and the resulting memory readily
transfers across different base LLMs. Experimental results show that AutoREM
consistently improves the accuracy and efficiency of RO reformulation across
in-distribution datasets, out-of-distribution datasets, and diverse base LLMs.
1
Introduction
Robust optimization (RO) has been widely studied for producing reliable solutions under uncertainty
[1–4]. As illustrated in Figure 1, applying RO typically follows a three-stage pipeline of formulation,
reformulation, and solving. Recently, large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong
reasoning and coding capabilities [5, 6], which greatly advances the automation of the solving
stage and shows promise for automating the formulation stage [7]. However, the reformulation
stage remains a critical bottleneck: mathematically transforming uncertain models into tractable
deterministic counterparts requires rigorous manual derivations grounded in convex analysis and
duality theory, which severely limits the scalability of RO applications. This work, therefore, focuses
on automating this reformulation stage with an LLM-based approach.
Recent methods for enhancing LLM reasoning are broadly divided into parameter-tuning and tuning-
free approaches. Parameter-tuning methods, such as RL-based post-training, suffer from significant
sample and computation inefficiency. They often require thousands of expensive rollouts and
substantial computation to fit new tasks. Recent studies [8–11] further suggest that RL post-training
∗Corresponding Authors.
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.11813v1  [cs.AI]  12 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Problem
1
Formulation
Problem
Description
Robust
Model
2
Reformulation
Robust
Model
Robust
Counterpart
3
Solving
Robust
Counterpart
Solving
Code
Solution
Reformulation (Our Focus)
Input: Robust Model
min
x
cTx
s.t.
(Ā + Δ)x ≤ b, ∀Δ ∈ U
x ∈ X
Ā : Nominal Coefficient
Δ : Perturbation
U : Uncertainty Set
X : Feasible Set
Method: Derive Robust Counterpart
Manual (Expert Knowledge)
VS.
LLM-based (Our Approach)
Output: Robust Counterpart
min
x, λ
cTx
s.t.
Āx + Hλ ≤ b
GTλ = Tx
λ ≥ 0, x ∈ X
Tractable
Deterministic
Equivalent to original robust model
Figure 1: The robust optimization pipeline and our focus on automated reformulation.
primarily induces distribution sharpening rather than enabling genuinely new capabilities. By contrast,
memory-augmented tuning-free methods [12, 13] offer a highly scalable paradigm: they allow models
to integrate interpretable and reusable knowledge from past trajectories at runtime, bypassing costly
parameter updates and per-instance test-time search. This is uniquely suited for RO reformulation,
where algebraic derivation and duality transformation patterns frequently recur across instances.
However, applying existing memory-augmented frameworks [14, 15] to RO reformulation typically
suffers from two fundamental limitations: an additive-only paradigm and a lack of quality verification.
As RO derivations must be mathematically exact and a single flawed memory trace can corrupt the
full reasoning, memory quality can significantly outweigh quantity for RO reformulation capability.
To systematically evaluate this capability, we introduce AutoRO-Bench, a dedicated benchmark with
verified ground-truth solutions that comprises an automated data generation pipeline for the core
reformulation task and a curated dataset for the application task. To overcome the limitations of
existing memory-based methods, we propose Automated Reformulation with Experience Memory
(AutoREM), a tuning-free framework with a tailored offline adaptation phase. AutoREM achieves
fine-grained memory management through unit-level experiences (ULE) and structured memory
operators (SMO), and ensures high-quality memory updates through dual-check commit (DCC) and
validation-based acceptance (VBA).
In summary, this paper makes the following contributions. (1) We propose AutoRO-Bench, the
first benchmark for systematically evaluating LLMs’ RO reformulation capability. It features two
complementary tasks: the RO reformulation task that takes mathematical models as input to test
derivation capability of reformulation, and the RO application task that takes language-described
problems as input to assess end-to-end practical problem solving, adopting benchmark settings similar
to previous LLM-based formulation studies. (2) We propose AutoREM, a tuning-free, memory-
augmented framework for automated RO reformulation, featuring a textual experience memory that
accumulates reusable reformulation knowledge without expert instruction. (3) We design a tailored
offline adaptation phase with four key components (ULE, SMO, DCC, and VBA) to automatically
construct and refine high-quality reformulation memory. (4) Experiments demonstrate that AutoREM
consistently improves accuracy and efficiency across both in-distribution and out-of-distribution
datasets, and diverse base LLMs.
2


--- Page 3 ---
2
Related work
LLMs for optimization formulation. Recent studies have extensively explored LLMs for opti-
mization formulation via parametric fine-tuning [16–22] and tuning-free methods [23–38]. However,
automated RO reformulation remains largely unexplored, as existing methods focus on problem
modeling, while lacking the capability to convert uncertain models to tractable counterparts. The
closest work by Bertsimas and Margaritis [39] relies heavily on manually crafted, domain-expert
prompts and evaluates on only seven case studies. In contrast, we first introduce a significantly
broader benchmark for systematic evaluation, and then propose AutoREM to autonomously collect
reusable reformulation experiences without expert curation. Interestingly, the auto-generated memory
from AutoREM consistently outperforms the expert-written prompt in the experiments, suggesting
that the LLM reflector distills more targeted guidance from the LLM reformulator’s specific behaviors
than static expert knowledge.
Tuning-free LLM reasoning methods. Since the introduction of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [40, 41],
a useful distinction has emerged between intra-instance test-time scaling [42–50] and cross-instance
context adaptation. Unlike test-time scaling, which processes isolated instances without retaining
lessons, context adaptation efficiently accumulates reusable knowledge across instances. Within this
paradigm, approaches divide into prompt optimization [51–55] and memory augmentation [14, 15, 56–
59]. Notably, state-of-the-art (SOTA) memory methods [14] utilizing offline adaptation have recently
demonstrated superiority over leading prompt optimizers [51]. While prompt optimization suffers
from a brevity bias that discards details, memory methods maintain a structured repository to
accumulate domain-specific knowledge without information loss [12, 13]. However, applying existing
memory methods to RO reformulation is problematic due to their monolithic additive mechanisms
and lack of rigorous verification. In fact, in our experiments, we even observe slight performance
degrade over the base LLM after applying the SOTA memory methods. To address these gaps, we
design a tailored offline adaptation procedure to automatically construct and refine high-quality
reformulation memory.
3
Preliminary
3.1
Reformulation of Robust Optimization
A robust model [3, 60, 61] requires the feasibility to every uncertainty realization, yielding infinitely
many constraints that render it directly intractable. Reformulation derives a robust counterpart (RC)
of the original problem, which is an equivalent finite-dimensional deterministic problem that can be
handled by standard solvers. A robust model is defined by a nominal problem and an uncertainty set.
Nominal LP. We focus on linear programs (LPs) as the nominal problem class, which is classical and
well-studied in robust optimization. A nominal LP takes the form:
min
x∈X ¯c⊤x
s.t.
¯a⊤
i x ≤bi, i = 1, . . . , m,
(1)
where x ∈Rn is the decision vector, ¯c ∈Rn the cost vector, ¯ai ∈Rn the i-th constraint row, and X
any additional deterministic constraints.
Uncertainty Set. An uncertainty set specifies admissible perturbations to the nominal coefficients.
In general, they take the form ˜c = ¯c + Pcζc and ˜ai = ¯ai + Piζi, with ζc ∈Uc, ζi ∈Ui and
perturbation matrices Pc, Pi. We take Pc = Pi = I, yielding the element-wise form ˜cj = ¯cj + ζc
j
and ˜aij = ¯aij + ζij. This avoids the extraneous numerical entries in a general Pi and keeps the
focus on the reformulation derivation itself. We consider three classical choices: box, budget, and
polyhedral uncertainty set. Each row (i.e., the objective function or a constraint) of the model may
independently be assigned any of these uncertainty types. Together with the nominal LP (1), they
define the robust model:
min
x∈X max
ζc∈Uc(¯c + ζc)⊤x
s.t.
max
ζi∈Ui(¯ai + ζi)⊤x ≤bi, i = 1, . . . , m.
(2)
Robust Counterpart (RC). Reformulation eliminates each inner maximization in (2) by LP duality,
yielding a finite set of linear constraints. For all three uncertainty sets above, the RC is an LP. Table 1
summarizes their definitions and RC forms; full derivations can be found in Appendix A.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Table 1: Three uncertainty sets and their LP robust counterparts.
Uncertainty
Definition of Ui
Robust Counterpart
Box
|ζj| ≤δj, ∀j
¯a⊤
i x + P
j tj ≤bi; tj ≥±δjxj, tj ≥0
Budget
|ζj| ≤δj, ∀j; P
j |ζj|/δj ≤Γi
¯a⊤
i x + Γizi0 + P
j zij ≤bi; zi0 + zij ≥±δjxj, zi0, zij ≥0
Polyhedral
Fζi ≤g
¯a⊤x + g⊤λ ≤b; F⊤λ = x, λ ≥0
3.2
Memory-augmented LLM methods
Let θ denote the parameters of an LLM. In standard generation, the model receives an input problem
q and a task prompt p, generating a response y ∼Pθ(y | p, q). To enhance reasoning capabilities
without updating θ, memory-augmented methods [12, 13] introduce a structured repository of reusable
external memory M so that the model can draw on accumulated past experience at inference time.
Memory retrieval. Rather than a simple string, M is typically a structured textual object. It follows
two retrieval paradigms. In explicit retrieval, an external module pre-selects a relevant subset Msub
(e.g., via semantic similarity [15]), yielding y ∼Pθ(y | p, Msub, q). Conversely, implicit retrieval
supplies the entire M directly to the context window [14], relying on the LLM’s self-attention to
dynamically filter information, yielding y ∼Pθ(y | p, M, q).
Memory formation. Memory is constructed by distilling generalizable insights from past trajectories
into structured, editable entries. This proceeds in two modes. Online adaptation continuously updates
M during inference, enabling continual learning on new tasks. Alternatively, offline adaptation
constructs M on a pre-deployment dataset; given abundant data, this enables thorough reflection to
build a high-quality memory without compromising inference efficiency.
4
Methodology
4.1
AutoRO-Bench: Automated RO Reformulation Benchmark
To comprehensively evaluate LLM-based methods for robust optimization (RO) reformulation, we
introduce AutoRO-Bench, comprising two complementary tasks that cover different input modalities:
the RO reformulation task, which takes formal mathematical models expressed in LATEX as input, and
the RO application task, which takes natural-language problem descriptions as input.
RO reformulation task. The RO reformulation task tests the core mathematical challenge: given
a formal RO model in LATEX, derive its deterministic robust counterpart. Each instance consists of
two components: a LATEX problem description as the LLM input q, and a ground-truth optimal value
f ∗as the evaluation target. The problem is a robust LP model (1) with uncertain coefficients as
in (2). Although the symbolic robust counterpart cannot be produced automatically, f ∗is obtained by
directly solving the robust model via the RSOME solver [62, 63].
To generate such verified instances at scale, we propose an automated generation pipeline (Algorithm 1
in Appendix B). It takes as input the number of decision variables n, a target number of valid
instances N, a candidate uncertainty type set U (instantiated with box, budget, and polyhedral),
and a template set T (instantiated with 8 diverse templates Tb0b1b2 parameterized by three binary
dimensions to encourage notation-invariant learning, see Appendix B.5). For each candidate instance,
the pipeline proceeds through five steps: (1) generate a nominal LP by sampling objective coefficients
c and optimization direction, and constructing a sparse feasible constraint polytope (A, b) with a
guaranteed interior point x0 via the FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE algorithm (Appendix B.3). (2) Assign an
uncertainty type from U to each row. (3) For each uncertain row, randomly select a sparse subset
Si of coefficients as the uncertain support, then generate the corresponding uncertainty parameters.
The box and budget types use dedicated sampling procedures (Appendix B.4), while polyhedral type
employs FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE to construct a sparse uncertainty polytope. (4) Solve via RSOME and
discard infeasible, unbounded, or degenerate instances. (5) Render the accepted instance into LATEX
using the selected template(s). Each output record contains the LATEX problem description, optimal
solution x∗, and optimal value f ∗.
4


--- Page 5 ---
RO application task. The RO application task evaluates end-to-end performance on realistic RO
problem solving. Its natural-language problem description setting is aligned with existing LLM-based
optimization formulation benchmarks, enabling direct and comprehensive comparison with those
methods. To support this task, we curate the RO application dataset of 32 instances. We first select
16 nominal problems from two established benchmarks with 8 from IndustryOR [18] and 8 from
OptiBench [64], covering both LP and mixed-integer linear program (MILP). For each nominal
problem, we append a natural-language description of the uncertain parameters and the robustness
requirement to the original problem statement, constructing a complete RO specification in plain text
(see Appendix D).
We generate two RO instances per nominal problem: the first uses the same parameter sampling
procedure as the RO reformulation task and the second uses practically-motivated parameters fol-
lowing the RO literature [1, 4]. Unlike the first procedure where uncertainty parameters are given as
explicit numerical values, the second leaves some parameters as unevaluated expressions involving
operations such as ratios or square roots over problem quantities. For example, deviations may be
given as proportions of nominal coefficients, or polyhedral bounds may involve the square root of
the uncertain coefficient count. These expressions must be preserved in the reformulation output
rather than evaluated to a single number. Full parameter details are given in Appendix C. Since each
instance is highly tailored to its nominal problem, all 32 instances were independently verified by
three operations research domain experts. Dataset statistics are summarized in Appendix E.
Evaluation Protocol. The benchmark evaluates reformulation quality by solver verification: a
model receives problem description q and outputs the robust counterpart; the output is translated into
executable code and run by a standard LP/MILP solver to obtain ˆf, which is compared against the
ground-truth f ∗stored in each data point. An instance is correctly reformulated if ˆf matches f ∗
within a numerical tolerance, providing an automatic, solver-grounded evaluation signal agnostic to
the syntactic form of the output. Concrete examples of both tasks are provided in Appendix F.
This paper employs a two-stage pipeline with a reformulator and a coder, each an LLM with distinct
roles. The reformulator, parameterized by θ, takes problem description q and task prompt p as input
and generates the robust counterpart y ∼Pθ(y | p, q) or y ∼Pθ(y | p, M, q) with experience
memory M. The coder, parameterized by ϕ, takes y and a coding prompt p′ as input and generates
executable solver code c ∼Pϕ(c | p′, y); running c yields ˆf. We use cost-efficient flagship LLMs as
the reformulator and fix a substantially stronger but also more expensive model as the coder. Coding
from a correct reformulation is mechanical, so fixing a strong coder isolates reformulation quality as
the sole variable.
4.2
AutoREM: Automated reformulation with experience memory
We propose AutoREM, a tuning-free LLM framework augmented with a reformulation experience
memory (REM). As shown in Figure 2, it operates through two interconnected phases: offline
adaptation that constructs a high-quality memory M on a dedicated offline dataset before deployment,
and online inference that leverages the resulting M to guide the reformulator at test time.
Online Inference. During inference, we employ the implicit retrieval paradigm: the entire memory
M is provided directly in the reformulator’s context, formulated as y ∼Pθ(y | p, M, q), allowing
the model to dynamically attend to relevant past derivation patterns without any external retrieval.
Offline Adaptation. The quality of online inference depends on the mathematical reliability of M.
In RO reformulation where derivations must be exact, even a single erroneous memory entry can
corrupt reasoning, making quality far more critical than quantity. This motivates a dedicated offline
adaptation phase rather than relying on manual curation or expensive test-time search. Crucially, the
AutoRO-Bench pipeline provides rich training instances at low cost, making data-driven memory
construction feasible and scalable.
4.3
Offline adaptation of reformulation experience memory
The offline adaptation phase constructs and refines REM through four tightly coupled components
organized around two design principles. The first principle is fine-grained memory management:
unit-level experience (ULE) addresses the representation dimension by organizing knowledge at
the granularity of individual uncertain constraint rows, making each entry independently reusable;
5


--- Page 6 ---
Figure 2: Overview of the AutoREM pipeline.
structured memory operators (SMO) address the editing dimension by providing atomic add, update,
and delete operations for precise, interpretable memory modification. The second principle is high-
quality memory verification: dual-check commit (DCC) operates at the step level, stress-testing each
proposed update against a targeted validation batch before committing; validation-based acceptance
(VBA) operates at the epoch level, evaluating the full validation set and rolling back any harmful
accumulated changes.
Structured representations. Following prior memory-augmented methods [14, 15], M is organized
as an ordered list of independently editable entries. Each entry has two fields: a unique integer
experience_id for identification, and a free-form content field encoding reformulation knowledge
for one minimal independent reformulation unit. The Reformulator and Reflector outputs adopt
a unified JSON format. The Reformulator returns reasoning, matched_experience_ids (the
entries used, supporting fine-grained attribution), and final_answer (the robust counterpart in
LATEX). The Reflector returns reasoning and final_answer (a list of memory operators). An
external controller parses these outputs and applies the operations. See full prompts in Appendix L.
Overall flow. Adaptation proceeds for E epochs of S steps each. At each step, a training instance
qs is evaluated under M. If it is already correct, then the step is skipped. Otherwise, the system
enters an inner reflection loop of up to K iterations, where a Reflector LLM proposes SMO edits on
a temporary copy ˆ
M that targets ULE entries while leaving the committed M untouched. Once qs
becomes correct under ˆ
M, the DCC gate validates it on a locked batch of validation samples: a full
pass commits ˆ
M to M, while any regression feeds the failure details back into the next Reflector call.
If no commit occurs within K iterations, ˆ
M is discarded. After each step, the controller records a
usage-success or usage-failure event on every matched experience, allowing the Reflector to perceive
per-experience quality accumulated over training. At epoch end, VBA evaluates the full validation
set. If the current accuracy does not surpass the best seen so far across all epochs (tracked as M∗),
M is rolled back to M∗before next epoch. See complete procedure in Algorithm 3, Appendix G.
Unit-level experience (ULE). ULE defines the granularity of memory entries: each entry targets
one minimal independent reformulation unit, making it self-contained and independently applicable
to any structurally similar unit in a new problem. This fine decomposition enables more precise
attribution and flexible reuse of reformulation knowledge than coarser, problem-level experiences. In
practice, ULE is realized by simply adding the phrase “minimal independent reformulation unit” to
the Reflector’s prompt. The Reflector itself decides what counts as such a unit for each problem and
distills experience at that level.
6


--- Page 7 ---
Structured memory operators (SMO). The Reflector outputs a JSON list of memory operations,
each of three types: ADD (insert a new entry), UPDATE (revise an existing entry’s content), or DELETE
(remove an entry), each specifying the target experience_id. An external controller parses this
JSON output and applies the corresponding operations to the working copy ˆ
M, while leaving the
committed M untouched. The Reflector also receives the full trace of prior operations and outcomes
of the inner loop, enabling it to diagnose why earlier edits failed and propose targeted corrections.
Dual-check commit (DCC). Committing after a single training fix risks silent regression on previ-
ously correct instances. When qs first becomes correct under ˆ
M, a mini-batch of up to B validation
instances is selected from the validation set and locked for the remainder of the step. Selection
prioritizes linked instances in the validation set, whose prior correct answers are attributed to the
modified experience entries, over the unlinked ones, filling the remaining budget with currently
correct unlinked instances. Linking is maintained via an experience-instance correspondence map,
which the external controller updates by reading the matched_experience_ids field in the Refor-
mulator’s JSON output. ULE’s fine-grained unit-level decomposition makes this attribution more
accurate. The locked batch is then evaluated under ˆ
M. On DC pass, ˆ
M is committed to M and
the correspondence map updated. On DC fail, the regression details (failing problem, reformulator
output, and solver feedback) are returned to the Reflector as additional context, making DCC an
active source of learning signal rather than a passive filter.
Validation-based acceptance (VBA). DCC covers only a mini-batch of B instances per step, which
provides a fast but biased estimate of memory quality and can let locally beneficial yet globally
harmful edits slip through. To obtain a more reliable assessment, VBA further evaluates the full fixed
held-out validation set of size |V| at each epoch end and retains the best-ever snapshot as M∗. If the
epoch-end accuracy does not surpass M∗, the current M is rolled back before the next epoch begins,
preventing the accumulation of such harmful edits over time.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental settings
Tasks and datasets. We evaluate AutoREM on the two tasks of AutoRO-Bench, each with a distinct
evaluation goal and a separate set of baselines.
For the RO reformulation task, we compare AutoREM against LLM-based reformulation methods
using three datasets generated by our pipeline. The Random dataset (64 instances) serves as the
in-distribution benchmark, following the same generation procedure as the training data with 2–5
decision variables. The Hard dataset (32 instances) is an out-of-distribution stress test where each
instance is designed around observed failure modes of the base LLM (see Appendix B.6). The Large
dataset (32 instances) is a second out-of-distribution split that uses the same random procedure as
Random but scales the variable count to 6–9, probing generalization to larger problem dimensions.
For the RO application task, we instead compare AutoREM against LLM-based formulation methods,
evaluating end-to-end RO problem solving from natural-language input on the 32-instance RO
Application dataset. Following the full RO solving pipeline (Figure 1), we first directly employ the
same base LLM as a formulator to translate each natural-language problem description into a LATEX
robust model, which is then passed to AutoREM as the reformulation component.
Baselines. We compare AutoREM against two groups of baselines, all using the same base LLM.
The datasets and codes will be publicly released to support reproducibility.
LLM reformulation methods operate on the RO reformulation task, taking a LATEX robust model as
input; all use zero-shot CoT [40] prompting and share the same fixed coder LLM: (1) Base LLM;
(2) Max Thinking: same base LLM with maximum reasoning effort, scaling test-time computation
per instance; (3) Expert Prompt [39]: the RO domain expert prompt; (4) ReasoningBank [15]:
a SOTA online adaptation memory method, adapted to our offline setting; (5) ACE [14]: a SOTA
offline adaptation memory framework, the most related competitor.
LLM formulation methods address the RO application task end-to-end from natural-language input:
(6) AlphaOPT [26]: an experience-library-based formulation method; (7) LEAN-LLM-OPT [28]:
a retrieval-augmented-generation-based agentic formulation framework; (8) OptiTree [30]: a tree-
search-based test-time scaling formulation method.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Table 2: Comparison of methods across the three datasets of the RO reformulation task.
Methods
Random (In-Distribution)
Hard (Out-of-Distribution)
Large (Out-of-Distribution)
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Base LLM
87.5 ± 5.4
7777 ± 162
70.8 ± 10
9026 ± 295
76.0 ± 3.6
11757 ± 135
Max Thinking
90.6 ± 1.6
13857 ± 331
83.3 ± 1.8
14902 ± 651
77.1 ± 3.6
22695 ± 1164
Expert Prompt
92.7 ± 3.3
8750 ± 200
83.3 ± 3.6
7549 ± 101
79.2 ± 9.5
13243 ± 1033
ReasoningBank
85.4 ± 0.9
6575 ± 131
80.2 ± 4.8
8089 ± 701
71.9 ± 13.6
11774 ± 471
ACE
87.0 ± 6.3
4419 ± 56
81.3 ± 9.4
5238 ± 570
63.5 ± 4.8
6706 ± 531
AutoREM
97.4 ± 0.9
6386 ± 56
94.8 ± 3.6
6944 ± 27
85.4 ± 7.1
10929 ± 238
Hyperparameter settings. All methods use DeepSeek-V4-Flash as the base LLM with default
reasoning effort (high), maximum output tokens of 32K, and temperature 0 (greedy decoding).
DeepSeek-V4-Pro is used as the fixed coder. For the offline adaptation phase, we run E = 10 epochs
with S = 8 steps per epoch. The dual-check batch size is set to B = 4, the maximum inner reflection
iterations to K = 3, and the validation set size to |V| = 64.
Metrics. We report two metrics to jointly assess reformulation quality and efficiency. Accuracy
(percentage of instances whose reformulation yields an optimal objective value matching the ground
truth within numerical tolerance) measures reformulation quality. Output Tokens (average number of
tokens generated by the reformulator per instance) measures reformulation efficiency: output tokens
are the primary determinant of online inference latency, and output tokens are priced significantly
higher than prompt tokens in API-based deployments, making this a practically important metric.
Although temperature is set to 0 (greedy decoding), LLM responses may still vary across API calls
due to engineering-level non-determinism. We therefore run each method three independent times
and report the mean ± standard deviation. In all tables, bold indicates the best result and underline
indicates the second best.
5.2
Experimental results
Comparison. AutoREM achieves the highest accuracy on the in-distribution Random dataset
(97.4%), surpassing Expert Prompt by 4.7%, Max Thinking by 6.8%, and both SOTA memory
methods (ReasoningBank, ACE) by more than 10%. It also attains the best accuracy and efficiency
trade-off, generating 54% fewer tokens than Max Thinking while delivering far higher accuracy.
Notably, both SOTA memory methods (ReasoningBank: 85.4%, ACE: 87.0%) fail to improve
over the Base LLM (87.5%), showing that on mathematically rigorous tasks, blindly accumulating
experiences is counterproductive. In contrast, AutoREM’s selective adaptation converges to just 8
verified, non-redundant templates, demonstrating that high-quality experiences matter far more than
quantity. See Appendices K and H for the full qualitative comparison and adaptation dynamics.
Out-of-distribution generalization. AutoREM generalizes strongly to both out-of-distribution
settings. On the Hard dataset, the advantage is most pronounced: all baselines drop substantially from
their Random scores (e.g., Expert Prompt: −9.4%, ACE: −5.7%), whereas AutoREM declines only
marginally (−2.6%), outperforming the best baseline by 11.5% and the Base LLM by 24.0%. This
robustness demonstrates that the learned memory genuinely improves the model’s core reformulation
capability rather than memorizing training-set patterns. AutoREM also reduces output tokens by 23%
compared to the Base LLM. On the Large dataset, all methods exhibit a consistent and significant
accuracy drop, indicating that the bottleneck is long-context processing rather than reformulation
capability. AutoREM still leads at 85.4% with consistent efficiency gains.
Cross-model universality. To evaluate transferability, we directly apply the memory trained on
DeepSeek-V4-Flash to GPT-5.4 and Qwen3.6-Plus without re-adaptation. These three models are high
cost-efficiency flagship offerings from DeepSeek, OpenAI, and Alibaba, providing broad coverage of
model architectures and training paradigms. As shown in Table 3, AutoREM consistently improves
both accuracy and token efficiency across all three base LLMs, with accuracy gains of 6.3% and 7.3%
on GPT-5.4 and Qwen3.6-Plus respectively. This indicates that the reformulation experience memory
encodes transferable knowledge that generalizes across heterogeneous base LLMs.
Application results. As shown in Figure 3, on the end-to-end Application dataset where all methods
operate on natural-language problem descriptions, AutoREM achieves 81.3% against the best baseline
of 75.0% (AlphaOPT), demonstrating strong practical capability for real-world RO problem solving.
8


--- Page 9 ---
Table 3: Comparison of methods across three base LLMs.
Methods
DeepSeek-V4-Flash
GPT-5.4
Qwen3.6-Plus
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Base LLM
87.5 ± 5.4
7777 ± 162
90.6 ± 3.1
2871 ± 78
81.2 ± 2.7
3448 ± 74
AutoREM
97.4 ± 0.9
6386 ± 56
96.9 ± 0
2550 ± 21
88.5 ± 1.8
2697 ± 73
Application
Random
Hard
Large
50
60
70
80
90
100
Accuracy / %
75.0
84.4
68.8
71.9
65.6
79.7
71.9
75.0
68.8
85.5
56.3
78.1
81.3
97.4
94.8
85.4
Performance Comparison across Datasets
AlphaOPT
LEAN
OptiTree
AutoREM
Figure 3: Comparison with LLM-based benchmarks.
w/o ULE
w/o SMO
w/o DCC
w/o VBA
AutoREM
86
88
90
92
94
96
98
100
Accuracy (%)
90.6%
92.2%
93.8%
93.8%
97.4%
Effect of Each Component
Figure 4: Ablation results.
When the same three formulation methods are evaluated on the pure reformulation datasets (bypassing
any formulation step), the advantage of AutoREM becomes even more pronounced: on the Hard
dataset, the best baseline reaches only 71.9% while AutoREM maintains 94.8%, a gap exceeding
22%. This widening margin reveals that the bottleneck lies specifically in reformulation: these
formulation-oriented methods lack the algebraic machinery for robust counterpart derivations, and it
is precisely this capability that AutoREM’s reformulation-specific memory supplies.
Ablation and hyperparameter analysis. Figure 4 shows that removing any components from ULE,
SMO, DCC, and VBA can cause a non-trivial accuracy drop, demonstrating that each is indispensable.
Figures 5 and 6 further show that the chosen defaults (B = 4, |V| = 64) achieve the best accuracy,
with performance remaining robust around these values. Implementation details and a full sensitivity
analysis are provided in Appendices I and J.
1
2
4
8
Size
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
Accuracy (%)
95.3%
95.3%
97.4%
93.8%
Effect of Dual-Check Size
Figure 5: Effect of dual-check size B.
8
16
32
64
Size
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
97.5
100.0
102.5
105.0
Accuracy (%)
95.3%
96.9%
93.8%
97.4%
100.0%
100.0%
96.9%
98.4%
Test Accuracy
Validation Accuracy
Accuracy Difference
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Diff (Val - Test) (%)
4.7%
3.1%
3.1%
1.0%
Accuracy & Difference vs. Validation Set Size
Figure 6: Effect of validation set size |V|.
6
Conclusion
We introduced AutoRO-Bench and AutoREM, respectively the first benchmark and the first tuning-
free memory-augmented framework for automated RO reformulation.
AutoREM consistently
achieves state-of-the-art accuracy across in-distribution and out-of-distribution settings, transfers
9


--- Page 10 ---
across diverse base LLMs without re-adaptation, and outperforms LLM-based formulation methods
on both the pure reformulation task and the end-to-end application task. One current limitation is that
offline adaptation relies on solver-verified objective values as the supervision signal, which may not
be available for all problem classes; future work could explore weaker supervision such as feasibility
checks. Extending the framework beyond LP-based robust counterparts to more complex RO is
another important direction.
References
[1] Chaithanya Bandi and Dimitris Bertsimas. Tractable stochastic analysis in high dimensions via robust
optimization. Mathematical Programming, 134(1):23–70, 2012.
[2] Dimitris Bertsimas and Melvyn Sim. The price of robustness. Operations Research, 52(1):35–53, 2004.
[3] Aharon Ben-Tal and Arkadi Nemirovski. Robust solutions of uncertain linear programs. Operations
Research Letters, 25(1):1–13, 1999.
[4] Aharon Ben-Tal and Arkadi Nemirovski. Robust solutions of Linear Programming problems contaminated
with uncertain data. Mathematical Programming, 88(3):411–424, 2000.
[5] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang,
Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. DeepSeek-R1 incentivizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement learning.
Nature, 645(8081):633–638, 2025.
[6] Jingcheng Hu, Yinmin Zhang, Qi Han, Daxin Jiang, Xiangyu Zhang, and Heung-Yeung Shum. Open-
Reasoner-Zero: An Open Source Approach to Scaling Up Reinforcement Learning on the Base Model. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. arXiv, July 2025.
[7] Ziyang Xiao, Jingrong Xie, Lilin Xu, Shisi Guan, Jingyan Zhu, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin Fu, WingYin Yu,
Han Wu, Wei Shi, et al. A survey of optimization modeling meets llms: progress and future directions. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 10742–
10750, 2025.
[8] Andre He, Daniel Fried, and S. Welleck. Rewarding the unlikely: Lifting GRPO beyond distribution
sharpening. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
pages 25548–25560, 2025.
[9] Rulin Shao, Shuyue Stella Li, Rui Xin, Scott Geng, Yiping Wang, Sewoong Oh, Simon Shaolei Du, Nathan
Lambert, Sewon Min, Ranjay Krishna, Yulia Tsvetkov, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Pang Wei Koh, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. Spurious rewards: Rethinking training signals in RLVR. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.10947,
2025.
[10] Yuda Song, Julia Kempe, and Remi Munos. Outcome-based exploration for LLM reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.06941, 2025.
[11] Yang Yue, Zhiqi Chen, Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Zhaokai Wang, Yang Yue, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Does
reinforcement learning really incentivize reasoning capacity in llms beyond the base model? In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[12] Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang, Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo,
Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, et al. Memory in the Age of AI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13564, 2025.
[13] Zeyu Zhang, Quanyu Dai, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-
Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model-based agents. ACM Transactions
on Information Systems, 43(6):1–47, 2025.
[14] Qizheng Zhang, Changran Hu, Shubhangi Upasani, Boyuan Ma, Fenglu Hong, Vamsidhar Kamanuru, Jay
Rainton, Chen Wu, Mengmeng Ji, Hanchen Li, Urmish Thakker, James Zou, and Kunle Olukotun. Agentic
context engineering: Evolving contexts for self-improving language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2026.
[15] Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long T. Le, Samira
Daruki, Xiangru Tang, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Mahsan Rofouei, Hangfei Lin, Jiawei Han,
Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pfister. ReasoningBank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
10


--- Page 11 ---
[16] Yitian Chen, Jingfan Xia, S. Shao, Dongdong Ge, and Yinyu Ye. Solver-informed RL: Grounding large
language models for authentic optimization modeling. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025.
[17] Zezhen Ding, Zhen Tan, Jiheng Zhang, and Tianlong Chen. OR-R1: Automating modeling and solving of
operations research optimization problem via test-time reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 228–236, 2026.
[18] Chenyu Huang, Zhengyang Tang, Shixi Hu, Ruoqing Jiang, Xin Zheng, Dongdong Ge, Benyou Wang, and
Zizhuo Wang. ORLM: A customizable framework in training large models for automated optimization
modeling. Operations Research, 73(6):2986–3009, 2025.
[19] Caigao Jiang, Xiang Shu, Hong Qian, Xingyu Lu, Jun Zhou, Aimin Zhou, and Yang Yu. LLMOPT:
Learning to define and solve general optimization problems from scratch. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2025.
[20] Ziyang Xiao, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Shisi Guan, Jingyan Zhu, Jingrong Xie, Lilin Xu,
Han Wu, Wing Yin Yu, Zehua Liu, Xiaojin Fu, Gang Chen, and Dongxiang Zhang. DeepOR: A deep
reasoning foundation model for optimization modeling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, pages 34052–34060, 2026.
[21] Wantong Xie, Yi-Xiang Hu, Jieyang Xu, Feng Wu, and Xiang-Yang Li. MURKA: Multi-Reward Reinforce-
ment Learning with Knowledge Alignment for Optimization Tasks. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025.
[22] Chenyu Zhou, Tianyi Xu, Jianghao Lin, and Dongdong Ge. StepORLM: A self-evolving framework with
generative process supervision for operations research language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2026.
[23] Ali AhmadiTeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling with
(MI)LP solvers and large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
[24] Nicolás Astorga, Tennison Liu, Yuanzhang Xiao, and Mihaela Van Der Schaar. Autoformulation of
Mathematical Optimization Models Using LLMs. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 1864–1886. PMLR, October 2025.
[25] Xia Jiang, Yaoxin Wu, Chenhao Zhang, and Yingqian Zhang. DRoC: Elevating Large Language Models
for Complex Vehicle Routing via Decomposed Retrieval of Constraints. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 46731–46752, May 2025.
[26] Minwei Kong, Ao Qu, Xiaotong Guo, Wenbin Ouyang, Chonghe Jiang, Han Zheng, Yining Ma, Dingyi
Zhuang, Yuhan Tang, Junyi Li, Shenhao Wang, Haris Koutsopoulos, Hai Wang, Cathy Wu, and Jinhua
Zhao. AlphaOPT: Formulating optimization programs with self-improving LLM experience library. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.18428, 2025.
[27] Dong Li, Xiaoyu Zhao, Linlin Yu, Yanchi Liu, Wei Cheng, Zhengzhang Chen, Zhong Chen, Feng Chen,
Chen Zhao, and Haifeng Chen. SolverLLM: Leveraging test-time scaling for optimization problem via
LLM-guided search. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[28] Kuo Liang, Yuhang Lu, Jianming Mao, Shuyi Sun, Chunwei Yang, Congcong Zeng, Xiao Jin, Hanzhang
Qin, Ruihao Zhu, and Chung-Piaw Teo. Large-scale optimization model auto-formulation: Harnessing
LLM flexibility via structured workflow. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09635, 2026.
[29] Fan Liu, Zherui Yang, Cancheng Liu, Tianrui Song, Xiaofeng Gao, and Hao Liu. MM-agent: LLM as
agents for real-world mathematical modeling problem. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2025.
[30] Haoyang Liu, Jie Wang, Yuyang Cai, Xiongwei Han, Yufei Kuang, and Jianye Hao. OptiTree: Hierarchical
thoughts generation with tree search for LLM optimization modeling. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2025.
[31] Tennison Liu and Mihaela van der Schaar. MATHMO: Automated Mathematical Modeling Through
Adaptive Search. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[32] Xiaotian Pan, Junhao Fang, Feng Wu, Sijia Zhang, Yi-Xiang Hu, Shaoang Li, and Xiang-Yang Li. Guiding
large language models in modeling optimization problems via question partitioning. In Proceedings of the
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 2657–2665, 2024.
11


--- Page 12 ---
[33] Rindra Ramamonjison, Haley Li, Timothy Yu, Shiqi He, Vishnu Rengan, Amin Banitalebi-dehkordi, Zirui
Zhou, and Yong Zhang. Augmenting operations research with auto-formulation of optimization models
from problem descriptions. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 29–62, 2022.
[34] Teng Wang, Wing Yin Yu, Zhenqi He, Zehua Liu, HaileiGong HaileiGong, Han Wu, Xiongwei Han, Wei
Shi, Ruifeng She, Fangzhou Zhu, and Tao Zhong. BPP-search: Enhancing tree of thought reasoning for
mathematical modeling problem solving. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 821–838, 2025.
[35] Zhiyuan Wang, Bokui Chen, Yinya Huang, Qingxing Cao, Ming He, Jianping Fan, and Xiaodan Liang.
ORMind: A cognitive-inspired end-to-end reasoning framework for operations research. In Proceedings of
the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 104–131, 2025.
[36] Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin
Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, and Gang Chen. Chain-of-Experts: When LLMs Meet Complex
Operations Research Problems. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[37] Jihai Zhang, Wei Wang, Siyan Guo, Li Wang, Fangquan Lin, Cheng Yang, and Wotao Yin. Solving general
natural-language-description optimization problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 483–490, 2024.
[38] Yansen Zhang, Qingcan Kang, Wing Yin Yu, Xiaojin Fu, Xiongwei Han, Tao Zhong, and Chen Ma.
Decision Information Meets Large Language Models: The Future of Explainable Operations Research. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pages 65698–65722, May 2025.
[39] Dimitris Bertsimas and Georgios Margaritis. Robust and adaptive optimization under a large language
model lens. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.00568, 2024.
[40] Shixiang Shane Gu, Yusuke Iwasawa, Takeshi Kojima, Yutaka Matsuo, and Machel Reid. Large language
models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 22199–
22213, 2022.
[41] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, F. Xia, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[42] Uri Alon, Peter Clark, Nouha Dziri, Luyu Gao, Prakhar Gupta, Shashank Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Katherine
Hermann, Aman Madaan, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Niket Tandon, Sean
Welleck, Sarah Wiegreffe, Yiming Yang, and Amir Yazdanbakhsh. Self-refine: Iterative refinement with
self-feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 46534–46594, 2023.
[43] Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, Noah Shinn, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion:
Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 8634–8652, 2023.
[44] Maciej Besta, Nils Blach, Ales Kubicek, Robert Gerstenberger, Michal Podstawski, Lukas Gianinazzi,
Joanna Gajda, Tomasz Lehmann, Hubert Niewiadomski, Piotr Nyczyk, and Torsten Hoefler. Graph of
thoughts: Solving elaborate problems with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 17682–17690, 2024.
[45] Yuan Cao, Tom Griffiths, Karthik Narasimhan, Izhak Shafran, Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, and Jeffrey Zhao. Tree
of thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pages 11809–11822, 2023.
[46] Yichao Fu, Xuewei Wang, Yuandong Tian, and Jiawei Zhao. Deep think with confidence. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[47] Zhewei Kang, Xuandong Zhao, and Dawn Song. Scalable best-of-n selection for large language models
via self-certainty. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[48] Aayush Karan and Yilun Du. Reasoning with sampling: Your base model is smarter than you think. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[49] Zhenting Qi, Mingyuan Ma, Jiahang Xu, Li Lyna Zhang, Fan Yang, and Mao Yang. Mutual reasoning
makes smaller llms stronger problem-solvers. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
2025.
12


--- Page 13 ---
[50] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery,
and Denny Zhou. Self-Consistency Improves Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[51] Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav
Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G.
Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA: Reflective prompt evolution
can outperform reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[52] Yumin Choi, Jinheon Baek, and Sung Ju Hwang. System prompt optimization with meta-learning. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025.
[53] Xinyuan Wang, Chenxi Li, Zhen Wang, Fan Bai, Haotian Luo, Jiayou Zhang, Nebojsa Jojic, Eric P. Xing,
and Zhiting Hu. PromptAgent: Strategic planning with language models enables expert-level prompt
optimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[54] Jianyu Wang, Zhiqiang Hu, and Lidong Bing. Evolving prompts in-context: An open-ended, self-replicating
perspective. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025.
[55] Chenrui Zhang, Lin Liu, Chuyuan Wang, Xiao Sun, Hongyu Wang, Jinpeng Wang, and Mingchen Cai.
PREFER: Prompt ensemble learning via feedback-reflect-refine. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, pages 19525–19532, 2024.
[56] Kyunghoon Bae, Yao Fu, Dong-Ki Kim, Jaekyeom Kim, Honglak Lee, Lajanugen Logeswaran, and
Sungryull Sohn. AutoGuide: Automated generation and selection of context-aware guidelines for large
language model agents. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 119919–119948,
2024.
[57] Yitao Liu, Chenglei Si, Karthik R Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Contextual experience replay for
self-improvement of language agents. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 14179–14198, 2025.
[58] Yiheng Shu, Saisri Padmaja Jonnalagedda, Xiang Gao, Bernal Jiménez Gutiérrez, Weijian Qi, Kamalika
Das, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. REMem: Reasoning with episodic memory in language agent. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[59] Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Y. Liu, and Gao Huang. ExpeL: LLM agents are
experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 19632–19642,
2023.
[60] Aharon Ben-Tal and Arkadi Nemirovski. Robust convex optimization. Mathematics of Operations
Research, 23(4):769–805, 1998. doi: 10.1287/moor.23.4.769.
[61] Aharon Ben-Tal, Laurent El Ghaoui, and Arkadi Nemirovski. Robust Optimization. Princeton Series in
Applied Mathematics. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2009. ISBN 978-0-691-14368-2.
[62] Zhi Chen and Peng Xiong. RSOME in Python: An open-source package for robust stochastic optimization
made easy. INFORMS Journal of Computing, 35(4):717–724, 2023.
[63] Zhi Chen, Melvyn Sim, and Peng Xiong. Robust stochastic optimization made easy with RSOME.
Management Science, 66(8):3329–3339, 2020.
[64] Zhicheng Yang, Yiwei Wang, Yinya Huang, Zhijiang Guo, Wei Shi, Xiongwei Han, Liang Feng, Linqi Song,
Xiaodan Liang, and Jing Tang. Optibench meets resocratic: Measure and improve llms for optimization
modeling. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Automated Reformulation of Robust Optimization via
Memory-Augmented Large Language Models
(Appendix)
A
Derivations of Robust Counterparts
This section derives the robust counterpart (RC) for each of the three polyhedral uncertainty sets
introduced in Section 3.1. All three derivations follow the same two-step template: (i) reformulate
the worst-case objective function or constraint as an inner maximization problem, and (ii) replace
this inner maximization with its LP dual, yielding a finite set of linear rows.
Throughout, we work with the i-th uncertain constraint in the direct perturbation form
n
X
j=1
˜aij xj ≤bi,
˜aij = ¯aij + ζij,
where ζi ∈Ui is the perturbation vector, ζij is its j-th component, and ¯aij is the nominal coefficient.
Within each subsection the row index i is fixed, so we write ζ and ζj for ζi and ζij for brevity.
Requiring this to hold for every ζi ∈Ui is equivalent to
n
X
j=1
¯aij xj + max
ζi∈Ui
n
X
j=1
ζij xj ≤bi.
(3)
The inner maximization in (3) is a linear program in ζi (for fixed x); replacing it by its dual gives the
RC.
A.1
Box Uncertainty Set
For Ubox = {ζ | |ζj| ≤δj, ∀j}, the inner problem is
max
ζ
X
j
ζj xj
s.t.
|ζj| ≤δj, ∀j.
This separates over j: for each j, max|ζj|≤δj ζjxj = δj|xj|, achieved at ζ∗
j = δj sign(xj). Intro-
ducing auxiliary variables tj ≥0 to linearize δj|xj| (i.e., tj ≥δjxj and tj ≥−δjxj) yields the LP
robust counterpart:
n
X
j=1
¯aij xj +
n
X
j=1
tj ≤bi,
tj ≥δjxj,
tj ≥−δjxj,
tj ≥0.
(4)
A.2
Budget Uncertainty Set
For UΓ =

ζ | |ζj| ≤δj, ∀j; P
j |ζj|/δj ≤Γi
	
, the inner problem is
max
ζ
X
j
ζj xj
s.t.
|ζj| ≤δj, ∀j;
X
j
|ζj|
δj
≤Γi.
Substituting uj = ζj/δj (so |uj| ≤1 and P
j |uj| ≤Γi) and dualizing the budget constraint with
multiplier zi0 ≥0 and the individual box constraints with multipliers zij ≥0, strong duality gives
zi0 + zij ≥δj|xj| for each j. Splitting the absolute value into two linear constraints yields the LP
robust counterpart:
n
X
j=1
¯aij xj + Γi zi0 +
n
X
j=1
zij ≤bi,
zi0 + zij ≥±δj xj, ∀j,
zij ≥0, zi0 ≥0.
(5)
Setting Γi = |Si| recovers the box RC (4) (budget constraint becomes inactive).
1


--- Page 15 ---
Algorithm 1 Data Generator for the RO reformulation task
Require: n (number of variables); N (target instances); uncertainty type set U; template set T
Ensure: Dataset D
1: D ←∅
2: count ←0
3: while count < N do
4:
Step 1: Nominal LP. Sample objective coefficients c and direction; construct sparse feasi-
ble constraint polytope (A, b) with interior point x0 via the FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE algorithm
(Appx. B.3)
5:
Step 2: Uncertainty types. Assign an uncertainty type from U to each row
6:
if all rows deterministic then continue
7:
end if
8:
Step 3: Uncertainty parameters (see Appx. B.4)
9:
for each uncertain row i do
10:
Sample sparse support Si ⊆{j : aij ̸= 0}, |Si| ≥2
11:
if Box then sample per-element deviations δi
12:
else if Budget then sample δi and budget Γi
13:
else if Poly then
14:
(F, g) ←FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE(|Si|, ζ0, [−pr, pr], |Si|)
(Appx. B.3)
15:
end if
16:
end for
17:
Step 4: Solve & filter. Solve via RSOME; discard if infeasible, unbounded, or degenerate
18:
Step 5: Render. Select T ′ ⊆T ; render LATEX using each Tb0b1b2 ∈T ′; add records to D
19:
count ←count + 1
20: end while
21: return D
A.3
General Polyhedral Uncertainty Set
For Upoly = {ζ | Fζ ≤g}, the uncertain row evaluates to ¯a⊤x + ζ⊤x, so the inner problem is
max
ζ
ζ⊤x
s.t.
Fζ ≤g.
Associating dual variables λ ≥0 with the constraints Fζ ≤g, the LP dual is
min
λ≥0 g⊤λ
s.t.
F⊤λ = x.
By strong duality, the RC becomes
¯a⊤x + g⊤λ ≤b,
F⊤λ = x,
λ ≥0.
(6)
This formulation subsumes the box and budget cases: both can be cast as instances of Upoly with
appropriate choices of F and g.
Extension to equality constraints. In practice (see Appendix B.4), the polyhedral uncertainty set
may additionally include equality constraints Eζ = e, used to zero out coefficients outside the
uncertain support Si. Introducing free dual variables µ for these constraints, the RC generalizes to
¯a⊤x + g⊤λ + e⊤µ ≤b,
F⊤λ + E⊤µ = x,
λ ≥0,
µ free.
(7)
B
RO reformulation task: Data Generation Details
This section supplements Section 4.1 with the full details of the data generation pipeline for the RO
reformulation task. Algorithm 1 gives the complete generation procedure.
B.1
Problem Structure and Scale
Variable count and constraint count.
Each RO instance is parameterized by a number of decision
variables n ∈{2, 3, 4, 5}. The number of inequality/equality constraints equals n, i.e., the constraint
matrix A ∈Rn×n.
2


--- Page 16 ---
Variable bounds.
A nominal range r ∼Uniform(1, 10) (rounded to 1 decimal place) is sampled
per instance. A variable-bound type τx ∈{a, b, c} is then selected uniformly at random, determining
the box [xl, xu] that every decision variable xi must satisfy:
τx = a : xl = −r, xu = r;
τx = b : xl = 0, xu = r;
τx = c : xl = −r, xu = 0.
The interior point x0
∈
[xl, xu]n used in Step 1 is sampled component-wise as x0,i
∼
Uniform(xl, xu), rounded to 1 decimal place.
Objective coefficients.
The n objective coefficients are sampled i.i.d. as cj ∼Uniform(−10, 10),
rounded to 1 decimal place. The optimization direction (maximize or minimize) is chosen uniformly
at random and is kept fixed for the entire instance.
Polyhedral perturbation range.
The polyhedral range is set to pr = 0.1 · r (1 decimal place),
where r is the nominal range defined above. A perturbation-bound type τp ∈{a, b, c} is selected
uniformly at random once per instance and shared across all polyhedral uncertain rows:
τp = a : pl = −pr, pu = pr;
τp = b : pl = 0, pu = pr;
τp = c : pl = −pr, pu = 0.
Deterministic row guarantee.
The generator enforces that exactly one row (counting the objective
as row 0 and the n constraints as rows 1 through n) is fully deterministic (uncertainty type = 0).
If the nominal LP (Step 1) happens to produce an equality constraint at row j, that row is forced
to be the deterministic row. Otherwise, the deterministic row is chosen uniformly at random from
{0, 1, . . . , n}. If the forced deterministic row is the objective (row 0), all n constraint rows may
be uncertain; otherwise, the objective row is assigned an uncertainty type drawn uniformly from
{1, 2, 3} (box / budget / polyhedral). Each remaining constraint row is assigned an uncertainty type
independently and uniformly from {1, 2, 3}.
B.2
Step 4: Solve and Filter
After the instance parameters are fully generated, the robust model is constructed and solved using
RSOME (via rsome.ro.Model). An instance is accepted and added to the dataset only if all three of
the following conditions hold:
1. Not all-deterministic. At least one row (objective or constraint) must have a positive
uncertainty type; instances where every row is deterministic are discarded before solving.
2. Feasible and bounded. The solver must return status optimal; instances that are infeasible,
unbounded, or produce a solver error are discarded.
3. Non-degenerate solution. The optimal solution x∗must not be identical to the variable
lower or upper bound at every component, i.e., it is required that x∗is not coordinatewise
equal to xl or xu. Formally, the instance is rejected if x∗
i ≈xl or x∗
i ≈xu for all i, as
such solutions are considered degenerate boundary solutions that offer little reformulation
challenge.
Rejected instances are discarded entirely (all parameters are re-sampled), and the generator loops
until the target number of valid instances is reached.
B.3
Shared Module: Feasible Polytope Generator
A key primitive used in two places of the generator is a procedure that constructs a random system
of linear inequalities for which a prescribed point is guaranteed to be a strictly interior point. It is
invoked as:
1. Nominal LP (Step 1): generate the constraint matrix A and right-hand side b such that x0
is strictly feasible.
2. Polyhedral uncertainty set (Step 3): generate the halfspace representation (F, g) of the
perturbation polytope Upoly such that the sampled interior point ζ0 is guaranteed to lie
strictly inside.
3


--- Page 17 ---
Algorithm 2 FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE: Random Feasible Inequality System Generator
Require: Dimension d; interior point v0 ∈Rd; coefficient range [l, u]; number of rows m
Ensure: Matrix A ∈Rm×d, vector b ∈Rm, directions s ∈{≤, ≥}m
1: for i = 1, . . . , m do
2:
Sample ai ∼Uniform([l, u]d); clip |aij| ≥0.1; round to 1 decimal
3:
if d > 2 then apply random binary mask, keeping ≥2 non-zero entries per row
4:
end if
5:
Sample si ∼Uniform({≤, ≥})
6:
vi ←a⊤
i v0
7:
if si = ≤then bi ∼Uniform(vi, vi + ∥ai∥1 · |u|)
▷slack above v0
8:
else bi ∼Uniform(vi −∥ai∥1 · |u|, vi)
▷slack below v0
9:
end if
10:
Round bi to 2 decimal places
11: end for
12: return A, b, s
Equality constraints in the nominal LP. When constructing the nominal constraint system (invo-
cation 1 above), a single row may additionally be converted to an equality: for n ≥3, this occurs
with probability 0.5 for one randomly chosen row, setting bi = a⊤
i x0 exactly. Such a row is always
designated as the deterministic row of the RO instance.
B.4
Step 3: Uncertainty Parameter Generation
Both the nominal LP constraint matrix A and the polyhedral uncertainty polytopes are sparse by
design. For n ≥3, each row of A has at least two but generally fewer than n non-zero entries,
determined by the random binary mask in FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE (Algorithm 2). Uncertainty is further
sparsified at the row level: for each uncertain row i, a random subset Si of |Si| ≥2 indices is selected
from the non-zero coefficient positions, so that only a portion of each row’s coefficients is subject to
perturbation. Uncertainty parameters are generated as follows.
Box uncertainty. Per-element deviations are set as ∆i,j = max(0.1, δij · |¯ai,j|) with δij ∼
Uniform(0.05, 0.20), rounded to 1 decimal. The uncertainty set is:
Ubox =

ζi ∈R|Si| : |ζi,j| ≤∆i,j, ∀j ∈Si
	
.
Budget uncertainty. The same per-element deviations ∆i,j are used, with an additional budget
Γi ∼Uniform(0, |Si|) (rounded to 1 decimal) limiting total perturbation:
Ubud =
n
ζi : |ζi,j| ≤∆i,j,
X
j∈Si
|ζi,j|
∆i,j
≤Γi
o
.
Polyhedral uncertainty. A polyhedral range pr = 0.1r is set, and component-wise bounds [pl, pu]
are chosen uniformly from {[−pr, pr], [0, pr], [−pr, 0]} (one choice shared across all polyhedral
rows of the same instance). An interior point ζ0 ∼Uniform([pl, pu]|Si|) is sampled. The halfspace
representation is obtained by calling FEASIBLEPOLYTOPE(|Si|, ζ0, [−pr, pr], |Si|) and retaining
only the first |Si| −1 inequality rows to form F ∈R(|Si|−1)×|Si| and g ∈R|Si|−1. The resulting
uncertainty set is:
Upoly =

ζi ∈R|Si| : Fζi ≤g, pl ≤ζi,j ≤pu, ∀j
	
.
By construction, ζ0 is strictly interior to Upoly, guaranteeing non-emptiness.
B.5
Template Dimensions
The template set T comprises a family of 8 templates Tb0b1b2, parameterized by three independent
binary dimensions: explicit/implicit worst-case direction (b0), vector/scalar notation style (b1), and
explicit/implicit uncertainty type annotation (b2). Using diverse templates encourages AutoREM to
4


--- Page 18 ---
Table 4: The three binary dimensions parameterizing the 8 LATEX presentation templates.
Dim.
Name
Value = 0 (Implicit)
Value = 1 (Explicit)
b0
Worst-case direction
Universal quantifier ∀ξ ∈U
Nested operator minξ∈U / maxξ∈U
b1
Notation style
Scalar: each term written element-wise
Vector/matrix: compact inner-product form
b2
Uncertainty type annotation
No label; set given by math definition only
Named label, e.g., “Box Uncertainty”
learn notation-invariant reformulation knowledge, preventing the experience memory from simply
memorizing surface-level text styles.
Each of the 8 presentation templates Tb0b1b2 is fully determined by three independent binary dimen-
sions, summarized in Table 4.
B.6
Hard Dataset Configuration
The Hard dataset is generated by the same pipeline as the Random dataset (Algorithm 1), but with the
random sampling constrained so that each instance simultaneously satisfies four structural conditions
identified as failure modes of the base LLM during preliminary experiments:
• all uncertain constraints use polyhedral uncertainty;
• the objective direction is maximization;
• the uncertain constraints include both ≥and ≤directions;
• decision variables are allowed to take both positive and negative values.
The decision-variable count remains n ∈{2, 3, 4, 5} as in the Random split, so the accuracy gap
relative to Random is attributable to these structural difficulty factors rather than to dimensionality.
C
RO application dataset: Literature-Motivated Parameter Generation
For the second RO instance of each nominal problem in the RO application dataset, uncertainty
parameters are generated following practically-motivated settings from the RO literature.
Uncertain row selection. A row is made uncertain only if it contains more than two coefficients
that are simultaneously non-zero and not equal to ±1. Let S denote the index set of such qualifying
coefficients, m = |S| the number of uncertain coefficients, and define the scale baseline s =
1
m
P
j∈S |¯aj|, where ¯a are the nominal coefficients of the row. Note that m is distinct from n (the
number of decision variables defined in Section 3.1).
Box uncertainty [4]. Each deviation is ∆j = p · |¯aj| for j ∈S, where p is randomly chosen from
{0.01%, 0.1%, 1%}:
Ubox = {ξ : |ξj| ≤∆j, ∀j ∈S}.
Budget uncertainty. The same deviation ∆j as for box is used. To reflect varying degrees of
conservatism, the budget parameter Γb is randomly chosen to be 40%, 60%, or 80% of m. Note
that Γb here is the budget threshold and is distinct from the robustness level parameter Γ used in the
polyhedral sets below:
Ubud =
n
ξ : |ξj| ≤∆j,
X
j∈S
|ξj|
∆j ≤Γb
o
.
Polyhedral uncertainty [1]. One of the following four statistically-motivated types is randomly
selected. All use a fixed robustness level Γ = 2.0. Unlike box and budget uncertainty where all
parameters are presented as explicit numerical values, these sets define their constraint bounds through
symbolic expressions involving m and sampled distribution parameters (e.g., Γσ√m, m/λ). These
expressions are retained symbolically in the problem description and must be preserved accordingly
in the reformulation output to avoid numerical precision loss.
CLT-based. Derived from the Central Limit Theorem for i.i.d. random variables with mean µ and
standard deviation σ:
UCLT =
n
ξ
 −Γσ√m ≤P
j∈S ξj −mµ ≤Γσ√m
o
,
5


--- Page 19 ---
where µ ∼Uniform(−0.1s, 0.1s) and σ ∼Uniform(0.05s, 0.2s).
Heavy-tail. For heavy-tailed distributions with tail index α ∈(1, 2], sums scale as m1/α rather than
√m:
UHT =
n
ξ
 −Γ ≤
P
j∈S ξj −mµ
m1/α
≤Γ
o
,
where µ ∼Uniform(−0.1s, 0.1s) and α = 1.5.
Typical set – exponential. Based on the typical set of i.i.d. Exponential(λ) variables, with non-negative
perturbations:
UE =
n
ξ
 m
λ −
√m
λ Γ ≤P
j∈S ξj ≤m
λ +
√m
λ Γ, ξj ≥0
o
,
where λ ∼Uniform
 1
0.2s,
1
0.05s

.
Typical set – uniform. Based on the typical set of i.i.d. Uniform(a, b) variables:
UU =
n
ξ
 m · a+b
2
−Γ√m ≤P
j∈S ξj ≤m · a+b
2
+ Γ√m, a ≤ξj ≤b
o
,
where a, b ∼Uniform(−0.2s, 0.2s) with a < b.
D
RO application dataset: Problem Description Format
Each instance in the RO application dataset consists of the original natural-language problem descrip-
tion from IndustryOR or OptiBench, followed by an appended Robust Extension paragraph. The
extension begins with a preamble explaining the robust optimization setup (uncertain parameters
modeled as nominal plus perturbation, worst-case feasibility requirement), lists each uncertain row
with its uncertainty set description, and closes with a statement of the problem objective.
Format of the Robust Extension. The appended text follows this structure:
1. Preamble. A fixed paragraph explaining that certain parameters are uncertain, perturbations
are confined to uncertainty sets, and the goal is a worst-case feasible decision.
2. Uncertain parameter descriptions. One bullet per uncertain row, identifying the physical
meaning of the uncertain coefficients and specifying the uncertainty set. The set is described
as:
• Box: “Each coefficient may deviate by at most ±[∆1, . . . , ∆m] from its nominal value.”
• Budget: Same as box, followed by “the sum of normalized deviations (P |ξj|/∆j)
across all m uncertain coefficients must not exceed Γb = ⟨value⟩.”
• Polyhedral: “The perturbations ξ are confined to a polyhedral uncertainty set with
each ξi bounded within [l, u], and satisfying the following k linear constraint(s):
⟨constraint list⟩.”
3. Closing statement. “The robust model seeks a decision that guarantees [maximizing/min-
imizing] the objective value under all worst-case realizations within the uncertainty sets
above.”
Example. The following is an excerpt from one instance (a bakery production problem from
OptiBench), illustrating the box uncertainty format:
Robust Extension: In this robust version, certain parameters in the problem are
treated as uncertain ...
The following parameters are subject to uncertainty:
• Objective coefficients: The profit per cake type may vary due to ingredient cost
and pricing fluctuations. Each relevant coefficient may fluctuate independently.
The maximum absolute deviation for each coefficient is ±[1.97, 1.64, 2.46].
• Batter required per cake: The batter quantity per cake may vary due to recipe
variation. Each relevant coefficient may fluctuate independently. The maximum
absolute deviation for each coefficient is ±[71.76, 89.70, 80.73].
6


--- Page 20 ---
Table 5: Detailed statistics of the RO application dataset (32 instances). Each source problem
produces 2 instances.
Attribute
Value
# Instances
Source Problems
Problem class
LP
14
P1, P2, P6, P8, P9, P11, P13
MILP
18
P3, P4, P5, P7, P10, P12, P14, P15, P16
# decision variables
2
12
P4, P8, P13, P14, P15, P16
3
8
P3, P5, P7, P10
4
4
P9, P12
5
4
P6, P11
6
2
P2
13
2
P1
# uncertain rows
1
2
P3 (objective only)
2
6
P8, P14, P16
3
12
P1, P7, P10, P12, P13, P15
4
12
P2, P4, P5, P6, P9, P11
• Milk required per cake: May vary. The maximum absolute deviation for each
coefficient is ±[26.67, 40.00, 46.67].
The robust model seeks a decision that guarantees maximizing the objective value
under all worst-case realizations within the uncertainty sets above.
E
RO application dataset: Statistics
This section reports detailed statistics of the RO application dataset and contrasts them with the RO
reformulation dataset (Random split). Since each application instance is curated from a real-world
problem rather than algorithmically generated, its problem-level characteristics differ substantively
from the reformulation dataset, while the per-instance reformulation challenge—measured by the
number of uncertain rows—remains broadly comparable. We index the 16 nominal problems as P1–
P16 (P1–P8 from IndustryOR, P9–P16 from OptiBench), each contributing 2 instances as described
in Section 4.1.
Problem class.
The 16 nominal problems comprise 7 LPs and 9 MILPs, yielding 14 LP and 18
MILP instances after the two-instance expansion. The reformulation dataset is exclusively LP, since
its automatic generator (Algorithm 1) does not produce integer variables. The presence of MILPs in
the application dataset stress-tests AutoREM’s ability to apply LP-derived reformulation memory to
mixed-integer settings.
Decision variables.
Application instances contain 2 to 13 decision variables (median 3), spanning
a wider range than the reformulation Random split’s {2, 3, 4, 5}. The 13-variable instance (P1) sub-
stantially exceeds the dimensionality of any reformulation training instance, providing an additional
dimensionality stress test.
Uncertain rows.
The number of uncertain rows, i.e., the count of objective and constraint rows
containing uncertain coefficients, is the most direct indicator of reformulation difficulty. Each
additional uncertain row requires an independent counterpart derivation, increasing both reasoning
depth and output context length. Application instances contain 1 to 4 uncertain rows, with 75%
(24/32) containing 3 or 4. By construction, every reformulation instance with n decision variables
contains exactly n uncertain rows (one of the n+1 rows is forced deterministic; see Appendix B.1),
giving 2–5 uncertain rows for the Random split. Thus, despite the application dataset’s smaller size,
its per-instance reformulation challenge is broadly comparable to that of the reformulation dataset.
F
Sample Dataset Instances
This section presents one concrete instance from each dataset to complement the abstract descriptions
in Section 4.1. We use the last instance of each dataset.
7


--- Page 21 ---
F.1
RO Reformulation Dataset Instance (Random Split)
The instance has identifier 5_16_T011, with n = 5 decision variables and 5 constraints. The verified
ground-truth solution is x∗= [1.8, 1.0231, 1.8, 0, 0.8]⊤with optimal value f ∗= 29.6985.
Problem (LLM input).
Maximize
c⊤x
∀c ∈Uc,Bud
(Budgeted Uncertainty Objective)
subject to
a⊤
1 x ≥b1
∀a1 ∈Ua,Box
(Box Uncertainty Constraint)
a⊤
2 x ≤b2
(Deterministic Constraint)
(anom
3
+ δa3)⊤x ≥b3
∀δa3 ∈Ua3,P
(Polyhedral Uncertainty Constraint)
(anom
4
+ δa4)⊤x ≤b4
∀δa4 ∈Ua4,P
(Polyhedral Uncertainty Constraint)
(anom
5
+ δa5)⊤x ≥b5
∀δa5 ∈Ua5,P
(Polyhedral Uncertainty Constraint)
where:
Uc,Bud = {c ∈R5 : c = cnom + Dcξc, ∥ξc∥∞≤1, ∥ξc∥1 ≤Γc}
Ua,Box = {a1 ∈R5 : a1 = anom
1
+ Da1ξa1, ∥ξa1∥∞≤1}
Ua3,P = {δa3 ∈R5 : Ma3δa3 ≤qa3,
Ea3δa3 = ea3}
Ua4,P = {δa4 ∈R5 : Ma4δa4 ≤qa4,
Ea4δa4 = ea4}
Ua5,P = {δa5 ∈R5 : Ma5δa5 ≤qa5,
Ea5δa5 = ea5}
x = [x1, x2, x3, x4, x5]⊤
cnom = [7.7, −1.8, 8.8, −2.9, 2.7]⊤
anom
1
= [0, 0, −0.1, 0, −0.7]⊤
b1 = −1
a2 = [−0.2, −1.3, 0, −0.7, −1.3]⊤
b2 = −2.73
anom
3
= [−0.4, 0, 0, 0, −1.1]⊤
b3 = −2.64
anom
4
= [0, 1.8, −1.4, −0.2, 0.9]⊤
b4 = 6.8
anom
5
= [0.3, 1, −1.1, 0, 0]⊤
b5 = −2.76
Dc = diag(0, 0, 0, 0.5, 0.5)
Γc = 0.8
Da1 = diag(0, 0, 0.1, 0, 0.1)
Ma3 =


−0.2
0
0
0
−0.2
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1


qa3 = [0.06, 0, 0.2, 0, 0.2]⊤
Ea3 =


0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0


ea3 = [0, 0, 0]⊤
Ma4 =


0
−0.2
0
0
−0.1
0
−0.1
0
0.1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1


qa4 = [0.04, 0.01, 0, 0.2, 0, 0.2, 0, 0.2]⊤
Ea4 =
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0

8


--- Page 22 ---
ea4 = [0, 0]⊤
Ma5 =


−0.1
−0.1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0


qa5 = [0.04, 0, 0.2, 0, 0.2]⊤
Ea5 =


0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1


ea5 = [0, 0, 0]⊤
0 ≤xj ≤1.8,
∀j ∈{1, . . . , 5}
(Variable Bounds)
F.2
RO Application Dataset Instance
The instance has identifier 32, sourced from OptiBench [64]. The verified ground-truth optimal value
is f ∗= 1761.568.
Problem (LLM input).
There has been an oil spill in the ocean and ducks need to be taken to shore to be cleaned
either by boat or by canoe. A boat can take 10 ducks per trip while a canoe can take 8
ducks per trip. Since the boats are motor powered, they take 20 minutes per trip while the
canoes take 40 minutes per trip. In order to avoid further environmental damage, there can
be at most 12 boat trips and at least 60% of the trips should be by canoe. If at least 300
ducks need to be taken to shore, how many of each transportation method should be used to
minimize the total amount of time needed to transport the ducks?
Robust Extension:
In this robust version, certain parameters in the problem are treated as uncertain — they
are not fixed at their nominal values. Instead, each uncertain parameter is modeled as its
nominal value plus a perturbation, and it is this perturbation that is confined within specified
uncertainty sets. The goal is to find a decision plan that remains feasible and near-optimal
under all possible realizations of these uncertain parameters (the worst-case guarantee).
The following parameters are subject to uncertainty:
• Objective coefficients: The time per trip for boats and canoes may vary due to water
conditions. Each coefficient may deviate by at most 0.10% of its nominal value. Additionally,
the combined perturbation is limited: the sum of normalized deviations (P |ξj|/dj) must
not exceed Γ = 1.2, which means on average at most 60% of the uncertain coefficients can
simultaneously reach their maximum deviation. This captures the realistic situation where
large simultaneous deviations across all parameters are unlikely.
• The number of ducks transported per trip may vary due to animal behavior. This uncertainty
set accounts for heavy-tailed distributions (tail index α = 1.5): the normalized sum
(Σξi−nµ)/n1/α must lie within [−Γ, +Γ], so the sum range is [nµ−Γ·n1/α, nµ+Γ·n1/α].
Compared to the CLT-based set, the normalization factor n1/α grows more quickly than n1/2,
allowing for heavier tails. Each component is bounded within [µ−Γ·n1/α−1, µ+Γ·n1/α−1]
(parameters: µ = −0.8139, α = 1.5, Γ = 2.0, n = 2).
• Variable type: The decision variables (x1, x2) represent trips by each transport method.
Since these quantities are inherently discrete, all decision variables are constrained to be
non-negative integers (xi ∈Z+).
The robust model seeks a decision that guarantees minimizing the objective value under all
worst-case realizations within the uncertainty sets above.
G
Offline Adaptation Algorithm
Algorithm 3 provides the complete pseudocode for the offline adaptation procedure introduced in
Section 4.3. The procedure iterates over E epochs, each consisting of S training steps. At each
step, a training instance qs is sampled on the fly and evaluated against the current memory M; if
already solved correctly, the step is skipped. Otherwise, an inner reflection loop of up to K iterations
is entered: the SMO-based Reflector proposes structured memory edits (line 11), the ULE-based
9


--- Page 23 ---
Algorithm 3 Offline Adaptation of Reformulation Experience Memory
Require: Epochs E; steps per epoch S; DC batch size B; max inner iters K; validation set V; initial
memory M
Ensure: Adapted memory M∗
1: M∗←M;
acc∗←EVALVAL(M, V)
2: for e = 1, . . . , E do
3:
for s = 1, . . . , S do
4:
Sample training instance qs on the fly
5:
(em, fb, y) ←EVAL(qs, M)
▷Reformulator + Coder + Solver
6:
if em = 1 then continue
7:
end if
▷Already correct — skip
8:
ˆ
M ←M; prev_trace ←∅; dc_fail ←∅; committed ←False
9:
Lock DC sample set Vs ⊆V, |Vs| ≤B
▷linked-first priority; locked for this step
10:
for k = 1, . . . , K do
▷Inner reflection loop
11:
[ SMO ] ops ←REFLECT(qs,
ˆ
M, y, fb, prev_trace, dc_fail)
12:
[ ULE ] Apply ops ∈{ADD, UPDATE, DELETE} to ˆ
M
13:
(e′
m, fb′, y′) ←EVAL(qs,
ˆ
M);
prev_trace ←(k, ops, e′
m, fb′);
dc_fail ←∅
14:
if e′
m = 0 then y ←y′; fb ←fb′; continue
15:
end if
16:
[ Dual-Check Commit ] (pass, dc_fail) ←DUALCHECK( ˆ
M, Vs)
17:
if pass then M ←ˆ
M; committed ←True; break
18:
else y ←y′; fb ←fb′
▷DC failed — Reflector gets dc_fail next iter
19:
end if
20:
end for
21:
if ¬ committed then Discard ˆ
M
22:
end if
23:
end for
24:
[ Validation-based Acceptance ] acc ←EVALVAL(M, V)
25:
if acc ≥acc∗then M∗←M; acc∗←acc
26:
else M ←M∗
▷Restore best memory
27:
end if
28: end for
29: return M∗
updater applies them at the granularity of individual uncertain constraint rows (line 12), and the
updated memory is re-evaluated on qs. Once the training instance is solved correctly, the Dual-Check
Commit (DCC) mechanism stress-tests the proposed memory against a locked batch Vs drawn from
the validation set (line 16): only if all samples in Vs pass is the update committed; otherwise the
failure feedback is fed back into the next reflection iteration. If no commit is achieved within K
iterations, the candidate memory is discarded and M remains unchanged. At the end of each epoch,
the Validation-based Acceptance (VBA) gate evaluates the full validation set V (line 24): if the
epoch-level accuracy does not improve upon the best recorded acc∗, the memory is rolled back to
M∗, preventing harmful accumulated changes from persisting. The best memory M∗is returned
after all epochs.
H
Offline Adaptation Dynamics
Figure 7 visualizes the evolution of validation accuracy throughout the offline adaptation process.
Starting from an initial accuracy of 87.5%, the model improves rapidly, reaching 89.1% by epoch 1
and making a decisive leap to 98.4% by epoch 4. After this point, the accuracy stabilizes at a high
plateau. The figure also illustrates the protective role of VBA: at epoch 7, a detrimental memory edit
briefly causes validation accuracy to drop to 95.3%; this update is correctly identified as a rejected
change and the rollback baseline is triggered, swiftly restoring accuracy to 98.4%. This concretely
demonstrates that the VBA gate is not merely a passive quality filter but an active safeguard that
prevents harmful updates from permanently degrading hard-won improvements. These dynamic
10


--- Page 24 ---
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Epoch
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
97.5
100.0
Validation Accuracy (%)
Offline Adaptation Curve
full version
Accepted Change
Rejected Change
Rollback Baseline
87.5%
89.1%
98.4%
95.3%
98.4%
Figure 7: Validation accuracy curve of offline adaptation.
trajectories corroborate the static ablation results in Figure 4: both perspectives jointly confirm that
all four components of AutoREM make distinct and significant contributions to its performance.
I
Ablation Study Details
Each ablation variant removes exactly one component of AutoREM while keeping the rest intact.
w/o ULE is implemented by removing unit-level decomposition from the prompts, so the model
must process the full constraint matrix as a monolithic block rather than attributing experiences to
individual uncertain rows. w/o SMO is implemented by modifying both the prompts and the internal
controller to allow only a single add operator (following Zhang et al. [14]), and replacing operator-
aware deduplication with cosine-similarity-based deduplication; this forces the reflector to produce
monolithic memory rewrites instead of structured atomic edits. w/o DCC skips the dual-check step
entirely; because no validation set is available in this variant, the dual-check buffer is replaced by a
fixed-capacity replay buffer of size 64 that stores historically successful training samples. w/o VBA
removes the validation set entirely, so every memory update is committed unconditionally without an
epoch-level quality gate.
As shown in Figure 4, each removal causes a distinct accuracy drop: ULE (97.4%→90.6%), SMO
(92.2%), DCC (93.8%), and VBA (93.8%). The largest drop from ULE confirms that unit-level
attribution is the backbone of effective memory reuse. DCC and VBA contribute equally in magnitude
but at complementary granularities: DCC catches step-level regressions before they are committed,
while VBA prevents epoch-level accumulation of locally beneficial but globally harmful updates.
J
Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis
We study the sensitivity of AutoREM to three key hyperparameters: the dual-check size B, the
validation set size |V|, and the inner reflection loop cap K.
J.1
Dual-check Size B
Figure 5 shows the effect of varying B ∈{1, 2, 4, 8}. Accuracy plateaus at 95.3% for B ≤2, peaks
at 97.4% at B = 4, then drops to 93.8% at B = 8. The non-monotonic behavior reflects two
opposing forces: a larger B improves regression coverage across diverse constraint types, but it also
lengthens the failure feedback fed into the Reflector, making it harder to produce a repair that satisfies
all sampled instances simultaneously. B = 4 balances these two effects.
J.2
Validation Set Size |V|
Figure 6 shows that accuracy rises monotonically from 95.3% to 97.4% as |V| grows from 8 to
64, while the generalization gap shrinks from 4.7% to 1.0%. Smaller validation sets introduce high
variance into the VBA signal; larger sets improve reliability but increase adaptation cost. We adopt
|V| = 64 as the default, where the generalization gap has already stabilized near its minimum.
11


--- Page 25 ---
Table 6: Per-invocation usage of the inner reflection loop during offline adaptation. Iter outcomes are:
training fail = the training sample is still incorrect under the proposed memory (no DC performed);
DC fail = training sample correct but the dual-check batch regressed; DC pass = both training sample
and DC batch correct (commit).
(Epoch, Step)
Iterations Used
Per-iteration outcome
(1, 1)
3 (= K)
Iter 1: training fail; Iter 2: DC fail; Iter 3: DC pass (committed)
(4, 2)
2
Iter 1: DC fail; Iter 2: DC pass (committed)
(7, 2)
1
Iter 1: DC pass (committed; later rolled back by VBA)
J.3
Inner Reflection Loop Cap K
We report the empirical usage of the inner reflection loop (Algorithm 3, parameter K) on the
offline adaptation training run, and use these statistics to assess whether the chosen value K = 3 is
well-calibrated.
Invocation statistics.
Across the full training run (E = 10 epochs × S = 8 steps = 80 step
attempts), the inner reflection loop was invoked exactly 3 times, once per training step that was
initially incorrect under the current memory. The remaining 77 steps were already correct on entry
and skipped reflection (Algorithm 3, line 6). Table 6 lists each invocation with the iterations it
consumed and its per-iteration outcomes. The distribution of iterations per invocation is exactly one
invocation each at 1, 2, and 3 iterations, with mean 2.0. Only the first invocation reached the cap K,
and it terminated by a successful commit at iteration 3 rather than by exhausting the budget without a
fix.
Is K = 3 a reasonable setting?
The data supports K = 3 as a tightly calibrated choice for three
reasons:
• Large enough to enable the hardest reflection. The first invocation, which bootstrapped the
memory from the empty state, required all 3 iterations: the very first iteration could not even
fix the training sample, the second produced a fix that regressed on the dual-check batch,
and only the third yielded a generalizable update that passed both checks. With K ≤2, this
foundational update would have been discarded.
• Small enough to control cost. Only 1 of the 3 invocations (33%) reached the cap, and that
single cap-hit invocation succeeded at the cap rather than exhausting it. Increasing K to 4 or
beyond would not have changed any outcome on this run, while inflating per-step Reflector
cost (one extra Reflector call plus one extra Reformulator + Coder + DC pass per uncapped
iteration).
• Reflection difficulty decays over training. The three invocations consumed 3, 2, and 1
iterations respectively, indicating that as the memory accumulates correct templates, later
reflections converge faster. Beyond epoch 1 the cap is therefore not the binding constraint:
it is needed only for the cold-start phase.
In summary, K = 3 provides exactly the headroom required for the hardest observed reflection
(cold-start) while remaining tight enough to keep Reflector cost low once the memory has matured.
K
Qualitative Comparison of Learned Memories
This section provides a qualitative illustration of the knowledge representations learned by AutoREM,
ACE, and ReasoningBank, alongside the Expert Prompt used as a baseline. These examples offer a
concrete basis for interpreting the accuracy differences reported in Table 2.
12


--- Page 26 ---
Memory Size Overview
Method
# Memory Entries
Entry Style
Expert Prompt
—
Manually written reformulation rules
ReasoningBank
80
One item per training step; multi-paragraph narrative
ACE
51
29 strategies + 18 formula entries + 4 code snippets
AutoREM (Ours)
8
Compact; one-liner reformulation templates
AutoREM’s memory is 6× smaller than ACE and 10× smaller than ReasoningBank, while
achieving strictly higher accuracy. The following subsections illustrate the qualitative contrast
between these representations.
K.1
AutoREM’s Learned Memory (Complete)
AutoREM produces 8 compact entries that exhaustively enumerate the 8 canonical reformulation
templates for the 3 uncertainty set types × 2 directions (min/max) × objective/constraint.
Listing 1: AutoREM: all 8 learned memory entries.
[Entry 1]
For an uncertain objective with box uncertainty:
minimize max_{xi in Box} (c_bar + diag(c_hat) xi)^T x,
where Box = {xi : ||xi||_inf <= 1}.
Reformulate as:
minimize c_bar^T x + sum_j u_j,
with u_j >= c_hat_j x_j, u_j >= -c_hat_j x_j
for all j where c_hat_j > 0.
(u_j are free variables, automatically nonneg by the constraints.)
[Entry 2]
For a constraint with budgeted uncertainty:
min_{xi in Budgeted} (a_bar + diag(a_hat) xi)^T x >= b,
where Budgeted = {xi : ||xi||_inf <= 1, ||xi||_1 <= Gamma}.
Reformulate as:
a_bar^T x - Gamma*p - sum_j q_j >= b,
with p >= 0, q_j >= 0,
p + q_j >= a_hat_j x_j, p + q_j >= -a_hat_j x_j, for each j.
[Entry 3]
For a constraint with polyhedral uncertainty:
min_{delta in Poly} (a_bar + delta)^T x >= b,
where Poly = {delta : D delta <= d, E delta = e}.
Reformulate using LP duality:
a_bar^T x - d^T lambda - e^T mu >= b,
D^T lambda + E^T mu = -x, lambda >= 0, mu free.
[Entry 4]
For a constraint with box uncertainty:
min_{xi in Box} (a_bar + diag(a_hat) xi)^T x >= b,
where Box = {xi : ||xi||_inf <= 1}.
Reformulate as:
a_bar^T x - sum_j w_j >= b,
with w_j >= 0, w_j >= a_hat_j x_j, w_j >= -a_hat_j x_j,
for each j where a_hat_j > 0.
[Entry 5]
For an objective with polyhedral uncertainty:
maximize min_{delta in Poly} (c_bar + delta)^T x,
where Poly = {delta : D delta <= d, E delta = e}.
Reformulate as:
maximize t, subject to
t <= c_bar^T x - d^T lambda - e^T mu,
D^T lambda + E^T mu = -x, lambda >= 0, mu free.
13


--- Page 27 ---
[Entry 6]
For a constraint with polyhedral uncertainty and max direction:
max_{delta in Poly} (a_bar + delta)^T x <= b,
where Poly = {delta : D delta <= d, E delta = e}.
Reformulate as:
a_bar^T x + d^T lambda + e^T mu <= b,
D^T lambda + E^T mu = x, lambda >= 0, mu free.
[Entry 7]
For a constraint with budgeted uncertainty and max direction:
max_{xi in Budgeted} (a_bar + diag(a_hat) xi)^T x <= b,
where Budgeted = {xi : ||xi||_inf <= 1, ||xi||_1 <= Gamma}.
Reformulate as:
a_bar^T x + Gamma*p + sum_j q_j <= b,
with p >= 0, q_j >= 0,
p + q_j >= a_hat_j x_j, p + q_j >= -a_hat_j x_j, for each j.
[Entry 8]
For an objective with polyhedral uncertainty:
minimize max_{delta in Poly} (c_bar + delta)^T x,
where Poly = {delta : M delta <= q, E delta = e}.
Reformulate as:
minimize c_bar^T x + q^T lambda + e^T mu,
subject to M^T lambda + E^T mu = x, lambda >= 0, mu free.
Each entry is a self-contained, directly applicable template for one specific combination of uncertainty
set type and problem component. There is no redundancy, no contradictory guidance, and no
implementation-specific noise. This tight, minimal structure is in stark contrast with the memories
learned by ACE and ReasoningBank, as shown below.
K.2
ACE’s Learned Memory (Representative Samples)
ACE accumulates 51 entries organized into “strategies”, “formulas/calculations”, and “code snippets”.
The strategy entries are verbose, covering overlapping reformulation scenarios with varying levels of
detail and occasional sign-convention inconsistencies. We show three representative entries below.
Listing 2: ACE: three representative strategy entries (abridged).
[strat-00019]
helpful=169
harmful=0
For robust optimization problems with multiple uncertain components
(objectives and constraints), adopt a modular approach:
(1) Identify each uncertain component and its uncertainty set type
(box, budget, polyhedral).
(2) For box uncertainty, check variable bounds: if all uncertain
variables are nonnegative, replace |x_j| with x_j; if nonpositive,
replace with -x_j; if mixed, use general absolute values and add
w_j with -w_j <= x_j <= w_j; for budget, introduce p_j and z with
p_j + z >= hat_j w_j; for polyhedral, dualize with lambda.
(3) Use distinct auxiliary variable names per component (e.g., prefix
‘obj_’, ‘con1_’) to avoid accidental coupling.
(4) Include all deterministic constraints and variable bounds unchanged.
[strat-00088]
helpful=44
harmful=3
For systematic dualization of any polyhedral robust component (objective
or constraint), follow this step-by-step Lagrangian approach:
(1) Determine the inner optimization direction: for a <= constraint,
inner is max; for a >= constraint, inner is min; ...
(2) Write the inner problem as an LP in P delta <= q (convert all
inequalities including box bounds).
(3) Form the Lagrangian by adding lambda^T(P delta - q) (lambda >= 0)
and mu^T(E delta - e) (mu unrestricted) ...
(4) Rearrange to isolate delta: Lagrangian = delta^T(x + P^T lambda +
E^T mu) - lambda^T q - mu^T e ...
14


--- Page 28 ---
... [48 more lines of derivation guidance with sign mnemonic tables] ...
Note: For inner max, stationarity is P^T lambda + E^T mu = x and
penalty is added. For inner min, stationarity is P^T lambda + E^T mu
= -x and penalty is subtracted. Always re-derive the Lagrangian when
uncertain. [Contradicted by strat-00105 which revises this rule.]
[calc-00089]
helpful=50
harmful=1
Correct dualization of polyhedral uncertainty set for all robust
component types:
(1) <= constraint (inner max): a_bar^T x + lambda^T q + mu^T e <= b,
P^T lambda + E^T mu = x, lambda >= 0, mu unrestricted.
(2) >= constraint (inner min): a_bar^T x - lambda^T q - mu^T e >= b,
P^T lambda + E^T mu = -x, lambda >= 0, mu unrestricted.
(3) Objective min-max: min c_bar^T x + lambda^T q + mu^T e,
s.t. P^T lambda + E^T mu = x.
(4) Objective max-min: max c_bar^T x - lambda^T q - mu^T e,
s.t. P^T lambda + E^T mu = -x.
... [Note: conflicts with calc-00030 and is partially corrected by
calc-00106; sign convention for max-min stationarity is listed
inconsistently across entries.] ...
In total, ACE contains 51 entries, many of which are redundant or mutually contradictory on sign con-
ventions (e.g., the max-min stationarity condition is stated differently in strat-00088, calc-00030,
calc-00089, and calc-00106). The cross-referencing burden and conflicting signals likely explain
why the LLM fails to extract reliable guidance on challenging problem types, contributing to the
accuracy drop on the Hard dataset.
K.3
ReasoningBank’s Learned Memory (Representative Samples)
ReasoningBank produces one multi-item memory record per training step (80 in total). Each record
contains 2–3 narrative-style memory items grounded in the specific training instance, including
concrete numerical values from that instance. We show two representative entries below.
Listing 3: ReasoningBank: two representative memory items.
[epoch1_step1 -- Memory Item 1]
Title: Worst-case direction for box uncertainty in minimization problems
Description: Under box uncertainty and nonneg variables, the worst-case
for minimization over uncertainty is achieved at the extreme point where
each parameter takes the opposite sign of its perturbation coefficient.
Content: For (a_i + b_i xi_i) x_i with xi_i in [-1,1] and x_i >= 0,
the minimum over xi_i occurs at xi_i = -sign(b_i). This rule applies
directly to both robust objectives of the form max min_xi and robust
constraints of the form min_xi (.) >= 0, all with nonnegative variables.
[epoch1_step2 -- Memory Item 1]
Title: Correct dual constraint sign for inner minimization over polyhedral set
Description: When dualizing an inner minimization problem over a
polyhedral uncertainty set in a max-min objective, the dual constraint
must match the negative of the coefficient vector.
Content: In the reformulation of max_x min_{delta: D delta <= d}
(c_bar + delta)^T x, the inner minimization min delta^T x has dual
max_{pi >= 0} -d^T pi subject to D^T pi = -x. A common error is to
write D^T pi = x, which corresponds to the dual of a maximization over
delta. Always derive the dual from the primal direction.
[epoch1_step2 -- Memory Item 3]
Title: Include all indices in dual variables for budgeted uncertainty
Description: When constructing the robust counterpart for box-budget
uncertainty, explicitly include dual variables for every index to
avoid subtle omissions.
Content: Even if some deviation coefficients hat_a_i are zero, the
dual constraint r_i + s >= hat_a_i x_i is still needed. For zero
15


--- Page 29 ---
deviation, the constraint simplifies to r_i + s >= 0, which can be
satisfied by r_i = 0 and s >= 0. Omitting such indices can lead to
an incomplete set of dual variables and potential errors.
While individual ReasoningBank entries are conceptually sound, the 80-entry corpus is heavily
redundant: the same LP-duality insight is restated dozens of times with minor phrasing variations
tied to specific training instances. The sheer volume forces the LLM to sift through and reconcile
overlapping guidance at inference time, offering no gain over a concise reference—consistent with
the accuracy results.
K.4
Expert Prompt
The Expert Prompt baseline provides a single fixed prompt containing a set of manually designed
reformulation rules that cover the five standard uncertainty set types (ellipsoidal, polyhedral, general
p-norm ball, 1-norm ball, ∞-norm ball). For reference, the core rules are as follows.
Listing 4: Expert Prompt: core reformulation rules (from Bertsimas and Margaritis [39]).
REFORMULATION RULES
Assume a robust constraint (a + P z)^T x <= b
for all z in Z.
- If Z is the Euclidean ball with radius r (||z||_2 <= r):
a^T x + r ||P^T x||_2 <= b.
- If Z is a polyhedral set (Z = {z : D z <= d}):
a^T x + d^T y <= b,
D^T y = P^T x,
y >= 0.
- If Z is a general p-norm ball with radius r (||z||_p <= r):
a^T x + r ||P^T x||_q <= b,
where 1/p + 1/q = 1
(q is the dual norm of p).
- If Z is a 1-norm ball with radius r (||z||_1 <= r):
a^T x + r ||x||_inf <= b.
- If Z is an inf-norm ball with radius r (||z||_inf <= r):
a^T x + r ||x||_1 <= b.
L
LLM Prompts
This section gives the verbatim prompts used for the three LLM agents in AutoREM. Dynamic inputs
inserted at runtime are marked with «PLACEHOLDER» notation.
L.1
Reformulator Prompt
You are a Reformulator.
Your task is to convert the input robust optimization problem into a tractable
robust counterpart -- a fully explicit deterministic formulation in which all
effects of uncertainty are resolved, with no shorthand operators remaining
(e.g., absolute values |*|, max/min, norms, or supremum expressions).
Use the experience memory to assist: match each minimal independent reformulation
unit (e.g., a single uncertain constraint or uncertain objective term) to the
most relevant experience if one exists, and apply that experience’s reformulation
approach; derive the counterpart from scratch for unmatched units.
All specific numeric values from the problem instance must be preserved and
appear explicitly in the final answer.
==================================================================
16


--- Page 30 ---
INPUT
==================================================================
=== PROBLEM ===
<<PROBLEM INPUT>>
=== REFORMULATION EXPERIENCE MEMORY ===
<<EXPERIENCE MEMORY>>
==================================================================
OUTPUT FORMAT
==================================================================
Your ENTIRE response MUST be a single valid JSON object -- nothing else.
* Do NOT include any text, commentary, or markdown outside the JSON.
* Do NOT wrap the JSON in code fences.
* The FIRST character of your response MUST be { and the LAST MUST be }.
"reasoning" MUST cover:
(a) For each reformulation unit: which experience was matched (or none) and why.
(b) The derivation process that transforms each unit into its tractable
robust counterpart.
"matched_experience_ids" MUST be a list of integer experience IDs matched to
reformulation units in (a). Use [] if no unit was matched.
"final_answer" MUST be a complete mathematical formulation of the tractable
robust counterpart in LaTeX within a \begin{align}...\end{align} environment,
with all numeric values from the problem instance appearing explicitly.
Return ONLY a RAW JSON object with the following structure:
{
"reasoning": <matching analysis and derivation process for each reformulation
unit>,
"matched_experience_ids": [<list of matched experience IDs as integers>],
"final_answer": <the tractable robust counterpart with numeric values in LaTeX>
}
L.2
Coder Prompt
You are a Coder.
Your task is to write Python code that uses the ‘gurobipy’ library to solve
the given optimization problem (a tractable robust counterpart).
Import gurobipy and create a Model for the given problem. Solve the model, and
then print the optimal objective value using print(model.ObjVal). If the model
is infeasible or unbounded, print "infeasible" or "unbounded" accordingly.
Note: In Gurobi, the default lower bound for variables is 0. Free variables
(unbounded) MUST be declared explicitly with a negative infinity lower bound
(e.g., lb=float(‘-inf’) or lb=-GRB.INFINITY).
==================================================================
INPUT
==================================================================
=== PROBLEM (ROBUST COUNTERPART) ===
<<ROBUST COUNTERPART INPUT>>
==================================================================
OUTPUT FORMAT
==================================================================
17


--- Page 31 ---
Your ENTIRE response MUST be a single valid JSON object -- nothing else.
* Do NOT include any text, commentary, or markdown outside the JSON.
* Do NOT wrap the JSON in code fences.
* The FIRST character of your response MUST be { and the LAST MUST be }.
Return ONLY a RAW JSON object with the following structure:
{
"reasoning": <step-by-step thinking on how to translate the formulation into
code>,
"final_answer": <the complete Python code>
}
L.3
Reflector Prompt
You are a Reflector.
Your task is to reflect on all training samples in the current step (both
correct and incorrect) and update the reformulation experience memory -- a
collection of experiences that each capture how a specific type of robust
optimization structure should be correctly reformulated into its tractable
robust counterpart. Use three operators: ‘add’, ‘update’, and ‘delete’.
Each experience_id MUST appear at most once across all operators.
The usage scores shown in the memory (success / failure counts) record how
often each experience has led to a correct or incorrect final answer when used.
Note: A problem may match multiple experiences (one per reformulation unit).
A failure does not imply every matched experience is wrong -- the root cause
may lie in only one of the matched experiences, while others are correct.
In your ‘reasoning’, analyze the root cause of each failure by examining the
Reformulator’s matched experience IDs, its reasoning, and the environment
feedback for all samples. Use the correct samples as reference to understand
what works, and focus your operator decisions on resolving the failures without
disrupting what is already correct. Consider all samples together and decide on
a unified set of memory operations. Then decide which operators to apply:
- ‘add’ a new experience if no suitable one exists in memory.
- ‘update’ an existing experience if its content is incorrect or misleading.
- ‘delete’ an experience if it is harmful.
==================================================================
INPUT
==================================================================
=== EXISTING REFORMULATION EXPERIENCE MEMORY ===
<<EXPERIENCE MEMORY>>
--- SAMPLE 1 (CORRECT / INCORRECT) ---
=== PROBLEM ===
<<PROBLEM INPUT>>
=== REFORMULATOR’S OUTPUT ===
<<REFORMULATOR OUTPUT>>
=== ENVIRONMENT FEEDBACK ===
<<SOLVER FEEDBACK>>
<<... ADDITIONAL SAMPLES ...>>
==================================================================
OUTPUT FORMAT
18


--- Page 32 ---
==================================================================
Your ENTIRE response MUST be a single valid JSON object -- nothing else.
* Do NOT include any text, commentary, or markdown outside the JSON.
* Do NOT wrap the JSON in code fences.
* The FIRST character of your response MUST be { and the LAST MUST be }.
Fields per operator:
- add:
{"operator": ‘add’, "experience_id": int, "content": "..."}
- update: {"operator": ‘update’, "experience_id": int, "content": "..."}
- delete: {"operator": ‘delete’, "experience_id": int}
Note on ‘add’ experience_id: assign max(existing experience ids) + 1 for the
first ‘add’, max(existing experience ids) + 2 for the second, and so on.
Each ‘add’ MUST use a distinct new ID.
Return ONLY a RAW JSON object with the following structure:
{
"reasoning": <step-by-step thinking covering: (1) failure diagnosis,
(2) correct reformulation derivation for the affected unit(s),
and (3) operator decisions>,
"final_answer": [
{ ... }
]
}
M
Additional Experiments: DeepSeek-V3.2 as Base LLM
Experimental setup. This section reports results on the Random dataset using DeepSeek-V3.2 (Chat
Mode) as the base LLM, following the same evaluation protocol as the main experiments. Both the
reformulator and the reflector in AutoREM use this base LLM, and offline adaptation is performed
on DeepSeek-V3.2 (Chat Mode) from scratch. Note that the Max Thinking baseline here refers to
DeepSeek-V3.2 with Thinking Mode. The evaluation is conducted on the Random dataset, using 32
instances in a single run.
Results and analysis. Table 7 reports the results. The base LLM achieves only 46.9% accuracy, a
drop of over 40 percentage points from the DeepSeek-V4-Flash result of 87.5% in Table 2, reflecting
V3.2’s considerably weaker capability on this algebraically demanding task. Baselines improve upon
the base LLM only partially. Max Thinking reaches 59.4%, Expert Prompt 68.8%, and ACE (the
strongest baseline) 71.9%, all far below their V4-Flash counterparts, indicating that a weaker base
LLM propagates degradation uniformly across all non-adaptive methods.
Table 7: Comparison of methods with DeepSeek-V3.2 as the base LLM.
Methods
Random
Accuracy/%↑
Output Tokens↓
Base LLM
46.9
4748
Max Thinking
59.4
13971
Expert Prompt
68.8
3734
ReasoningBank
53.1
2510
ACE
71.9
3184
AutoREM
96.9
2006
AutoREM achieves 96.9% accuracy, nearly identical to its V4-Flash result of 97.4%, and notably
surpasses the V4-Flash base LLM (87.5%) despite operating on a substantially weaker model. The
absolute gain over the V3.2 base LLM is 50.0%, far exceeding the ≈10% improvement observed on
V4-Flash. The margin over the best baseline (ACE, 71.9%) reaches 25.0%, compared to only 4.7
percentage points on V4-Flash. These results show that the improvement brought by AutoREM is far
greater when the base LLM is weaker, suggesting that the offline adaptation procedure is especially
effective in filling the larger gap left by a less capable model. AutoREM also achieves the lowest
19


--- Page 33 ---
output token count (2006 tokens), far below Max Thinking (13971 tokens), further showing that
AutoREM is both more accurate and more efficient than inference-time computation scaling.
Note on DeepSeek-V3.2. DeepSeek-V3.2 is the previous-generation flagship model from DeepSeek.
During our experiments, DeepSeek released a new model version and deprecated the V3.2 API,
making it impossible to continue experiments on V3.2. We therefore switched to the latest DeepSeek-
V4-Flash for our main experiments, which constitutes the primary results reported in the paper. The
V3.2 results above are included for reference, reflecting the initial stage of our experimental process.
20
