--- Page 1 ---
Bandwidth-Aware and Cost-Efficient Pipeline Parallel Scheduling in
Geo-Distributed LLM Training
Han Zhang, Jianchun Liu, Hongli Xu
Abstract—The rapid evolution of large language models
(LLMs) has made geographically distributed training necessary
due to GPU scarcity within a single cloud region. In such
cross-region settings, Pipeline Parallelism (PP) is communication-
efficient, yet scheduling PP remains challenging under hetero-
geneous inter-region bandwidth and regional electricity prices.
Existing schedulers are either delay-first, incurring high electric-
ity cost, or cost-first, relying on rigid resource allocation that
prolongs Job Completion Time (JCT). They are also ineffective
at optimizing execution order in multi-tenant environments,
where long-running and bandwidth-intensive jobs can cause
head-of-line (HoL) blocking and degrade overall performance.
To this end, we propose BACE-Pipe, a bandwidth-aware and
cost-efficient pipeline scheduling framework for LLM training
across geo-distributed clusters. BACE-Pipe first introduces a
dynamic job prioritization mechanism that optimizes execution
order by jointly considering job characteristics (e.g., computa-
tion time) and real-time network utilization. It then employs
a bandwidth-aware pathfinder to identify feasible cross-region
pipeline paths that satisfy communication constraints, thereby
preventing communication from stalling the pipeline. Among all
feasible paths, a cost-minimizing allocator determines the optimal
GPU placement strategy by preferentially assigning resources
to regions with lower electricity prices. Consequently, BACE-
Pipe mitigates HoL blocking, improves resource utilization, and
simultaneously reduces both JCT and total electricity cost.
Extensive simulations show that BACE-Pipe reduces average
JCT by 27.9%–64.7% and total electricity cost by 12.6%–30.6%
compared with state-of-the-art baselines.
Index Terms—Large Language Models, Pipeline Parallelism,
Geo-distributed Cloud, Cross-Region Scheduling
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid advancement of deep learning has led to the rise
of large language models (LLMs) with billions of parameters,
such as GPT-4 [1] and DeepSeek [2]. These models have
become central to a wide range of natural language and
multimodal applications, delivering remarkable capabilities in
language understanding, generation, and human-like interac-
tion [3], [4]. However, training such models is extremely
resource-intensive, often requiring thousands of GPUs running
for weeks [5]. For instance, MegaScale uses 1,024 NVIDIA
Ampere GPUs for nearly 20 days to train a 175-billion-
parameter model on 300 billion tokens [5]. Such enormous
training costs place large-scale model development beyond
the reach of many research institutions. As a result, cloud
providers such as Amazon Web Services [6] have increasingly
offered deep learning training (DLT) services, allowing users
to train models on distributed cloud infrastructures.
While cloud-based DLT services relieve users from man-
aging training infrastructure, their widespread adoption has
sharply increased GPU demand and intensified cloud resource
scarcity [7]. For instance, Strati et al. [8] report that a request
for eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs in a single Google Cloud region
often receives only one GPU or none at all. To avoid wide-area
communication overhead, existing cloud schedulers typically
bind each training job to a single region [9]. This region-
bound design reduces cross-region traffic, but it fragments the
global GPU pool into isolated regional clusters. Consequently,
a job can be delayed in a congested region while GPUs
remain idle in other regions, resulting in low global utiliza-
tion and prolonged Job Completion Time (JCT) [10]. This
motivates cross-region scheduling, which treats geographically
distributed clusters as a unified resource pool to better utilize
scarce GPUs and reduce job waiting time.
A recent empirical study [8] compares data parallelism
(DP) and pipeline parallelism (PP) for cross-region LLM
training. In DP, each worker maintains a replicated model and
processes a different subset of data, requiring periodic syn-
chronization of full model parameters or gradients [11]–[13].
Such synchronization often involves gigabytes of data and
becomes prohibitively expensive over bandwidth-constrained
wide-area networks (WANs). In contrast, PP partitions the
model into sequential stages across GPUs [14], and only
exchanges activations and gradients between adjacent stages
during forward and backward propagation [15], [16]. Since
these intermediate tensors are typically much smaller than full-
model synchronization traffic, PP incurs lower cross-region
communication overhead and has been shown to achieve
shorter training time than DP in geo-distributed settings [8].
Despite the advantage of PP in cross-region training,
scheduling PP jobs efficiently remains challenging because
it must jointly account for bandwidth heterogeneity and re-
gional electricity-price differences. First, inter-region band-
width varies significantly due to differences in network infras-
tructure, Internet service providers, and geographic distance.
According to Cisco’s 2018–2023 report [17], the average fixed
broadband bandwidth reached 87.7 Mbps in Central and East-
ern Europe by 2023, compared with 157.1 Mbps in the Asia-
Pacific region. In cross-region PP training, limited bandwidth
on bottleneck links can significantly increase communication
latency, leading to pipeline bubbles and longer JCT. For ex-
ample, consider training a Llama-3.1-70B model using GPUs
allocated from two distant regions. If each GPU requires
about 50 ms of computation per micro-batch, while the inter-
region bandwidth is only 200 Mbps, transferring activations
or gradients of about 30 MB would take roughly 1200 ms.
This communication delay is more than an order of magnitude
larger than the computation time, leaving GPUs idle for nearly
arXiv:2605.25375v1  [cs.DC]  25 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
96% of the training process. As a result, severe communica-
tion bottlenecks can degrade pipeline efficiency substantially,
causing up to a 24× increase in overall training time compared
with high-bandwidth intra-cluster environments.
Second, electricity prices also vary substantially across
regions. Given the long duration and massive scale of LLM
training, even moderate price differences can translate into
significant cost variation. For example, industrial electricity
rates [18] in the United Kingdom can reach $0.35/kWh,
whereas the average rates in the United States and China are
much lower, around $0.12/kWh and $0.08/kWh, respectively.
Allocating an entire training job within a high-cost region such
as the UK simplifies resource orchestration and avoids WAN
bottlenecks, but it can also incur excessive electricity cost. In
contrast, distributing pipeline stages across lower-cost regions,
such as the US and China, can significantly reduce the total
electricity bill. If the cross-region pipeline paths are carefully
designed to avoid bandwidth bottlenecks, such placement
can preserve the same training performance while reducing
electricity cost by approximately 65% to 77% in this example.
Therefore, cross-region multi-job scheduling fundamentally
requires jointly optimizing two competing objectives: minimiz-
ing electricity cost by exploiting regional price disparities, and
maintaining high pipeline efficiency through bandwidth-aware
path construction. However, existing scheduling frameworks
still cannot fully address these requirements simultaneously.
Existing schedulers [9], [19]–[29] can be broadly divided
into two categories: Delay-First (e.g., Crux [20] and CASSINI
[19]) and Cost-First (e.g., TanGo [9]). Delay-First schedulers
mainly aim to accelerate training by alleviating communication
contention among concurrent jobs. For example, Crux adopts
a priority-based traffic ordering, while CASSINI employs an
interleaved communication to mitigate inter-job communica-
tion contention. However, these approaches focus primarily
on training speed and can incur high electricity costs in
cross-region settings, as they do not account for regional
electricity price differences. In contrast, cost-first schedulers
such as TanGo [9] exploit regional price disparities to reduce
monetary cost, but they typically assume simplified job models
with fixed resource requirements, limiting their ability to
exploit residual GPUs and dynamically adjust placements for
PP jobs. Regardless of their optimization objectives, existing
frameworks also do not optimize execution order effectively
for concurrent LLM jobs. In multi-job settings, a large job
with long computation time and high bandwidth demand can
occupy many GPUs and scarce WAN links for an extended
period. This can cause severe head-of-line (HoL) blocking,
delaying subsequent jobs that could otherwise be completed
earlier and more efficiently, thereby increasing the average JCT
at the cluster level.
To address these limitations, we propose BACE-Pipe,
a Bandwidth-Aware and Cost-Efficient Pipeline scheduling
framework for geo-distributed LLM training, which reduces
average JCT and total electricity cost. BACE-Pipe consists of a
control plane and a data plane. The control plane is responsible
for centralized scheduling, including a State Collector, a Job
Parser, and a Job Scheduler. The State Collector continuously
monitors real-time cluster status, such as the available GPUs,
inter-region bandwidth, and regional electricity prices, while
the Job Parser profiles submitted jobs to extract execution
metadata (e.g., computation time and communication de-
mand). Based on these inputs, the Job Scheduler coordinates
multi-job execution through a three-stage decision process.
First, the scheduler determines the execution order of pend-
ing jobs by computing a weighted priority score for each
job. This score jointly captures computation intensity and
bandwidth sensitivity, with the weighting factor dynamically
adjusted according to real-time network utilization. As a result,
long-running or bandwidth-intensive jobs are less likely to
trigger HoL blocking under network contention. Second, once
a job is selected, the scheduler invokes a bandwidth-aware
Pathfinder to identify feasible cross-region pipeline paths. This
step considers available GPU capacity, inter-region link band-
width, and the job’s communication requirement, ensuring
that the resulting path can support efficient pipeline execu-
tion without severe communication bottlenecks. Third, given
the feasible path candidates, the scheduler applies a Cost-
Min Allocator to finalize GPU placement by preferentially
assigning resources in lower-cost regions. In this way, BACE-
Pipe reduces electricity cost while preserving the pipeline
efficiency guaranteed by the previous step. The data plane
consists of multiple GPU clusters distributed across regions
and executes training jobs according to the placement deci-
sions generated by the control plane. Consequently, BACE-
Pipe jointly optimizes execution order, pipeline path selection,
and GPU allocation, thereby improving resource utilization
while reducing both training time and electricity cost. The
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose BACE-Pipe, a scheduling framework for geo-
distributed LLM pipeline training that jointly optimizes
average JCT and total electricity cost.
• We design a dynamic job prioritization mechanism that
captures both computation intensity and bandwidth sen-
sitivity, and adapts to real-time network utilization to
mitigate HoL blocking in multi-job settings.
• We develop a joint resource provisioning strategy con-
sisting of a bandwidth-aware Pathfinder and a Cost-Min
Allocator, which together construct feasible cross-region
pipeline paths and place GPUs in lower-cost regions
while preserving pipeline efficiency.
• We conduct extensive simulations with six global regions,
diverse LLM models (14B–101B parameters), and real-
world electricity prices. Experimental results show that
BACE-Pipe achieves 27.9%-64.7% shorter average JCT
and 12.6%-30.6% lower total electricity cost compared
to state-of-the-art baselines.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. Related Works and Limitations
The proliferation of deep learning has led to a surge in train-
ing jobs submitted to cloud platforms, motivating extensive


--- Page 3 ---
research on efficient workload scheduling. According to their
primary optimization goals, existing efforts can be broadly
categorized into two classes.
Delay-First Schedulers [19]–[27] are designed with the
primary goal of minimizing JCT. A common approach is to
reduce resource contention, especially communication con-
tention, in multi-job environments. For instance, MiCS [22]
incorporates bandwidth heterogeneity into scheduling and re-
duces communication overhead by decreasing the number of
participants in each collective operation. Similarly, CASSINI
[19] and Muri [24] improve training efficiency through inter-
leaved job execution, which temporally staggers concurrent
jobs to alleviate contention and enable non-blocking training.
Other systems, such as StellaTrain [21], directly accelerate
training through cache-aware gradient compression and CPU-
based sparse optimization, thereby improving GPU utilization
and reducing time-to-accuracy. Although these approaches are
effective at reducing JCT, they generally assume uniform
electricity pricing. When deployed in geo-distributed envi-
ronments with substantial regional price variation, they can
therefore incur prohibitively high electricity costs despite their
performance benefits.
Cost-First Schedulers [9], [28], [29] incorporate regional
electricity price diversity to minimize electricity costs. For ex-
ample, TanGo [9] proposes a cost-aware job placement frame-
work for geo-distributed clouds, assigning jobs to lower-cost
regions while satisfying constraints such as latency require-
ments. However, existing cost-aware approaches often rely on
simplified job models that assume fixed resource requirements
per job (e.g., a fixed number of GPUs). Such rigidity prevents
schedulers from dynamically leveraging additional available
resources to accelerate training. More importantly, it does
not capture the distinctive communication pattern of PP-based
LLM training, where pipeline stages exchange activations and
gradients only along adjacent stages and are highly sensitive to
bottleneck links. As a result, a placement that is cost-effective
for a generic cloud task may still suffer from long JCT when
used for cross-region PP training.
Beyond the above performance-cost trade-off, existing
schedulers rarely optimize the execution order of concurrent
LLM jobs. Under a fixed FCFS order, a job that arrives slightly
earlier may occupy scarce GPUs or bottleneck inter-region
links for a long period, even when another pending job could
finish faster or use the current resources more efficiently. Such
queue-level coupling is particularly harmful in geo-distributed
PP training: a placement that is locally reasonable for one job
can fragment resources and reduce the feasible path choices
for subsequent jobs, thereby increasing average JCT and total
cost. This limitation motivates our proposed method to jointly
consider job prioritization, bandwidth-aware path construction,
and cost-min GPU allocation.
B. Motivation Example
To better illustrate the limitations of existing approaches and
motivate our design, we analyze a representative scheduling
scenario in geo-distributed infrastructures. In practice, public
1000Mbps
300Mbps
400Mbps
Region  A
Price: 0.230 $/kWh 
200Mbps
Region  C
Price: 0.191 $/kWh 
700Mbps
Region  B
Price: 0.222$/kWh 
300Mbps
Region  D
Price: 0.291$/kWh 
Fig. 1: Illustration of job placement strategies across geo-distributed
regions. The bottom shows the job placement decisions of each
strategy and the overall cost. The notation X(x/n) indicates that
x out of n total pipeline stages of Job X are allocated to the
corresponding region.
cloud providers mainly adopt two job placement strategies to
manage distributed resources [9]: Lowest-Delay-First (LDF),
which prioritizes performance by selecting regions with higher
computing capacity, and Lowest-Cost-First (LCF), which pri-
oritizes economic efficiency by allocating jobs to regions with
lower electricity prices. In this example, LCF and LDF follow
the first-come, first-served (FCFS) job order, whereas our
proposed method can reorder pending jobs according to their
priority scores before making placement decisions. This setting
allows us to isolate the impact of execution order in addition
to the impact of resource placement.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, a cloud provider manages four geo-
graphically dispersed regions (A, B, C, D) with varying GPU
capacities, bandwidth, and electricity costs. To ensure data
authenticity, the electricity prices for these regions are derived
from real-time statistics of four international cities via Glob-
alPetrolPrices [18]: Region A (4 GPUs, $0.230/kWh), Region
B (3 GPUs, $0.222/kWh), Region C (2 GPUs, $0.191/kWh),
and Region D (2 GPUs, $0.291/kWh). Two LLM training
jobs are waiting in the scheduling queue in FCFS order:
Job P (Qwen2.5-14B) followed by Job Q (Llama-3.1-70B),
both utilizing the Alpaca-52k dataset. We show the placement
decisions of LCF and LDF along with our solutions as follows.
• LCF: LCF preserves the FCFS order and first assigns Job
P to Region C (2 GPUs) because Region C offers the
lowest electricity price ($0.191/kWh) among all regions.
It then assigns Job Q to Region B (3 GPUs) among the
remaining feasible regions. Although LCF assigns Job P
to the lowest-cost region, the limited GPU capacity re-
stricts training parallelism. This results in a long average
JCT of 1.50 hours and a total electricity cost of $0.53.
• LDF: LDF also follows the FCFS order. It first as-
signs Job P to Region A, which possesses the largest
computing capacity (4 GPUs), and then assigns Job


--- Page 4 ---
Q to Region B (3 GPUs), which has the next largest
residual capacity. Although LDF achieves higher training
parallelism than LCF, this local choice ignores electricity
price variations and precludes exploiting high-bandwidth
inter-region paths, yielding an average JCT of 1.32 hours
and a high electricity cost of $0.56.
• Ours (FCFS): Maintaining the FCFS order, this strategy
schedules Job P first and aggregates resources across
Regions A and C (4 in A and 2 in C, denoted as P(4/6)
and P(2/6)) to leverage the high-bandwidth link (1000
Mbps). However, only Regions B and D remain for the
subsequent Job Q. Given the low inter-region bandwidth
(200 Mbps) between them, which is insufficient for the
large activation size of Job Q in a cross-region scenario,
Job Q is forced to run on a single region (Region B with
3 GPUs). Consequently, the average JCT is 1.27 hours
and the total electricity cost is $0.55.
• Ours (Reordered): This strategy explores reordering the
scheduling sequence by scheduling Job Q first and Job P
second. Under this reordered sequence, Job Q is allocated
across the high-bandwidth Regions A and C (Q(4/6)
and Q(2/6)) to support its large activation size, while
Job P is placed across Regions B and D (P(3/4) and
P(1/4)). Given that the small activation size of Job P
is highly tolerant of the 200 Mbps low bandwidth, both
jobs achieve a high degree of parallelism, leading to a
JCT of 0.75 hours and an electricity cost of $0.52.
These results demonstrate that existing industrial strategies
(LDF and LCF) are structurally limited in geo-distributed
clusters. More importantly, comparing the two cross-region
execution orders highlights that spatial pathfinding alone is
insufficient when throttled by a rigid queue order. Specifically,
while Ours (FCFS) achieves an average JCT of 1.27 hours
and a cost of $0.55, Ours (Reordered) dramatically reduces
the average JCT to 0.75 hours (a 40.9% reduction) and
lowers the cost to $0.52. This crucial observation inspires
us to design a dynamic, multi-dimensional priority scoring
mechanism that systematically optimizes job ordering instead
of relying on a rigid queue. These observations highlight
the practical importance of intelligent cross-region resource
aggregation. Motivated by this insight, we propose BACE-
Pipe, an efficient scheduling framework designed to minimize
JCT while reducing electricity cost.
C. System Overview
As illustrated in Fig. 2, BACE-Pipe is architected as a
decoupled control and data plane to coordinate geo-distributed
LLM training. Specifically, the data plane comprises heteroge-
neous GPU clusters geographically dispersed across multiple
regions, while the control plane drives end-to-end scheduling
decisions through a hierarchical, four-stage workflow: 1⃝The
State Collector periodically gathers dynamic system states,
including active inter-region network bandwidth, residual GPU
capacities, and regional electricity prices. 2⃝Concurrently,
the Job Parser profiles submitted training jobs to extract
execution metadata, such as activation sizes and per-GPU
Job 
Parser
State
Collector
Control Plane
User
Cluster
1
2
3
4
Job Scheduler





Dynamic
Priority
Cost-Min
Allocator
PathFinder
Data Plane
Fig. 2: The end-to-end workflow of BACE-Pipe, illustrating the
interaction between its core components.
computation times under different pipeline parallelism config-
urations. 3⃝Utilizing these inputs, the Job Scheduler executes
its three-stage scheduling sequence: it first scores pending
jobs to determine the optimal execution order, then invokes
a bandwidth-aware pathfinder to construct communication-
feasible cross-region pipeline paths, and finally applies a cost-
minimizing allocator to finalize GPU placements. 4⃝Based on
the resulting mapping, the control plane transparently deploys
the training jobs onto the data plane for execution. In this
way, tenants can submit LLM training jobs to cloud providers
without manually managing complex cross-region placements
or network bottlenecks. We detail the mathematical formula-
tion and algorithmic design of these scheduling components
in Section III-B.
III. PROBLEM DEFINITION AND ALGORITHM DESIGN
A. Problem Definition
To ensure clarity and consistency throughout the problem
formulation, the key notations used in our system model are
summarized in Table I.
System Model. We consider a geo-distributed cloud in-
frastructure consisting of K regions, denoted by R
=
{1, 2, . . . , K}. Each region r ∈R is characterized by its
GPU capacity Gr, and a regional electricity price Pr, which
represents the electricity cost per unit time. The available
inter-region bandwidth from region u to region v (u, v ∈R)
is denoted by Bu,v. Note that our model naturally supports
asymmetric network bandwidth (i.e., Bu,v can differ from
Bv,u), which reflects the routing and traffic asymmetries
typical of WANs.
The cloud hosts a set of N LLM training jobs, J
=
{1, 2, . . . , N}. Each job j ∈J is parallelized across Lj stages


--- Page 5 ---
TABLE I: Summary of Key Notations
Notation
Description
J , R
Set of training jobs and set of regions
Gr, Pr
GPU capacity and electricity price of region r
Bu,v
Available network bandwidth from region u to
v
Lj
Number of pipeline stages for job j
Mj
Number of micro-batches for job j
tj
comp(Lj)
Computation time for a micro-batch of job j
under the configuration of Lj GPUs
tj
comm(s)
Communication
time
between
adjacent
pipeline stages s and s + 1
Aj
Activation/gradient data size of job j
Sj
Decision variable: pipeline path and GPU al-
location for job j
nj,r
Number of GPUs allocated to job j in region
r
Ej
Active execution duration of job j
Wj
Queuing delay (waiting time) of job j
Tj, Cj
JCT and electricity cost for job j
bj
The minimum bandwidth requirement for job
j
(i.e., Lj GPUs are allocated to job j) using PP with Mj micro-
batches.
Let tj
comp(Lj) be the computation time for a micro-batch of
job j under the configuration of Lj GPUs, and tj
comm(s) be
the communication latency of job j between adjacent pipeline
stages s and s+1. To capture the pipeline efficiency, we define
the bottleneck stage duration ∆j as:
∆j = max

tj
comp(Lj), max
1≤s<Lj tj
comm(s)

Accordingly, the time required for a single training iteration
tj
iter(Lj) is formulated as:
tj
iter(Lj) = (
Lj−1
X
s=1
t(s,s+1)
comm
+Lj·tj
comp(Lj)+(Mj−1)∆j)·2 (1)
Fig. 3 illustrates the execution flow of a 4-stage pipeline
with Mj = 4 micro-batches. As shown, the total iteration time
tj
iter(4) consists of the pipeline fill-up latency and the steady-
state execution. The overall throughput is constrained by the
bottleneck stage duration ∆j. For brevity, only the forward
pass is visualized, as the backward pass is symmetric and
follows the same scheduling logic.
For a training job j requiring Ij total iterations, its active
execution duration, denoted as Ej, is given by:
Ej = Ij · tj
iter(Lj)
(2)
Due to the limited GPU and bandwidth capacity, a job may
wait in the scheduling queue before it can start execution.
Let Wj ≥0 denote the queuing delay (waiting time) of job j,
which is determined by the scheduling sequence. The true JCT,
denoted as Tj, is the total time elapsed from job submission
to its completion, formulated as:
Tj = Wj + Ej
(3)
Computation
Communication
1
Stage 1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Forwad Finish
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
(Link1,2)
(Link2,3)
(Link3,4)
Fig. 3: Schematic of GPipe pipeline execution (Forward pass with
Lj = 4 stages and Mj = 4 micro-batches). The backward pass is
omitted for clarity as it is symmetric to the forward pass.
Unlike execution delay, the electricity cost is incurred
continuously as long as the GPUs are actively allocated to the
job, including during pipeline bubbles, but no cost is incurred
while the job is waiting in the queue. Thus, the total electricity
cost Cj for job j is correctly calculated by integrating the
regional GPU prices over the active execution duration Ej:
Cj = Ej ·
X
r∈R
(nj,r · Pr)
(4)
Problem Formulation. Given the multi-region infrastruc-
ture and the presence of concurrent jobs, we formulate the
scheduling problem as follows. For each job j, the scheduler
determines a comprehensive allocation and placement strategy
Sj. The strategy Sj uniquely defines two aspects: (1) the
number of GPUs allocated in each region, denoted as nj,r, and
(2) the cross-region pipeline path (i.e., the ordered sequence
of regions hosting the pipeline stages). The overall schedul-
ing decision is represented by S = {S1, S2, . . . , SN}. The
scheduling decisions are subject to the following constraints:
(1) GPU Allocation Constraint: The total GPUs allocated
in region r cannot exceed its capacity Gr:
X
j∈J
nj,r ≤Gr,
∀r ∈R
(5)
(2) Regional Bandwidth Constraint: The total bandwidth
requirement of all jobs utilizing inter-region links must not
exceed the available capacity. To prevent communication from
becoming the pipeline bottleneck, the minimum bandwidth
requirement for job j is bj =
Aj
tj
comp(Lj), where Aj represents
the size of activations or gradients transmitted between trans-
former layers of job j.
Since the cross-region traffic routing is strictly determined
by the pipeline path defined in Sj, we introduce a deterministic
indicator function Iu→v(Sj). This function equals 1 if the
adjacent pipeline stages of job j span across region u and
region v under the strategy Sj, and 0 otherwise. Furthermore,
since jobs are executed over time according to their scheduled
order and do not all run concurrently, the network bandwidth
constraint is an instantaneous physical constraint. Let Jact(t)
be the set of active running jobs at any time t. Thus, the


--- Page 6 ---
bandwidth constraint is formulated as:
X
j∈Jact(t)
Iu→v(Sj) · bj ≤Bu,v,
∀u, v ∈R, u ̸= v, ∀t
(6)
Our dual objectives are to minimize the average JCT across
all jobs and reduce the total electricity cost:
min O1 = 1
N
X
j∈J
Tj
(7)
min O2 =
X
j∈J
Cj
(8)
s.t. (5)(6)
Since minimizing JCT and electricity cost are potentially
conflicting objectives, we model this as a heuristic joint-
optimization problem. We primarily prioritize JCT minimiza-
tion (O1) to ensure training performance, while opportunisti-
cally minimizing electricity costs (O2).
B. Algorithm Design
The optimization problem is a combinatorial challenge that
is fundamentally NP-hard. Specifically, it can be viewed as
a variation of the Multi-Dimensional Bin Packing Problem
compounded with Constrained Path Selection. The complex-
ity arises from three dimensions: (1) resource heterogeneity,
where jobs must be mapped to regions with varying GPU
capacities and electricity costs, (2) network constraints, where
the bandwidth requirement of all jobs utilizing inter-region
links must not exceed the available bandwidth, and (3) multi-
objective conflict, where minimizing JCT may conflict with
minimizing electricity costs. Consequently, finding a global
optimum for N jobs across K regions requires exploring
an exponential decision space, which is computationally pro-
hibitive for real-time scheduling in large-scale clusters.
To provide an efficient yet near-optimal solution, we pro-
pose BACE-Pipe, a Bandwidth-Aware and Cost-Efficient
Pipeline scheduling algorithm. BACE-Pipe operates in a three-
stage workflow to systematically decouple the scheduling
complexity. First, it employs a dynamic job prioritization
mechanism to determine the optimal scheduling sequence.
Second, for each scheduled job, it invokes a bandwidth-aware
pathfinder to construct feasible pipeline chains that satisfy
network constraints, aiming to aggregate as many distributed
GPU resources as possible across regions to accelerate training
process. Third, a cost-minimizing allocator is applied to final-
ize the GPU placement, greedily minimizing electricity costs.
The overall architecture is explicitly designed to prioritize
JCT performance while opportunistically reducing operational
expenses.
1) Dynamic Job Prioritization: In geo-distributed clusters
with heterogeneous resources, the scheduling sequence of
jobs significantly dictates the overall system efficiency. A
conventional FCFS policy often leads to suboptimal perfor-
mance due to the HoL blocking effect, where long-running,
compute-intensive LLM jobs monopolize GPUs and inter-
region bandwidth, forcing smaller, more efficient jobs to wait
indefinitely. To maximize global throughput and minimize
average JCT, BACE-Pipe employs an adaptive priority-based
strategy that balances computational workload with network
overhead.
Our prioritization logic is guided by two principles. First,
inspired by the Shortest Job First (SJF) theorem, prioritizing
jobs with lower computation intensity can significantly reduce
average JCT by clearing the queue of shorter tasks quickly.
Second, under network contention, it is advantageous to defer
bandwidth-intensive jobs, as they consume substantial inter-
region bandwidth. Scheduling such jobs early may saturate
critical inter-region links, restricting the placement flexibility
for subsequent jobs.
Resource Demand Metrics. To mathematically quantify
these two principles and evaluate the relative priority of
pending jobs, we characterize their resource profiles using two
normalized metrics:
• Computation Intensity (Ij): This metric represents a job’s
baseline workload. Let Ej(1) denote the theoretically
estimated execution duration of job j under a single-GPU
configuration. The normalized intensity is defined as:
Ij =
Ej(1)
maxk∈J Ek(1)
(9)
where a lower Ij indicates a shorter job that can be
completed rapidly to improve system-wide throughput.
• Bandwidth Sensitivity (Dj): To assess the pressure a job
exerts on the network, we define its bandwidth sensitivity
Dj as its minimum bandwidth requirement bj normalized
by the highest such requirement among all jobs in the
queue:
Dj =
bj
maxk∈J bk
(10)
Jobs with a high Dj are particularly sensitive to inter-
region link capacities and are more likely to cause severe
network congestion.
Adaptive Priority Scoring. To dynamically balance these
two metrics, BACE-Pipe integrates them into a unified priority
score using an adaptive weighting factor α ∈[0, 1]. This factor
intuitively represents the instantaneous network congestion
level of the cluster (i.e., the ratio of currently consumed inter-
region bandwidth to the aggregate bandwidth capacity). Let
E = {(u, v) | u, v ∈R, u ̸= v} denote the set of all directed
inter-region links, and Jact be the set of currently running
jobs. Using the indicator function Iu→v(Sj) and the minimum
bandwidth requirement bj for job j defined in Section III-A,
we formally define α as:
α =
P
(u,v)∈E
P
j∈Jact Iu→v(Sj) · bj
P
(u,v)∈E Bu,v
(11)
where the numerator sums the bandwidth dynamically oc-
cupied by the pipeline paths of all active jobs, and the
denominator is the total theoretical bandwidth capacity. The
scheduling priority for a pending job j is then formulated as:
Priorityj = (1 −α) · (1 −Ij) + α · (1 −Dj)
(12)
This adaptive mechanism allows BACE-Pipe to remain
robust under varying cluster states. When the network has high
headroom (α →0), the scheduler prioritizes jobs with lower
Ij to mitigate HoL blocking and reduce average JCT. As the


--- Page 7 ---
network nears saturation (α →1), the scheduler shifts its focus
to 1−Dj, favoring bandwidth-efficient jobs to prevent further
network degradation while maintaining steady progress on the
workload.
2) Bandwidth-Aware Multi-Region Pathfinder: Following
the dynamic prioritization described in Section III-B1, BACE-
Pipe schedules jobs sequentially according to their priority
scores. For each scheduled job j, the scheduler must determine
its concrete allocation plan, adhering to the constraints defined
in Section III-A.
Optimal GPU Count and Single-Region Placement. A
fundamental consideration is determining the optimal number
of GPUs to allocate for a job. While PP accelerates training
by distributing model layers, diminishing returns occur as the
number of GPUs increases. This is because the computational
load per GPU shrinks, potentially leading to lower utilization
and increased pipeline bubbles. Consequently, the computation
time tj
comp(k) does not scale perfectly inversely with the total
GPU count k.
BACE-Pipe defines the optimal GPU count K∗as the value
that minimizes the overall per-iteration time from Eq. (1):
K∗= arg min
k
titer(k).
(13)
Note that the GPU count and the pipeline path are deter-
mined by the scheduler prior to the start of training (i.e.,
at the scheduling boundary). Once a job is deployed, its PP
size remains fixed throughout its lifetime, which avoids the
significant checkpoint re-sharding and process re-initialization
overheads associated with dynamic runtime adjustments.
Detailed in Alg. 1, the allocation process first attempts this
single-region placement (Lines 1-4). If a region r has sufficient
GPU capacity (Gr ≥K∗), placing the entire job within region
r eliminates inter-region communication overhead. Among all
such feasible regions, the one with the lowest electricity price
Pr is selected. This placement is both JCT-optimal and cost-
optimal.
Multi-Region Path Construction. When no single region
can host all K∗GPUs, a multi-region pipeline becomes
necessary. The core challenge is to select and order a sequence
of regions such that their aggregate capacity approaches K∗,
while ensuring the inter-region links have sufficient bandwidth
to prevent pipeline stalls.
Our pathfinding strategy is inspired by the greedy expansion
of Prim’s algorithm. Starting from an initial region, the algo-
rithm iteratively appends a new region connected to the current
endpoint via the highest-bandwidth link (Line 10). This greedy
expansion prioritizes high-bandwidth connections to minimize
communication latency.
During expansion, the algorithm tracks the bottleneck band-
width bmin of the current path. The expansion continues only
if the estimated communication time does not exceed the
computation time for the accumulated GPU count (Lines 13-
17). The process terminates when the aggregated GPUs reach
K∗, or when no feasible region can be added.
Since the path quality heavily depends on the starting
region, the algorithm iterates over all regions as potential
Algorithm 1 Pathfinder: Bandwidth-Aware Path Construction
Input: Region set R, GPU capacities {Gr}, electricity prices
{Pr}, bandwidth matrix B, optimal GPU count K∗,
activation size A, computation times tcomp(·).
Output: Optimal pipeline path P∗and GPU allocation A∗.
// Phase 1: Single-Region Feasibility Check
1: Candidate set C ←{r ∈R | Gr ≥K∗}
2: if C ̸= ∅then
3:
r∗←arg minr∈C Pr
▷Select the cheapest region
4:
return P∗= [r∗], A∗= {nr∗= K∗}
// Phase 2: Multi-Region Path Expansion
5: Initialize gmax ←0, cmin ←∞
6: for each starting region rs ∈R do
7:
Path P ←[rs], tail node v ←rs, capacity g ←Grs
8:
Bottleneck bandwidth bmin ←∞
9:
while |P| < |R| and g < K∗do
10:
Find u /∈P that maximizes Bv,u with Gu > 0
11:
Tentative bottleneck btmp ←min(bmin, Bv,u)
12:
Tentative capacity g′ ←min(g + Gu, K∗)
13:
if A/btmp ≤tcomp(g′) then
14:
P ←P ∪[u], v ←u
15:
bmin ←btmp, g ←g′
16:
else
17:
break
18:
A ←COSTALLOCATOR(P, g)
▷Invoke Alg. 2
19:
Compute Average Cost: cavg ←1
g
P
r∈P A[r] · Pr
Update Global Best Solution:
20:
if g > gmax or (g = gmax and cavg < cmin) then
21:
P∗←P, A∗←A
22:
gmax ←g, cmin ←cavg
23: return P∗, A∗
seeds (Line 6). For each candidate path, it evaluates the
cost-efficiency by invoking the Cost-Min Allocator (Alg. 2).
Among all explored paths, the algorithm selects the one that
allocates the most GPUs (closest to K∗to minimize JCT). If
multiple paths yield the same GPU count, it breaks the tie by
selecting the one with the lowest average electricity cost.
3) Cost-Aware Resource Allocator: The Cost-Min Alloca-
tor (Alg. 2) is a crucial component that enables optimal GPU
allocation within a fixed path to further reduce electricity
expenses. Given a candidate path P and a target GPU count
g, it determines the specific GPU allocation A that minimizes
electricity costs under two constraints: (1) at least one GPU
must be assigned to each region in the path to maintain
pipeline continuity, and (2) the regional allocation cannot
exceed the available capacity Gr.
The algorithm first satisfies the connectivity constraint by
allocating exactly one GPU to each traversed region (Lines
1-3). The remaining surplus GPUs are then greedily allocated
to regions sorted by their electricity prices Pr, prioritizing
the cheapest regions until the surplus is depleted or capacities
are full (Lines 5-10). This exact distribution guarantees the
minimum electricity cost per training iteration for the given


--- Page 8 ---
Algorithm 2 Cost-Min Allocator
Input: Ordered region path P, total required GPUs g.
Output: GPU allocation mapping A = {nr}r∈P.
// Step 1: Ensure Pipeline Connectivity
1: for each region r ∈P do
2:
nr ←1
▷Assign at least 1 GPU per stage
3: Surplus GPUs grem ←g −|P|
// Step 2: Cost-Aware Surplus Distribution
4: Sort regions in P by price Pr in ascending order →Psorted
5: for each region r ∈Psorted do
6:
if grem = 0 then
7:
break
8:
nadd ←min(Gr −1, grem) ▷Fill up to GPU capacity
9:
nr ←nr + nadd
10:
grem ←grem −nadd
11: return A = {nr}r∈P
path.
Summary. BACE-Pipe provides an efficient and practical
solution for scheduling LLM training jobs in geo-distributed
clusters through its tightly coupled mechanisms: dynamic
job prioritization and bandwidth-aware pathfinding with cost-
minimizing allocation. By adaptively balancing computation
intensity and bandwidth sensitivity during job ordering, and
jointly optimizing pipeline performance and electricity costs
during resource aggregation, it effectively reduces both the
average JCT and total electricity costs. This design enables
BACE-Pipe to meet stringent resource constraints while adapt-
ing to the real-time scheduling demands of large-scale LLM
workloads.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
This section presents a rigorous evaluation of the BACE-
Pipe scheduler. We begin by detailing the experimental
setup, encompassing the geo-distributed simulation environ-
ment, workload characteristics, baseline methodologies, and
evaluation metrics. Subsequently, we analyze the primary
experimental results, complemented by sensitivity analysis,
workload analysis and ablation studies to validate the efficacy
of individual components within BACE-Pipe.
A. Experiment Settings
Simulation Environment. Drawing on the regional foot-
prints of leading cloud providers, we construct a geo-
distributed simulation environment spanning six major global
regions. As summarized in Table II, the simulation environ-
ment is configured with six regions selected from a diverse set
of global locations, reflecting the geographically distributed
nature of typical public cloud service providers. These loca-
tions are strategically chosen to represent major cloud hubs
across different continents, thereby capturing the heterogeneity
in inter-region bandwidth and fluctuating electricity prices
inherent in a worldwide infrastructure. To simulate resource
heterogeneity, the number of GPUs (Nvidia A6000) for each
region is selected from {16, 32, 64, 128} [37]. Electricity
prices are derived from real-world business electricity rates via
GlobalPetrolPrices [18]. For network topology, the bandwidth
for each region is randomly sampled from the range of
network bandwidths offered by AWS EC2 G4 [6] instances
(25-100 Gbps) to reflect typical cloud provider capabilities.
The inter-region link bandwidth between region i and j is
then modeled as the average of their respective bandwidth,
i.e., Bi,j = (Bi + Bj)/2.
Workload Configuration. Our workload consists of eight
LLM training jobs, covering a diverse range of architectures
from 14B to 101B parameters. The specific configurations are
detailed in Table III. To evaluate the efficacy of our algorithm
across diverse data scales and computational intensities, we
select three representative benchmark datasets: (1) Alpaca-52k
[38]: A high-quality instruction-following dataset containing
52,002 samples (approximately 50MB). This serves as a
small-scale benchmark to evaluate the algorithm’s overhead
and initial convergence in fine-tuning scenarios. (2) WikiText-
103 [39]: A standard language modeling dataset extracted
from Wikipedia articles, consisting of 1.81 million samples
(approximately 0.5GB). It represents a medium-scale workload
focused on long-form, structured text. (3) OpenWebText [40]:
An open-source recreation of the WebText corpus, comprising
8.01 million samples (approximately 38GB). This dataset
provides a large-scale, diverse web-based corpus. Each job
is randomly assigned one of these three datasets to ensure
diversity in data scale and workload characteristics.
Baseline Algorithms. To evaluate the effectiveness of
BACE-Pipe, we select four representative scheduling strategies
that span the spectrum of practical scheduling philosophies,
from single-region resource management to multi-region re-
source aggregation. This selection allows us to compare
BACE-Pipe against both industry-standard practices and state-
of-the-art cross-region adaptations:
• LCF [41] and LDF [41]: These serve as industrial
standard baselines. LCF is a cost-first scheduler that
allocates the entire job to a single region offering the
lowest electricity price, while LDF is a delay-first sched-
uler that prioritizes the region with the highest GPU
availability. They represent the conventional placement
approach commonly used in public clouds.
• Cross-Region LCF (CR-LCF) [9] and Cross-Region LDF
(CR-LDF) [42]: These represent comprehensive cross-
region extensions of the standard policies. CR-LCF
aggregates GPUs from regions sorted by ascending prices
to minimize cost, while CR-LDF starts with the largest
GPU-capacity region and greedily appends adjacent re-
gions with the highest bandwidth to minimize delay. By
including these, we evaluate whether existing strategies,
even when extended to support multi-region resource ag-
gregation, can handle the complexities of geo-distributed
LLM training.
By comparing against these four baselines, we can dis-
sect whether BACE-Pipe’s performance gains stem from its
superior pathfinding logic, its dynamic prioritization, or its


--- Page 9 ---
TABLE II: Configuration of Simulated Geo-distributed Regions
Region
Location
GPU Capacity
Elec. Price ($/kWh)
Bandwidth (Gbps)
EU-West
Ireland
64
0.251
50
US-East-2
New York, USA
64
0.156
90
EU-Central
Frankfurt, Germany
16
0.288
30
EA-East
Tokyo, Japan
128
0.191
70
SEA-South
Singapore
32
0.222
50
OC-East
Sydney, Australia
32
0.295
70
TABLE III: Model Configurations for LLM Training Jobs
Job ID
Model Architecture
Parameters
Transformer Layers
Hidden Size
Batch Size
1
FLM-101B [30]
101B
80
10240
128
2
Solar-Open-100B [31]
100B
48
4096
128
3
Llama-3.1-70B [32]
70B
80
8192
128
4
Falcon-40B [33]
40B
60
8192
256
5
Qwen2.5-32B [34]
32B
64
5120
256
6
Gemma-3-27B [35]
27B
62
5376
256
7
Ministral-3-14B [36]
14B
40
5120
512
8
Qwen2.5-14B [34]
14B
48
5120
512
cost-aware resource distribution. To ensure a fair comparison,
all evaluated schedulers impose a strict allocation cap of K∗
GPUs per job, where K∗is determined via Eq. (13). This
consistent upper bound ensures that performance variations
stem solely from the placement logic rather than differences
in the total resource scale.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate the schedulers based on
two primary performance indicators: (1) Average JCT: The
mean duration from job submission to the completion of
the training process across the entire workload. (2) Total
Electricity Cost: The cumulative expenditure on electricity
consumption for all GPUs utilized throughout the training
duration of all jobs.
B. Main Results and Performance Analysis
We first conduct an end-to-end performance evaluation to
assess BACE-Pipe’s efficacy in achieving the primary objec-
tive O1 (Average JCT) and secondary objective O2 (Cost). The
normalized results are summarized in Fig. 4.
Average JCT Analysis: As summarized in Fig. 4, BACE-
Pipe achieves the shortest average JCT, with the baselines
incurring 27.9% to 64.7% longer average JCT. Unlike FCFS-
based baselines, our dynamic prioritization mechanism effec-
tively balances computation intensity and bandwidth sensi-
tivity. By prioritizing shorter and more bandwidth-efficient
jobs during network congestion, BACE-Pipe maintains high
system throughput and prevents small jobs from being stalled
by resource-intensive ones. More importantly, compared to
single-region methods (LDF and LCF), BACE-Pipe breaks the
localized capacity limit by aggregating GPUs across regions,
accelerating training but also creating opportunities for reduc-
ing electricity costs. Compared to the existing cross-region
baselines (CR-LCF and CR-LDF), BACE-Pipe’s Pathfinder
employs a bottleneck-aware search. This ensures that every
cross-region expansion translates into a genuine speedup rather
BACE-Pipe
LDF
LCF
CR-LCF
CR-LDF
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.5
1.8
Normalized Value
Avg. JCT
Total Cost
Fig. 4: End-to-end performance comparison of BACE-Pipe and
baseline policies. The average JCT and total electricity cost are
normalized to BACE-Pipe.
than being throttled by suboptimal inter-region links, which the
greedy CR-baselines often overlook.
Electricity Cost Analysis: Regarding the secondary ob-
jective of electricity cost, BACE-Pipe maintains its superi-
ority, with the baselines incurring 12.6% to 30.6% higher
electricity costs. The cost-efficiency of BACE-Pipe stems
from our hierarchical optimization strategy. First, our priority-
based scheduling favors short-running jobs, enabling them to
complete quickly and avoid prolonged occupation of GPU
resources in low-price regions. Second, the Pathfinder com-
ponent identifies high-bandwidth inter-region routes, while
the Cost-Min Allocator strategically places workloads onto
regions with lower electricity rates (e.g., US-East-2), jointly
achieving cost savings. In contrast, cost-oriented baselines
(LCF and CR-LCF) focus entirely on selecting low-cost nodes,
while ignoring the critical factor of job training time charac-
teristics.
The Cross-Region Paradox and HoL Blocking: A striking


--- Page 10 ---
observation from Fig. 4 is the emergence of a Cross-Region
Paradox: the cross-region methods (CR-LCF and CR-LDF)
actually perform worse than even the single-region methods
(LCF and LDF), despite their ability to utilize more GPUs
per job. Specifically, CR-LDF and CR-LCF exhibit 28.8% and
13.1% higher average JCT than LDF.
This paradox suggests that simply increasing the GPU count
via multi-region expansion can be counterproductive in a
multi-job environment. The root cause is the HoL blocking
effect. In the CR-baselines, large-scale models (e.g., FLM-
101B) scheduled early in the queue aggressively acquire a vast
number of GPUs and monopolize critical inter-region links.
These time-consuming training jobs hold the resources for an
extended period, forcing numerous subsequent smaller jobs
into a state of starvation.
This finding underscores the indispensable value of BACE-
Pipe’s Dynamic Job Prioritization. By implementing an SJF-
inspired strategy with adaptive bandwidth awareness, BACE-
Pipe ensures that the cluster maintains high throughput by
clearing short and low-bandwidth jobs quickly. The ex-
perimental results confirm that in geo-distributed scenarios,
the synergy between a bandwidth-aware Pathfinder and a
throughput-oriented Priority strategy is the key to overcoming
the Cross-Region Paradox and achieving efficient hierarchical
optimization.
C. Sensitivity Analysis
To further verify the robustness of BACE-Pipe under dif-
ferent resource conditions, we conduct sensitivity tests by
varying bandwidth and GPU capacities. Although each exper-
iment includes three scaling factors, our discussion focuses on
the two endpoint settings because they expose the dominant
scheduling mechanisms most clearly. The intermediate settings
are retained in the figures for completeness and follow the
same trends with smaller magnitudes.
1) Impact of Bandwidth Fluctuations:
To evaluate the
resilience of BACE-Pipe against network variations, we
scale
the
default
inter-region
bandwidth
by
factors
of
{0.3×, 0.9×, 1.5×}, spanning severe congestion, mild band-
width reduction, and bandwidth-abundant environments. Fig. 5
summarizes the performance across all metrics, with val-
ues normalized to BACE-Pipe. We analyze the 0.3× and
1.5× endpoint cases in detail because they represent the
two qualitatively different regimes: bandwidth scarcity, where
cross-region expansion is heavily restricted, and bandwidth
abundance, where aggressive expansion can amplify HoL
blocking. The 0.9× case is close to the default configuration
and therefore mainly serves as an intermediate reference in
the figure.
Performance under Severe Congestion (0.3×): In this
regime, bandwidth becomes a critical bottleneck, forcing most
schedulers to adopt conservative placement strategies. For
average JCT, LDF and CR-LDF exhibit overheads of 10.7%
and 26.2%, respectively, compared to BACE-Pipe. The rel-
atively narrow gap stems from the fact that the Pathfinder
module consistently adheres to bandwidth constraints, which
0.3×
0.9×
1.5×
Bandwidth Scale
1.0
2.0
3.0
Avg. JCT
(a) Normalized Avg. JCT
0.3×
0.9×
1.5×
Bandwidth Scale
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Total Cost
(b) Normalized Total Cost
BACE-Pipe
LDF
LCF
CR-LCF
CR-LDF
Fig. 5: Sensitivity to inter-region bandwidth. The normalized average
JCT and total electricity cost are evaluated under different bandwidth
scaling factors.
0.5×
0.75×
1.25×
GPU Capacity Scale
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Avg. JCT
(a) Normalized Avg. JCT
0.5×
0.75×
1.25×
GPU Capacity Scale
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Total Cost
(b) Normalized Total Cost
BACE-Pipe
LDF
LCF
CR-LCF
CR-LDF
Fig. 6: Sensitivity to regional GPU capacity. The normalized average
JCT and total electricity cost are evaluated under different GPU
capacity scaling factors.
prevents BACE-Pipe from expanding into paths with bottle-
neck bandwidth and effectively makes its behavior converge
toward single-region placements. Regarding cost, BACE-Pipe
maintains a 29.2% to 34.9% advantage over all baselines. Al-
though cross-region allocation is rare under limited bandwidth,
BACE-Pipe can still reduce electricity costs by prioritizing
shorter jobs and selecting lower-price regions whenever feasi-
ble.
Performance under Bandwidth Abundance (1.5×): As
bandwidth headroom increases, we observe a counter-intuitive
"performance collapse" in the baselines, particularly for CR-
LDF. Its average JCT surges to 3.4× that of BACE-Pipe,
while its cost remains 19.0% higher. This behavior highlights
the HoL blocking effect exacerbated by resource-greedy ex-
pansion. With abundant bandwidth, the constraints in Eq. (6)
are more easily satisfied, encouraging CR-LDF to aggres-
sively aggregate GPUs for training jobs. Jobs requiring a
long training period then monopolize the cluster’s GPUs for
extended durations. BACE-Pipe avoids this problem through
its Dynamic Job Prioritization, which ensures that shorter jobs
are processed rapidly to maintain high system-wide turnover
while simultaneously exploiting the high-bandwidth environ-
ment. Regarding cost, BACE-Pipe continues to maintain the
highest economic efficiency. Despite the greater flexibility
in region selection afforded by increased bandwidth, the
baselines still incur 14.3% to 28.5% higher costs, failing to
translate resource abundance into cost-effective placements.
This consistent advantage indicates that BACE-Pipe can use
the expanded bandwidth to place jobs in more cost-effective
regions without compromising training speed.


--- Page 11 ---
Notably, the average JCT advantage of BACE-Pipe be-
comes substantially more pronounced under bandwidth abun-
dance (i.e., the 1.5× bandwidth setting) than under limited-
bandwidth regimes (i.e., severe congestion at 0.3× bandwidth
and mild bandwidth reduction at 0.9× bandwidth), with the
baselines incurring 42.9% to 240.3% longer average JCT. This
widening performance gap demonstrates the superior efficacy
of the Pathfinder module. As the search space expands with
higher bandwidth, our bottleneck-aware search remains adept
at identifying optimal paths that maximize global throughput.
2) Impact of Cluster GPU Capacity:
To examine the
system’s robustness under varying hardware availability, we
scale the total GPU capacity of each region by factors of
{0.5×, 0.75×, 1.25×}. This evaluates BACE-Pipe’s ability to
manage workloads ranging from extreme resource scarcity to
relative abundance. The normalized results for average JCT
and cost are detailed in Fig. 6. Similar to the bandwidth
study, we focus on the 0.5× and 1.25× endpoint cases
because they reveal the clearest contrast between resource
contention and resource abundance. The 0.75× case represents
moderate scarcity and follows the same qualitative trend as the
constrained case, so it is shown in the figure but not discussed
separately.
Performance under Constrained GPU Capacity (0.5×):
When the total GPU pool is halved, resource contention
reaches its peak. In this scenario, BACE-Pipe demonstrates its
most significant performance lead, with baselines exhibiting
average JCT inflations ranging from 32.2% to 69.9%. Specifi-
cally, the cross-region baselines (CR-LCF and CR-LDF) suffer
the most, with average JCT overheads nearing 70%. This
confirms that in highly constrained environments, the HoL
blocking effect becomes catastrophic. Without an effective
priority mechanism, a few large-scale model training jobs can
paralyze the limited resource pool. In terms of cost, BACE-
Pipe maintains the highest efficiency, while baselines incur
24.1% to 42.5% higher expenditures. It is worth noting that
the cost of LCF is even higher than that of LDF, which is
largely due to the scheduling order.
Performance under Abundant GPU Capacity (1.25×):
As the GPU capacity increases to 1.25×, the performance gap
between all methodologies begins to narrow. In this resource-
abundant regime, the average JCT of baselines relative to
BACE-Pipe drops to between 5.5% and 20.7%. Similarly, the
cost disparities also shrink to within 0.2% to 9.4%. This trend
is expected, as the abundance of GPU slots alleviates resource
contention. When compute resources are no longer the primary
bottleneck, the impact of the scheduling order (Priority) and
placement logic (pathfinding) naturally diminishes, leading to
a convergence in performance across different policies. This
indicates that when GPUs are plentiful, even less sophisticated
allocators can eventually find reasonably priced resources.
Nevertheless, BACE-Pipe still yields the lowest average JCT
and total electricity cost among the evaluated schedulers.
These results demonstrate that BACE-Pipe is particularly
valuable for geo-distributed clusters with constrained comput-
ing resources. By intelligently prioritizing workloads and find-
8
12
16
20
24
Number of Jobs
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Avg. JCT
(a) Normalized Avg. JCT
8
12
16
20
24
Number of Jobs
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Total Cost
(b) Normalized Total Cost
BACE-Pipe
LDF
LCF
CR-LCF
CR-LDF
Fig. 7: Sensitivity to workload intensity. The normalized average JCT
and total electricity cost are evaluated under different numbers of
jobs.
ing the best placements to prevent resource monopolization,
it significantly reduces both average JCT and electricity costs,
thereby improving cluster throughput and economic efficiency.
D. Impact of Workload Intensity
To evaluate the effectiveness of BACE-Pipe under varying
levels of system pressure, we scale the number of concurrent
LLM training jobs from 8 to 24. This experiment aims to as-
sess how the scheduler manages increasing resource contention
and whether it can maintain its lead as the cluster approaches
saturation. The results for average JCT and cost are illustrated
in Fig. 7.
As shown in our experimental data, BACE-Pipe consis-
tently maintains the lowest average JCT across all workload
intensities. However, we observe a narrowing performance
gap between BACE-Pipe and the baselines as the number
of jobs increases. For instance, the JCT overhead of CR-
LDF decreases from 64.7% at 8 jobs to 21.7% at 24 jobs.
This trend is a natural consequence of cluster saturation. As
the workload intensifies, the cluster’s GPU utilization reaches
near-maximum levels across all scheduling policies. In such a
"fully-loaded" state, most jobs are forced to wait in the queue
for a significant amount of time, which inherently reduces
the marginal benefits of optimized scheduling. Nevertheless,
the fact that BACE-Pipe still provides a 9.7% to 23.3% JCT
improvement even at 24 jobs is significant. It proves that
our priority-driven scheduling approach remains effective at
maintaining a more rational and efficient scheduling flow even
when resources are extremely tight.
A similar convergence trend is observed in the total elec-
tricity cost. When the workload increases to 20 or 24 jobs, the
cost advantage of BACE-Pipe over baselines such as CR-LCF
shrinks to nearly 1%. This is because under high workload
intensity, almost all GPUs in every region are kept in an
active state to process the backlog of jobs. Consequently, the
flexibility to choose low-cost regions is severely restricted.
When the demand for computing power meets or exceeds the
total supply, every available GPU must be utilized, causing
the average electricity price across all schedulers to con-
verge toward the cluster-wide mean. The experimental results
confirm that while the optimization space for cost naturally
diminishes under heavy loads, BACE-Pipe consistently stays
at the lower bound of electricity cost. The overall stability of


--- Page 12 ---
BACE-Pipe
w/o Priority
w/o Pathfinder
w/o Cost-Min
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Normalized Value
Avg. JCT
Total Cost
Fig. 8: Ablation study of BACE-Pipe. The results quantify the impact
of removing the Priority, Pathfinder, and Cost-Min components on
normalized average JCT and total electricity cost.
BACE-Pipe under high-intensity workloads demonstrates its
practical viability for large-scale, multi-tenant geo-distributed
training environments.
E. Ablation Study
To quantify the individual contribution of each core com-
ponent in BACE-Pipe, we conduct an ablation study by com-
paring the full version of BACE-Pipe against three stripped-
down variants: (1) w/o Priority: Replaces the dynamic priority
scoring with a standard FCFS strategy. (2) w/o Pathfinder:
Substitutes the Pathfinder module with CR-LDF, thereby elim-
inating the path selection component. (3) w/o Cost-Min:
Allocates GPUs uniformly across the selected path without
considering price variations, effectively removing the cost-
minimization strategy. The results, normalized to the full
BACE-Pipe, are illustrated in Fig. 8.
Impact of Pathfinder: As depicted in Fig. 8, the Pathfinder
module is the most critical component for achieving both
temporal and economic efficiency. Removing it results in a
52.5% surge in JCT and a 20.5% increase in total electricity
cost. The root cause is the restricted search space for optimal
pipeline paths. While all methods strictly adhere to the band-
width constraint to prevent communication bottlenecks, w/o
Pathfinder lacks the global topology awareness to aggregate a
larger number of GPUs (K∗) across multiple regions. Conse-
quently, jobs are forced to run at lower parallelism, leading to
the highest JCT inflation. Furthermore, without the ability to
verify a broader range of inter-region combinations, the sched-
uler is often confined to paths with higher electricity rates,
which explains the simultaneous spike in cost. This confirms
that a sophisticated path search strategy is the foundation for
maximizing resource aggregation within stringent networking
constraints.
Impact of Priority: The absence of the priority mech-
anism leads to a significant increase of 41.9% in average
JCT, whereas the cost only increases by 5.0%. This result
highlights that while the scheduling order is the primary
lever for mitigating HoL blocking and improving JCT, it is
largely decoupled from the GPU placement logic. Even with
suboptimal job sequencing, the remaining Pathfinder and Cost-
Min modules can still identify valid paths and prioritize lower-
cost regions for individual jobs, thereby maintaining relatively
stable economic efficiency.
Impact
of
Cost-Min
Allocator: Removing the cost-
optimization logic results in a 13.9% increase in total elec-
tricity cost. Interestingly, it also leads to a minor JCT increase
of 4.6%. This indicates that the Cost-Min Allocator provides
benefits beyond mere price reduction. Compared to uniform
allocation, our cost-aware strategy concentrates GPU resources
in a small set of low-cost regions. This strategic concentration
effectively reduces resource fragmentation across the cluster.
By packing workloads tightly into specific locations, the
remaining available GPUs in other regions are kept more con-
centrated and contiguous. This unfragmented pool of available
resources significantly facilitates the placement of subsequent
jobs, thereby slightly improving the overall scheduling effi-
ciency and reducing the average JCT. This effect is expected
to be more pronounced in clusters with a larger number of
regions, as uniform allocation would disperse resources across
more nodes, exacerbating fragmentation.
In conclusion, the ablation study demonstrates that BACE-
Pipe’s overall superiority relies on the indispensable synergy
of its three components. The Pathfinder is the fundamental en-
abler for efficient cross-region scaling, the Priority mechanism
is crucial for maintaining global throughput by preventing HoL
blocking, and the Cost-Min Allocator guarantees economic
efficiency while mitigating resource fragmentation.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented BACE-Pipe, an optimization
scheduler designed for efficient and cost-effective LLM train-
ing in geo-distributed environments. By addressing the intrin-
sic challenges of limited inter-region bandwidth and fluctuat-
ing electricity costs, BACE-Pipe provides a holistic solution
for large-scale multi-tenant clusters.
Our core contributions are three-fold. First, the Pathfinder
module employs a bottleneck-aware search strategy to identify
optimal inter-region pipeline paths, successfully breaking the
capacity limitations of single regions while strictly enforcing
a communication-computation balance. Second, we identified
and analyzed the "Cross-Region Paradox," where naive re-
source expansion leads to system-wide performance collapse.
To mitigate this, our Dynamic Job Prioritization module
incorporates an adaptive bandwidth-aware scoring mechanism
to eliminate HoL blocking and maximize job turnover. Finally,
the Cost-Min Allocator leverages regional price disparities to
minimize electricity expenditure, while its strategic workload
concentration inadvertently reduces resource fragmentation,
further facilitating efficient scheduling.
Experimental evaluations across diverse workload inten-
sities and network conditions demonstrate that BACE-Pipe
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art baselines. More im-
portantly, BACE-Pipe exhibits exceptional robustness under
high-load and bandwidth-constrained scenarios, maintaining
stable scheduling efficiency.


--- Page 13 ---
REFERENCES
[1] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat et al., “Gpt-4
technical report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[2] D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, R. Zhang, R. Xu, Q. Zhu, S. Ma,
P. Wang, X. Bi et al., “Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability
in llms via reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948,
2025.
[3] Z. Tang, X. Kang, Y. Yin, X. Pan, Y. Wang, X. He, Q. Wang, R. Zeng,
K. Zhao, S. Shi et al., “Fusionllm: A decentralized llm training system
on geo-distributed gpus with adaptive compression,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.12707, 2024.
[4] J. Huang, Y. Feng, F.-Q. Cui, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, X. Liu, J. Liu, F. Zhang,
and M. Li, “Identifying who you are no matter what you write through
abstracting handwriting style,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and
Secure Computing, 2026.
[5] Z. Jiang, H. Lin, Y. Zhong, Q. Huang, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Peng,
X. Li, C. Xie, S. Nong et al., “Megascale: Scaling large language model
training to more than 10,000 gpus,” in 21st USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24), 2024, pp.
745–760.
[6] “Aws
global
infrastructure,”
https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/
global-infrastructure/, accessed: April 27, 2025.
[7] Z. Yang, Z. Wu, M. Luo, W.-L. Chiang, R. Bhardwaj, W. Kwon,
S. Zhuang, F. S. Luan, G. Mittal, S. Shenker et al., “Skypilot: An
intercloud broker for sky computing,” in 20th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), 2023, pp.
437–455.
[8] F. Strati, P. Elvinger, T. Kerimoglu, and A. Klimovic, “Ml training with
cloud gpu shortages: Is cross-region the answer?” in Proceedings of the
4th Workshop on Machine Learning and Systems, 2024, pp. 107–116.
[9] L. Luo, G. Zhao, H. Xu, Z. Yu, and L. Xie, “Tango: A cost optimization
framework for tenant task placement in geo-distributed clouds,” in
IEEE INFOCOM 2023-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications.
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–10.
[10] G. Gao, M. Xiao, J. Wu, H. Huang, S. Wang, and G. Chen, “Auction-
based vm allocation for deadline-sensitive tasks in distributed edge
cloud,” IEEE Transactions on Services Computing, vol. 14, no. 6, pp.
1702–1716, 2021.
[11] J. Liu, R. Li, H. Xu, Q. Ma, J. Yan, and L. Huang, “Fedquad: Adaptive
layer-wise lora deployment and activation quantization for federated
fine-tuning,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2025.
[12] S. Shi, Z. Tang, X. Chu, C. Liu, W. Wang, and B. Li, “A quantitative
survey of communication optimizations in distributed deep learning,”
IEEE Network, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 230–237, 2020.
[13] Z. Tang, Y. Zhang, S. Shi, X. Tian, T. Liu, B. Han, and X. Chu, “Fed-
impro: Measuring and improving client update in federated learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07011, 2024.
[14] Y. Huang, Y. Cheng, A. Bapna, O. Firat, D. Chen, M. Chen, H. Lee,
J. Ngiam, Q. V. Le, Y. Wu et al., “Gpipe: Efficient training of giant neu-
ral networks using pipeline parallelism,” Advances in neural information
processing systems, vol. 32, 2019.
[15] R. Yan, Y. Jiang, W. Tao, X. Nie, B. Cui, and B. Yuan, “Flashflex:
Accommodating large language model training over heterogeneous
environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.01143, 2024.
[16] Q. Ma, X. Song, J. Zhou, H. Wang, Y. Liao, J. Liu, and H. Xu,
“Asynchronous federated learning over non-iid data via over-the-air
computation,” IEEE Transactions on Networking, 2025.
[17] Cisco, “Cisco annual internet report (2018-2023) white paper,” 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/
executive-perspectives/annual-internet-report/white-paper-c11-741490.
html
[18] “Globalpetrolprices,”
https://zh.globalpetrolprices.com/electricity_
prices, accessed: December 27, 2024.
[19] S. Rajasekaran, M. Ghobadi, and A. Akella, “Cassini: Network-aware
job scheduling in machine learning clusters,” in 21st USENIX Sym-
posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24),
2024, pp. 1403–1420.
[20] J. Cao, Y. Guan, K. Qian, J. Gao, W. Xiao, J. Dong, B. Fu, D. Cai, and
E. Zhai, “Crux: Gpu-efficient communication scheduling for deep learn-
ing training,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference,
2024, pp. 1–15.
[21] H. Lim, J. Ye, S. Abdu Jyothi, and D. Han, “Accelerating model
training in multi-cluster environments with consumer-grade gpus,” in
Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference, 2024, pp. 707–
720.
[22] Z. Zhang, S. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Chiu, G. Karypis, T. Chilimbi, M. Li,
and X. Jin, “Mics: near-linear scaling for training gigantic model on
public cloud,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.00119, 2022.
[23] W. Xiao, R. Bhardwaj, R. Ramjee, M. Sivathanu, N. Kwatra, Z. Han,
P. Patel, X. Peng, H. Zhao, Q. Zhang et al., “Gandiva: Introspective
cluster scheduling for deep learning,” in 13th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18), 2018, pp.
595–610.
[24] Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. Peng, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, and X. Jin, “Multi-resource
interleaving for deep learning training,” in Proceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2022 Conference, 2022, pp. 428–440.
[25] P. Zheng, R. Pan, T. Khan, S. Venkataraman, and A. Akella, “Shock-
wave: Fair and efficient cluster scheduling for dynamic adaptation in
machine learning,” in 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (NSDI 23), 2023, pp. 703–723.
[26] K. Mahajan, A. Balasubramanian, A. Singhvi, S. Venkataraman,
A. Akella, A. Phanishayee, and S. Chawla, “Themis: Fair and efficient
gpu cluster scheduling,” in 17th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 20), 2020, pp. 289–304.
[27] J. H. Park, G. Yun, M. Y. Chang, N. T. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. Choi,
S. H. Noh, and Y.-r. Choi, “Hetpipe: Enabling large dnn training on
(whimpy) heterogeneous gpu clusters through integration of pipelined
model parallelism and data parallelism,” in 2020 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 20), 2020, pp. 307–321.
[28] L. Rao, X. Liu, L. Xie, and W. Liu, “Minimizing electricity cost:
Optimization of distributed internet data centers in a multi-electricity-
market environment,” in 2010 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM.
IEEE,
2010, pp. 1–9.
[29] L. Gu, D. Zeng, A. Barnawi, S. Guo, and I. Stojmenovic, “Optimal
task placement with qos constraints in geo-distributed data centers using
dvfs,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 2049–2059,
2014.
[30] X. Li, Y. Yao, X. Jiang, X. Fang, X. Meng, S. Fan, P. Han, J. Li, L. Du,
B. Qin, Z. Zhang, A. Sun, and Y. Wang, “Flm-101b: An open llm and
how to train it with $100k budget,” 2023.
[31] S. Park, S. Kim, J. Cho, G. Gim et al., “Solar open technical
report,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.07022, 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://huggingface.co/papers/2601.07022
[32] A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri et al., “The llama 3 herd of
models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783
[33] G. Penedo, Q. Malartic, D. Hesslow, R. Cojocaru, A. Cappelli,
H. Alobeidli, B. Pannier, E. Almazrouei, and J. Launay, “The
RefinedWeb dataset for Falcon LLM: outperforming curated corpora
with web data, and web data only,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.01116,
2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.01116
[34] Q. Team, “Qwen2.5: A party of foundation models,” September 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://qwenlm.github.io/blog/qwen2.5/
[35] G. Team, A. Kamath, J. Ferret et al., “Gemma 3 technical report,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.19786
[36] A. H. Liu, K. Khandelwal, S. Subramanian et al., “Ministral 3,” 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.08584
[37] Y. Huo, J. Liu, H. Xu, Z. Ma, S. Wang, and L. Huang, “Mitigating
catastrophic forgetting with adaptive transformer block expansion in
federated fine-tuning,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2026.
[38] R. Taori, I. Gulrajani, T. Zhang, Y. Dubois, X. Li, C. Guestrin, P. Liang,
and T. B. Hashimoto, “Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama
model,” https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_alpaca, 2023.
[39] S. Merity, C. Xiong, J. Bradbury, and R. Socher, “Pointer sentinel
mixture models,” 2016.
[40] A. Gokaslan, V. Cohen, E. Pavlick, and S. Tellex, “Openwebtext corpus,”
http://Skylion007.github.io/OpenWebTextCorpus, 2019.
[41] I. Pelle, J. Czentye, J. Dóka, and B. Sonkoly, “Towards latency sensitive
cloud native applications: A performance study on aws,” in 2019 IEEE
12th International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), 2019,
pp. 272–280.
[42] B. Yuan, Y. He, J. Davis, T. Zhang, T. Dao, B. Chen, P. S. Liang,
C. Re, and C. Zhang, “Decentralized training of foundation models in
heterogeneous environments,” Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 25 464–25 477, 2022.
