--- Page 1 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
Yoichi Ishibashi 1 Taro Yano 1 Masafumi Oyamada 1
Abstract
AlphaEvolve and FunSearch have demonstrated
the potential of combining large language models
(LLMs) with evolutionary search for automated
algorithm discovery. However, discovery success
is shaped not only by model capability but also
significantly by the design of the execution infras-
tructure, i.e., the harness. This paper investigates
effective harness design through three questions:
under a fixed token budget, is it better to produce
many algorithms with brief thought or fewer al-
gorithms with deeper thought? How should the
harness handle evaluation hacks, where gener-
ated programs exploit the scoring function? And
how can agents that require full filesystem access
execute safely in parallel? Using Vesper, an al-
gorithm discovery framework that incorporates
harness improvements addressing these questions,
we evaluate on Circle Packing under the same
token budget. Interestingly, generating fewer al-
gorithms while thinking more deeply about each
one achieved higher scores. That is, scaling the
quality of each individual is more budget-efficient
than scaling the number of evolutionary gener-
ations. Surprisingly, more capable models pro-
duced evaluation hacks at higher rates, making
hack detection increasingly necessary as models
scale.
1. Introduction
Scientific and engineering progress is often driven by the
discovery of superior algorithms. Yet such algorithm design
still relies heavily on manual effort by domain experts, and
AI-driven automation of discovery is beginning to change
this landscape (Zheng et al., 2025). In particular, the ap-
proach of using large language models (LLMs) as muta-
tion operators in evolutionary search, iteratively creating
algorithms that surpass human designs through cycles with
an automatic evaluator, has achieved remarkable results.
1NEC Corporation.
Correspondence to: Yoichi Ishibashi
<yoichi-ishibashi@nec.com>.
Preprint. May 18, 2026.
FunSearch evolved function-level algorithms with LLMs,
generating mathematical constructions surpassing the best
known results for the cap set problem (Romera-Paredes
et al., 2024). Beyond improving algorithms alone, alter-
nately improving both the generated algorithms and the
generating model itself through reinforcement learning has
also been explored (Ishibashi et al., 2024). More recently,
AlphaEvolve (Novikov et al., 2025) expanded the scope
of improvement to entire codebases and improved matrix
multiplication algorithms that had remained unimproved
for over 50 years. This technology is applicable to any do-
main where algorithms play a central role, including route
optimization, chip placement design, and molecular gen-
eration in drug discovery, and may replace manual expert
optimization.
What determines the success of algorithm discovery is not
agent capability alone; the design of the agent infrastructure,
i.e., the harness, has a substantial impact. The harness refers
to the entire execution infrastructure that guides agents to-
ward discovery, encompassing prompt construction, data
design, evaluation pipelines, and parallel agent management.
AlphaEvolve’s success is supported not only by Gemini’s
model capability but also by the harness design as a whole,
including randomized prompt switching, evaluation cas-
cades, and an evolutionary database combining MAP-Elites
with island-based population models.
Examining existing open-source implementations from this
harness perspective reveals substantial room for improve-
ment. Representative implementations such as OpenEvolve1
and CodeEvolve (Assumpc¸˜ao et al., 2025) all use LLMs as
stateless code generators through single-shot API calls, with-
out leveraging the capabilities of coding agents that have
rapidly advanced since 2025. Just as coding agents such
as Claude Code2 and Codex CLI3 have transformed pro-
ductivity in software development, differences in harness
implementation may fundamentally change the practicality
of algorithm discovery.
From these observations, we identify four practical chal-
1https://github.com/
algorithmicsuperintelligence/openevolve
2https://github.com/anthropics/
claude-code
3https://github.com/openai/codex
1
arXiv:2605.15221v1  [cs.SE]  13 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
lenges in existing harnesses. First, LLMs remain stateless
code generators, without leveraging autonomous reasoning
such as analyzing evaluation results, referencing the entire
codebase, or planning multi-step corrections. Second, there
is no mechanism to detect “evaluation hacking” (Amodei
et al., 2016), where generated algorithms exploit flaws in
the evaluation function rather than genuinely solving the
problem. Third, running multiple search agents in parallel
on a shared filesystem risks file conflicts and race condi-
tions that compromise reproducibility. Fourth, each iteration
starts from a blank slate, without systematically leveraging
knowledge of successes and failures from past trials.
Beyond these challenges, a fundamental question about
search strategy remains unanswered. Algorithm discovery
is inherently a search problem whose success scales with the
budget invested. The practical constraint is that every search
step costs tokens, so token efficiency directly determines
the scalability of discovery. Under a fixed token budget, is
it better to produce many algorithms with brief thought, or
fewer algorithms with deeper thought? Whether investing
more thought per algorithm at the expense of fewer gen-
erations improves overall discovery performance requires
empirical verification.
This paper proposes Vesper, a harness for LLM-driven algo-
rithm discovery that integrates several candidate improve-
ments, including coding agent integration (§ 4.2), evaluation
hack detection (§ 4.3), and Git worktree isolation (§ 4.5),
and empirically investigates which components matter and
why. Interestingly, scaling the quality of each individual
proved more budget-efficient than scaling the number of
evolutionary generations (§ 5). We also find, surprisingly,
that more capable frontier models such as GPT-5.2 are more
prone to evaluation hacking.
2. Related Work
LLM-Driven
Algorithm
Discovery
The
dominant
paradigm in LLM-driven algorithm discovery shares the
common approach of incorporating LLMs into evolutionary
operators as stateless generators that return single-shot code
completions in response to prompts. FunSearch (Romera-
Paredes et al., 2024) surpassed the best known results on the
cap set problem, and AlphaEvolve (Novikov et al., 2025) im-
proved matrix multiplication algorithms that had remained
unimproved for over 50 years. Numerous specialized frame-
works have also emerged, including EoH (Liu et al., 2024),
ReEvo (Ye et al., 2024), LLaMEA (van Stein & B¨ack, 2025),
and AEL (Liu et al., 2023). In open source, OpenEvolve
reproduces AlphaEvolve’s workflow, followed by CodeE-
volve (Assumpc¸˜ao et al., 2025) and DeepEvolve (Liu et al.,
2025).
Coding Agents
Since 2025, command-line coding agents
that operate autonomously have emerged in rapid succes-
sion, including Codex CLI, Claude Code, Gemini CLI4,
and Qwen Code5. These agents complete repository-wide
reading, file editing, test execution, and debugging within
a single session, with SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024)
driving their development as an evaluation platform. Un-
like single-shot API calls, coding agents can autonomously
perform multi-step reasoning, including analyzing existing
code, hypothesis testing based on execution results, and iter-
ative error correction, giving them fundamentally different
potential as evolutionary operators. Vesper places the use of
coding agents, rather than stateless API calls, at the center
of its harness design.
Agent Harnesses
LLM agent performance is shaped not
only by the model but also substantially by the orchestration
layer surrounding it, i.e., the harness. A harness refers to
the entire runtime infrastructure including prompt construc-
tion, tool execution, context management, safety controls,
and session persistence (Pan et al., 2026). Recent empir-
ical studies have shown that harness differences can dra-
matically change performance even with the same model.
Meta-Harness (Lee et al., 2026) automatically searched over
harness code while keeping model weights fixed, outper-
forming the best hand-designed harness by 7.7 points on
text classification and achieving top rankings among agents
using the same base model on TerminalBench-2. In the
coding agent domain as well, differences in harness-level
design such as prompt design, tool selection strategies, and
context management is more decisive than the choice of
base model (Bui, 2026). A similar structure is observed in
algorithm discovery. AlphaEvolve’s (Novikov et al., 2025)
success is supported not only by Gemini’s model capability
but by a harness design that includes evaluation cascades,
randomized prompt switching, and an evolutionary database
combining MAP-Elites with island-based population mod-
els. This paper focuses on improving the harness.
3. Overview of LLM-Driven Algorithm
Discovery
Background
To reproduce and extend these results, one
must understand the common pipeline structure. This sec-
tion provides an overview of the typical pipeline shared by
AlphaEvolve and OpenEvolve.
Algorithm Discovery Pipeline
A typical pipeline follows
a loop structure consisting of five stages. First, parent
selection chooses one or more parent programs from the
4https://github.com/google-gemini/
gemini-cli
5https://github.com/QwenLM/qwen-code
2


--- Page 3 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
Select a parent
Sample parent 
branches (programs) 
from the Program DB
Set up environment
Create an isolated 
worktree.
Improve programs
Autonomous coding 
agent improves 
programs
Evaluate algorithm
Run candidates 
and measure 
performance.
Detect hacks
A secondary agent 
filters evaluation 
exploits.
New or improved harness components
Repeat evolutionary loop until fixed token budget exhausted
Update Program DB
Store valid branches 
with scores and 
metadata.
Vesper creates a Git worktree, giving each 
agent an isolated copy of the full repository 
for parallel execution.
Vesper uses a coding agent with access to 
the Program DB, investing more budget per 
iteration to produce higher-quality offspring.
Vesper uses a secondary agent to review 
candidate branch (programs) and reject 
those that exploit the evaluation function.
Vesper stores valid branch (programs) with 
scores, summary, and improvement 
ideas to the Program DB, enabling future 
agents to learn from past trials.
Many tokens & Higher-quality
Single  
API-call
Few tokens & Lower-quality
Coding  
Agent 
(Vesper)
Existing harness components
Worktree 
(Vesper)
w/o  
Worktree
branch-a
branch-b
branch-c
Parent 
branch
Parent 
branch
branch-a branch-b branch-c
checkout
checkout
return 100
Update 
DB
{ 
  ”branch”: a2fb3d631, 
  ”algorithm_overview”: “xxx”, 
  ”score”: 2.51234, 
  ”diff_from_parent”: “xxx”, 
  “ideas”: [ 
    {“name”: “idea1”,  
     “description”: “xxx”}, 
    {“name”: “idea2”,  
     “description”: “xxx”}, 
  ] 
}
Figure 1. Vesper’s evolutionary loop (top) and details of each harness improvement (bottom). Dotted borders indicate components shared
with existing pipelines; solid borders indicate harness improvements introduced by Vesper. The following cycle repeats until the token
budget is exhausted. (1) Select a parent: sample a parent program (Git branch) from the program database. (2) Set up environment: create
a Git worktree from the parent branch, providing each agent with an isolated execution environment (§ 4.5). (3) Improve programs: a
coding agent autonomously improves code while referencing the program database (§ 4.2, § 4.4). (4) Evaluate algorithm: compute the
score of the improved algorithm. (5) Detect hacks: a secondary agent reviews candidate programs and rejects those that exploit the
evaluation function (§ 4.3). (6) Update Program DB: store validated programs with scores, summaries, and improvement ideas in the
program database. The accumulated trial history enables subsequent agents to analyze which approaches succeeded and which failed,
informing their improvement decisions (§ 4.4).
population pool based on scores. Next, prompt construc-
tion assembles the selected parent’s source code, problem
description, and improvement instructions into an input
prompt for the LLM. In the subsequent LLM call stage,
the constructed prompt is sent to the LLM API, obtaining a
code diff, i.e., a mutation, in a single API call. The result-
ing candidate is executed by an automatic evaluator in the
evaluation stage, where a score is computed. Finally, in
the DB storage stage, the score and program are saved to
a database in preparation for the next cycle’s parent selec-
tion. By repeating this cycle hundreds to thousands of times,
increasingly high-scoring candidates accumulate from an
initial seed program, ultimately leading to the discovery of
algorithms surpassing human design.
Diversity Maintenance via Island Model
Running this
cycle with a single population can cause parent selection
to converge prematurely around an early high-scoring so-
lution, leaving other promising regions of the search space
unexplored. To address this premature convergence, Al-
phaEvolve and OpenEvolve adopt the island model. The
island model maintains N independent population pools,
running the pipeline independently on each island while pe-
riodically migrating top-scoring solutions between islands.
This allows each island to pursue different search direc-
tions in parallel while propagating promising discoveries
across the entire population, maintaining a balance between
exploration and exploitation.
4. Vesper
4.1. Limitations of Existing Pipelines and Design
Principles
Limitations
of
Existing
Pipelines
The
pipeline
overviewed in § 3 has four areas open for improvement
from a harness perspective. First, LLM calls are single-shot
and stateless, preventing multi-step reasoning such as
diagnosing the cause of a low score and re-debugging the
code. Second, there is no verification mechanism after
the evaluation stage, allowing hack solutions that exploit
evaluation function flaws to be stored in the database and
contaminate parent selection. Third, when running multiple
LLM calls in parallel, conflicts on a shared filesystem
can compromise reproducibility and stability.
Fourth,
each iteration starts from a blank slate without systematic
utilization of knowledge about which approaches succeeded
and which failed in past trials.
Vesper’s Architecture
Vesper integrates improvements
addressing each of these four limitations into a single evo-
lutionary loop (Figure 1). Vesper treats the target of evo-
lution as a repository, building an evolutionary tree with
Git branches as units. In the initial state, only a single seed
branch containing the algorithm and evaluation code is reg-
istered in the program database. In each cycle, a parent
branch is first sampled from the program database, and a
Git worktree is created from that branch to construct an iso-
lated execution environment (§ 4.5). A coding agent is then
launched within the worktree, where it references the pro-
3


--- Page 4 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
gram database to analyze past success and failure patterns
(§ 4.4) while autonomously performing code improvement
and testing (§ 4.2). After completion, the evaluator com-
putes a score, and a hack detection step verifies candidate
integrity (§ 4.3). Candidate branches passing verification
are added to the program database. Vesper maintains di-
versity solely through the island model, without the MAP-
Elites component used in AlphaEvolve’s database (Mouret
& Clune, 2015).
4.2. Coding Agent Integration
Limitations of Stateless Generation
In representative al-
gorithm discovery pipelines such as OpenEvolve, a prompt
is sent to the LLM API and a code diff is received as a single
response. While it is possible to include previous evaluation
results and error information in the next iteration’s prompt,
that constitutes a separate iteration; achieving a multi-step
debugging loop where code is executed, errors are observed,
and corrections are attempted within the same session re-
quires harness modifications. For example, if a runtime
exception occurs in generated code, it is not possible to in-
spect the error and apply repeated fixes on the spot; a single
failed generation wastes the entire iteration.
Quality vs. Quantity Trade-off
Evolutionary search ad-
mits two strategies: spend fewer tokens per iteration to
generate many candidates and rely on generational turnover,
or invest more tokens per iteration to produce fewer but
higher-quality candidates. Stateless API calls correspond to
the former: they are cheap but lack self-correction, placing
an upper bound on candidate quality. Vesper adopts the
latter strategy by replacing this step with autonomous cod-
ing agents. Agents consume several times more tokens per
algorithm due to repository reading, multi-step reasoning,
test execution, and debugging, but substantially improve
candidate quality through self-correction within a single
session. This quality-versus-quantity trade-off is the central
question of this paper and is empirically examined in § 5.
Autonomous Operation and Structured Output
Each
agent operates as an autonomous coding session. It reads
source files, runs evaluations, inspects errors, and references
related modules on its own, submitting candidate solutions
through multiple tool-use turns. The improvement strategy,
including which functions to modify and how, is determined
by the agent itself, free from the single-function mutation
constraints typical of prompt-based systems. Agent outputs
are recorded in a structured format containing not only code
changes but also descriptions of attempted approaches and
rationale for score improvements, serving as input to the
DB observation mechanism (§ 4.4).
4.3. Evaluation Hack Detection
Risk of Evaluation Hacking
Reward hacking, where
agents exploit the reward function itself rather than the
intended task, is widely known in reinforcement learn-
ing (Amodei et al., 2016; Skalse et al., 2022). In LLM-
driven algorithm discovery, there is a risk that generated
programs achieve high scores through hardcoding expected
outputs or exploiting boundary conditions of the scoring
function, and this risk becomes particularly acute when
agents are powerful enough to inspect and modify the evalu-
ation infrastructure. In the evolutionary setting, if a single
hack solution with an inflated score dominates parent selec-
tion, degenerate strategies propagate throughout the popula-
tion, rendering subsequent search effectively meaningless.
No existing framework incorporates a mechanism to detect
this problem.
Hack Detection Mechanism
Vesper addresses this prob-
lem by executing a secondary agent-based verification pass
after each candidate passes evaluation. An independent
agent session inspects the candidate’s implementation code
and determines whether the solution genuinely addresses
the algorithmic problem or exploits the evaluation mecha-
nism. Candidates flagged as hacks are excluded from the
parent selection pool, preventing degenerate solutions from
spreading through the evolutionary lineage.
4.4. DB Observation
Inefficiency of Stateless Search
In existing pipelines,
each iteration effectively starts from a blank slate. The
prompt contains only the parent code, without systematic
information about which approaches were previously tried,
what succeeded, and what failed. Consequently, search effi-
ciency is substantially degraded by retrying already-failed
directions or failing to leverage promising approaches dis-
covered in other search threads.
Program Database
Vesper addresses this problem
through an SQLite-based program database. Repository
information for each worktree, branch lineage, evaluation
results, algorithm descriptions, code diffs, and improvement
ideas are accumulated in relational tables. By aggregat-
ing the structured outputs recorded by each agent into this
database, individual trials become shared knowledge assets
rather than disposable artifacts.
Autonomous DB Observation by Agents
Accumulating
experience is meaningless unless it is properly delivered to
agents. Injecting summaries into prompts requires the har-
ness to predetermine which information is useful for the cur-
rent improvement, precluding flexible, situation-dependent
knowledge retrieval. Vesper instead passes the database
path to agents, allowing them to execute SQL queries them-
4


--- Page 5 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
selves to retrieve needed information. Since coding agents
have tool execution capabilities, they can, for example, trace
their parent branch’s lineage to avoid past failures or inves-
tigate the changes in algorithms that produced rapid score
increases on other islands to inform their own improvements.
The division of roles between DB observation and island
model migration is discussed in Appendix B.
4.5. Git Worktree Isolation
Conflicts in Parallel Execution
When multiple agents
simultaneously write to the same files, race conditions and
state corruption occur. This risk is particularly severe be-
cause Vesper’s agents have unrestricted filesystem access
within their workspace. Traditional approaches can achieve
isolation through full repository cloning, but this is impracti-
cal for large target repositories in terms of disk consumption
and initialization time.
Isolation via Worktrees
Vesper assigns each agent a ded-
icated Git worktree, achieving complete filesystem isolation
without cloning the entire repository. Worktrees are a native
Git feature that provides independent working directories
while sharing the repository’s internal data. This allows
multiple agents to operate safely in parallel without con-
flicts. The parallelism efficiency achieved by this isolation
is evaluated in § 5.
5. Harness Comparison Experiments
5.1. Contribution of Each Component to Discovery
Performance
Experimental Objective
We seek to quantitatively verify
the extent to which the harness improvements proposed
in § 4 affect algorithm discovery performance. If Vesper
outperforms the baseline under the same model and token
budget, this provides evidence that harness design influences
discovery performance. Furthermore, by controlling the
presence or absence of hack detection and DB observation,
we isolate the contribution of each component.
Baseline Selection
To examine how harness design differ-
ences affect algorithm discovery performance, we compare
against OpenEvolve6, an unofficial open-source reimple-
mentation of AlphaEvolve, as our baseline. OpenEvolve
is a harness designed with prompt construction and evalu-
ation pipelines built around stateless API calls. Vesper is
not a modification of OpenEvolve but a system built from
the ground up with coding agents as the design premise,
resulting in four key differences: coding agent integration,
evaluation hack detection, Git worktree isolation, and DB
observation for leveraging past experience. Simply plug-
6v0.2.25
ging an agent backend into OpenEvolve would not leverage
agent-specific capabilities such as autonomous codebase
access and multi-step reasoning, so we compare the overall
harness design rather than swapping individual components.
Experimental Conditions
We use Circle Packing (n=26)
as the task: a geometric optimization problem of placing
26 non-overlapping circles in a unit square to maximize the
sum of radii. This problem has been adopted as a standard
benchmark across many LLM-driven algorithm discovery
studies (Novikov et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025; Yu et al.,
2025). We target AlphaEvolve’s achievement of 2.635. To
enable fair comparison between systems with different per-
iteration costs, we adopt a token consumption ceiling (40M
tokens) rather than number of generated algorithms as the
termination criterion. Token budget control directly maps
to API cost constraints in practical deployment, making it
a more pragmatic evaluation criterion. Island model hy-
perparameters (5 islands, migration interval 50, migration
rate 0.1, exploration ratio 0.3, exploitation ratio 0.7) fol-
low OpenEvolve’s official settings and are unified across
both systems. OpenEvolve uses gpt-5.2 as its default
model. Codex-series models offer stronger code-specialized
reasoning capabilities than Chat-series models but use a dif-
ferent API endpoint incompatible with OpenEvolve’s Chat
Completions interface. To avoid conflating harness effects
with model differences, we adapted OpenEvolve to support
Codex-series models and evaluate both systems under the
same model, isolating the contribution of harness design.
Note that OpenEvolve invokes these models through single-
shot API calls, without multi-step reasoning or codebase
access, so the same model operates under fundamentally
different usage patterns across the two harnesses. The com-
parison factors are harness (Vesper / OpenEvolve), agent
usage, model (expensive gpt-5.2-codex7 / inexpensive
gpt-5.1-codex-mini8), hack detection presence, and
DB observation (the feature where agents autonomously
reference past trial histories via an SQLite database, § 4.4)
presence, yielding the conditions shown in Table 1.
Finding 1: Replacing with Coding Agents Substantially
Improves Discovery Performance
In LLM-driven algo-
rithm discovery, model capability tends to attract attention,
but how much do results change when the harness differs
under the same model and token budget? To exclude the con-
tribution of hack detection, we compare conditions without
hack detection. From Table 1, Vesper (gpt-5.2-codex,
no hack detection) substantially outperforms OpenEvolve.
As shown in Figure 2(a), Vesper rapidly improves its
score from the early stages of search, already surpassing
7https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
gpt-5.2-codex
8https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/
gpt-5.1-codex-mini
5


--- Page 6 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
Table 1. Harness comparison on Circle Packing (n=26, 2 runs). Model refers to the foundation model of the agent used for algorithm
discovery. Hack detection uses gpt-5.1-codex-mini for all conditions. Token Budget is the total token allocation for each
experiment. Raw Best is the highest score recognized by the system (hack solutions are already excluded when hack detection is enabled).
Best additionally applies mechanical exclusion of scores > 3 for † conditions, reporting the highest valid score across 2 runs (sum of radii,
higher is better). #Algo, Tok/Algo, Cost($), Hacks, and Hack% are averaged over 2 runs. † indicates conditions without hack detection,
where scores > 3 were mechanically excluded before reporting the best.
Harness
Model
Agent Hack DB Raw Best
Best Token Budget #Algo Tok/Algo Cost($) Hacks Hack%
Vesper
5.2-codex
✓
✓
✓
2.63110
2.63110
40M
568
70.5K
391
92
16.6%
Vesper
5.2-codex
✓
✓
✗
2.63599
2.63599
40M
338
118.8K
391
26
7.8%
Vesper
5.2-codex
✓
✗
✓
>1010
2.63599†
40M
742
54.2K
391
—
—
Vesper
5.2-codex
✓
✗
✗
>1010
2.63599†
40M
452
89.6K
391
—
—
Vesper
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✓
✓
2.61232
2.61232
40M
87
465.2K
42
0
0%
Vesper
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✓
✗
2.62721
2.62721
40M
101
400.1K
42
0
0%
Vesper
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✗
✓
2.63598
2.63598†
40M
90
451.7K
42
—
—
Vesper
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✗
✗
2.63586
2.63586†
40M
110
369.6K
42
—
—
OpenEvolve
5.2
✗
✗
✗
2.41852
2.41852†
40M
1,671
23.9K
107
—
—
OpenEvolve
5.2-codex
✗
✗
✗
2.54142
2.54142†
40M
1,510
26.5K
245
—
—
OpenEvolve
5.1-codex-mini
✗
✗
✗
2.48092
2.48092†
40M
1,487
26.9K
27
—
—
AlphaEvolve Gemini
✗
✗
✗
—
2.6358
—
—
—
—
—
—
Human best
—
—
—
—
—
2.6340
—
—
—
—
—
—
OpenEvolve’s final score at approximately 5M tokens. This
effect is independent of model scale: even the inexpensive
gpt-5.1-codex-mini (no hack detection) outperforms
OpenEvolve’s gpt-5.2. The harness-level differences
between Vesper and OpenEvolve, including coding agent
integration, evaluation hack detection, and Git worktree iso-
lation, collectively produce the performance gap. Moreover,
OpenEvolve with gpt-5.1-codex-mini confirms that
even under the same model, harness design alone produces
a substantial performance gap.
Finding 2: Scaling Reasoning per Algorithm Is More
Efficient than Scaling Generations
Under the same to-
ken budget, is it better to generate many low-quality can-
didates or fewer high-quality ones? The Tok/Algo column
in Table 1 answers this question. OpenEvolve (gpt-5.2)
spends 23.9K tokens per algorithm and generates 1,671 can-
didates within 40M tokens, yet its best score remains low.
In contrast, Vesper (gpt-5.2-codex, no hack detection)
spends 89.6K tokens per algorithm and generates only 452
candidates, yet surpasses both AlphaEvolve’s achievement
and the human best. Figure 2(a) makes this gap even more
vivid: Vesper surpasses OpenEvolve’s final score at approxi-
mately 5M tokens, a budget in which OpenEvolve generates
over 200 candidates. The compute-intensive processes of
coding agents, including multi-step reasoning, codebase in-
spection, and evaluation result analysis, dramatically elevate
the quality of each candidate. This trend holds for inexpen-
sive models as well: Vesper (gpt-5.1-codex-mini)
with 110 candidates outperforms OpenEvolve’s 1,487 candi-
dates and approaches the human best. Producing fewer high-
quality algorithms is more efficient than producing many
low-quality ones. That is, under a fixed budget, scaling
reasoning per algorithm is more effective than scaling the
number of generations. Figure 3 summarizes this relation-
ship: conditions with higher per-iteration token investment
(Tok/Algo) consistently achieve higher best scores, with a
clear separation between OpenEvolve (lower left) and Ves-
per (upper right). A detailed cost comparison is provided in
§ 6.
Finding 3: More Capable Models Generate More Eval-
uation Hacks
By comparing conditions that differ only
in the presence of hack detection within the same harness,
we isolate the contribution of evaluation hack detection. For
gpt-5.2-codex, hack detection on outperforms off. As
shown in Table 1, 29 out of 352 algorithms (8.2%) were
detected and excluded as evaluation hacks under this con-
dition. By eliminating hack solutions from the population
pool, subsequent parent selection operates exclusively on
sound solutions, maintaining search quality. In contrast,
for gpt-5.1-codex-mini, hack detection on underper-
forms off. Under this condition, no evaluation hacks oc-
curred at all (Table 1). More capable models have greater
ability to generate code exploiting evaluation function vul-
nerabilities, and the necessity of hack detection increases in
proportion to model capability. When no hacks occur, the
overhead of hack detection reduces the number of genera-
tions under the same budget, resulting in lower scores.
Finding 4: The Effect of DB Observation Is Limited
DB observation is a feature that allows agents to reference
past trial histories via an SQLite database, enabling each
agent to leverage past successes and failures when deciding
improvement directions. However, the two-run results in Ta-
ble 1 show no clear benefit. For gpt-5.1-codex-mini
6


--- Page 7 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
0
10
20
30
40
Cumulative tokens (M)
2.20
2.25
2.30
2.35
2.40
2.45
2.50
2.55
2.60
2.65
Best score (sum of radii)
AlphaEvolve (2.635)
Human (2.634)
(a) Token budget
0
100
200
300
400
Cumulative cost (USD)
AlphaEvolve (2.635)
Human (2.634)
(b) API cost
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack OFF
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack OFF
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.2
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.1-mini
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.2-codex
Figure 2. Best score progression. (a) Cumulative tokens, (b) cumulative API cost. Each marker represents an individual (algorithm) that
updated the best score. Conditions without DB observation only. Algorithms flagged as evaluation hacks are excluded. Dashed lines
indicate AlphaEvolve (2.635) and the human best (2.634).
102
Tokens per algorithm (K)
2.40
2.45
2.50
2.55
2.60
2.65
Best score (sum of radii)
AlphaEvolve (2.635)
Human (2.634)
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack OFF
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack OFF
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.2
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.1-mini
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.2-codex
Figure 3. Relationship between per-iteration token investment
(Tok/Algo) and best score. Each marker represents an experimental
condition from Table 1. Higher compute investment per iteration
yields higher best scores. Conditions without DB observation only.
(hack detection on), DB observation on underperforms off,
and for gpt-5.2-codex (hack detection on), DB obser-
vation on likewise underperforms off. DB observation con-
sumes tokens, reducing the number of generated algorithms
under the same budget, and this loss of search opportunities
may offset the benefit of referencing past trials.
5.2. Parallel Search via Worktree Isolation
Worktree Isolation Enables Efficient Parallel Search
OpenEvolve generates complete programs as strings via
stateless API calls and writes them to temporary files only
during evaluation, requiring no filesystem isolation for par-
allelism. In contrast, Vesper’s agents directly read, modify,
and test the shared codebase, making concurrent access with-
out isolation impossible. Git worktrees provide independent
Table 2. Effect of worktree isolation on execution time. Without
worktree isolation (WT ✗), a single agent runs one branch at a
time; with worktree isolation (WT ✓), 4 agents run in parallel on
independent worktrees. † Estimated from the sum of per-agent
execution times.
Model
Hack
DB
WT
Exec. Time (h)
Speedup
5.2-codex
✓
✓
✗
46.6†
3.2x
✓
14.5
5.2-codex
✓
✗
✗
69.7†
3.5x
✓
20.0
5.2-codex
✗
✓
✗
40.5†
3.9x
✓
10.4
5.2-codex
✗
✗
✗
64.3†
3.8x
✓
17.1
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✓
✗
13.9†
3.3x
✓
4.2
5.1-codex-mini
✓
✗
✗
16.1†
3.3x
✓
4.9
5.1-codex-mini
✗
✓
✗
15.2†
3.6x
✓
4.2
5.1-codex-mini
✗
✗
✗
30.6†
3.3x
✓
9.3
working directories while sharing the repository’s internal
data, enabling safe parallel execution. Table 2 shows the
effective parallelism across all conditions with 4 parallel
agents. The parallelism ratio (total sequential agent time
divided by wall-clock time) ranges from 3.2x to 3.9x, re-
ducing wall-clock time from approximately 70 hours to 20
hours in the most compute-intensive condition.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
6. Cost-Performance Analysis
Objective of Analysis
§ 5 showed that fewer high-quality
candidates outperform many low-quality ones under the
same token budget. However, coding agents use Codex
CLI models with higher per-token costs than stateless calls
($9.77/M tokens vs $2.68/M tokens), creating an approxi-
mately 3.7× gap in actual cost under the same token budget.
Whether the quality-focused strategy remains superior even
after accounting for this cost difference is an important prac-
tical question. Furthermore, it remains unclear whether one
should select an expensive model for the agent backend
or use an inexpensive model to maximize iterations. This
section answers these two questions.
Experimental
Setup
In
addition
to
the
Vesper
(gpt-5.2-codex)
and
OpenEvolve
results
from
§ 5, we conduct a supplementary experiment increasing
OpenEvolve’s token budget to 146M tokens, equiv-
alent to Vesper’s actual cost (approximately $392),
enabling comparison under equal expenditure.
For
model selection comparison, we use four Vesper condi-
tions on the same harness with gpt-5.2-codex and
gpt-5.1-codex-mini.
Finding 1: The Quality-Focused Strategy Remains Su-
perior Even at Equal Cost
§ 5 compared systems un-
der the same token budget, but what happens when ac-
tual cost is equalized? We increased OpenEvolve’s token
budget to 146M tokens, equivalent to Vesper’s cost (ap-
proximately $392) (Appendix C). OpenEvolve generated
4,239 algorithms but failed to close the gap with Vesper (Ta-
ble 1). As shown in Figure 2(b), Vesper already far exceeds
OpenEvolve’s final level at approximately $107 worth (11M
tokens), and OpenEvolve fails to reach this level even at
equivalent expenditure. Even after accounting for per-token
cost differences, the quality-focused strategy of investing
more compute per iteration remains superior.
Finding 2:
Expensive Models Offer Better Cost-
Performance than Inexpensive Models
From Fig-
ure 2(b), the gpt-5.2-codex curve consistently lies
above the gpt-5.1-codex-mini curve on the cost axis.
That is, for the same monetary investment, the expensive
model reaches a higher score. Although gpt-5.2-codex
has a higher per-token cost ($9.77/M tokens vs $1.05/M to-
kens) and therefore generates fewer algorithms under the
same budget, the quality per algorithm is higher, maintaining
superiority in performance improvement per dollar. When
budget permits, selecting the expensive model is also ratio-
nal from a cost-effectiveness perspective.
Finding 3:
$38 Reaches AlphaEvolve-Level Perfor-
mance
gpt-5.2-codex reaches the human best and
AlphaEvolve-level performance at approximately $38
(3.9M tokens) (Figure 2(b)). Meanwhile, the inexpensive
gpt-5.1-codex-mini approaches the human best at a
total cost of $42. Even the inexpensive model approaches
the human best at $42.
7. Conclusion
This paper proposed Vesper, a framework that systemat-
ically strengthens the harness for LLM-driven algorithm
discovery. In Circle Packing (n=26) experiments, Vesper
substantially outperformed OpenEvolve under the same to-
ken budget, surpassing both AlphaEvolve’s achievement and
the human best. Under a fixed budget, investing more tokens
per iteration to produce fewer high-quality candidates via
coding agents proved more efficient than generating many
low-quality candidates through cheap API calls, and this
advantage held even in cost-based comparisons accounting
for per-token price differences. Furthermore, more capable
models generate more evaluation hacks, demonstrating that
the necessity of hack detection increases with model capa-
bility. These results demonstrate that LLM-driven algorithm
discovery performance is substantially influenced not only
by model capability but also by harness design, and Vesper’s
design provides concrete guidelines for making this field
more practical.
References
Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P. F., Schul-
man, J., and Man´e, D. Concrete problems in AI safety.
CoRR, abs/1606.06565, 2016.
Assumpc¸˜ao, H. S., Ferreira, D., Campos, L. L., and Mu-
rai, F. Codeevolve: An open source evolutionary coding
agent for algorithm discovery and optimization. CoRR,
abs/2510.14150, 2025.
doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2510.
14150.
Bui, N. D. Q. Building effective AI coding agents for the
terminal: Scaffolding, harness, context engineering, and
lessons learned, 2026.
Ishibashi,
Y.,
Yano,
T.,
and Oyamada,
M.
Can
large language models invent algorithms to improve
themselves?: Algorithm discovery for recursive self-
improvement through reinforcement learning.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.15639, 2024.
Jimenez, C. E., Yang, J., Wettig, A., Yao, S., Pei, K., Press,
O., and Narasimhan, K. R. Swe-bench: Can language
models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth
International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2024, Vienna, Austria, May 7-11, 2024. OpenRe-
view.net, 2024.
8


--- Page 9 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
Lee, Y., Nair, R., Zhang, Q., Lee, K., Khattab, O., and Finn,
C.
Meta-harness: End-to-end optimization of model
harnesses, 2026.
Liu, F., Tong, X., Yuan, M., and Zhang, Q. Algorithm evolu-
tion using large language model. CoRR, abs/2311.15249,
2023. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2311.15249.
Liu, F., Tong, X., Yuan, M., Lin, X., Luo, F., Wang, Z.,
Lu, Z., and Zhang, Q. Evolution of heuristics: Towards
efficient automatic algorithm design using large language
model. In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27,
2024, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp.
32201–32223. PMLR / OpenReview.net, 2024.
Liu, G., Zhu, Y., Chen, J., and Jiang, M. Scientific algorithm
discovery by augmenting alphaevolve with deep research.
CoRR, abs/2510.06056, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.
2510.06056.
Mouret, J. and Clune, J. Illuminating search spaces by
mapping elites. CoRR, abs/1504.04909, 2015.
Novikov, A., Vu, N., Eisenberger, M., Dupont, E., Huang,
P., Wagner, A. Z., Shirobokov, S., Kozlovskii, B., Ruiz, F.
J. R., Mehrabian, A., Kumar, M. P., See, A., Chaudhuri,
S., Holland, G., Davies, A., Nowozin, S., Kohli, P., and
Balog, M. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and
algorithmic discovery. CoRR, abs/2506.13131, 2025. doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.2506.13131.
Pan, L., Zou, L., Guo, S., Ni, J., and Zheng, H.-T. Natural-
language agent harnesses, 2026.
Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Balog,
M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J. R., Ellenberg,
J. S., Wang, P., Fawzi, O., Kohli, P., and Fawzi, A. Math-
ematical discoveries from program search with large lan-
guage models. Nat., 625(7995):468–475, 2024. doi:
10.1038/S41586-023-06924-6.
Skalse, J., Howe, N. H. R., Krasheninnikov, D., and Krueger,
D. Defining and characterizing reward gaming. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35:
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems 2022, NeurIPS 2022, New Orleans, LA, USA,
November 28 - December 9, 2022, 2022.
van Stein, N. and B¨ack, T. Llamea: A large language model
evolutionary algorithm for automatically generating meta-
heuristics. IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 29(2):331–345,
2025. doi: 10.1109/TEVC.2024.3497793.
Wang, Y., Su, S.-R., Zeng, Z., Xu, E., Ren, L., Yang, X.,
Huang, Z., He, X., Ma, L., Peng, B., et al.
Thetae-
volve: Test-time learning on open problems.
CoRR,
abs/2511.23473, 2025.
Ye, H., Wang, J., Cao, Z., Berto, F., Hua, C., Kim, H.,
Park, J., and Song, G. Reevo: Large language models as
hyper-heuristics with reflective evolution. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December
10 - 15, 2024, 2024.
Yu, Z., Feng, K., Zhao, Y., He, S., Zhang, X.-P., and Cohan,
A. Alpharesearch: Accelerating new algorithm discovery
with language models. CoRR, abs/2511.08522, 2025.
Zheng, T., Deng, Z., Tsang, H. T., Wang, W., Bai, J.,
Wang, Z., and Song, Y.
From automation to auton-
omy: A survey on large language models in scien-
tific discovery.
CoRR, abs/2505.13259, 2025.
doi:
10.48550/ARXIV.2505.13259.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
Table 3. Island model hyperparameters. Unified across both sys-
tems.
Parameter
Value
Number of islands
5
Migration interval
50 algorithms
Migration rate
0.1
Exploration ratio pexplore
0.3
Exploitation ratio pexploit
0.7
Max population per island
5
Max total population
25
A. Detailed Experimental Settings
The detailed settings used in the experiments of § 5 and § 6
are provided below.
Island Model Settings
Island model hyperparameters fol-
low OpenEvolve’s official settings and are unified across
both Vesper and OpenEvolve. Table 3 shows the parameter
values. Parent selection uses a three-way probability mix-
ture: with probability 0.3 for exploration (sampling from
the bottom 80% by score), probability 0.7 for exploitation
(sampling from the top 20% by score), and the remaining
probability 0.0 for uniform random selection. Migration
occurs in a ring topology every 50 completed algorithms,
with the top 10% of each island copied to adjacent islands.
Vesper Agent Settings
Vesper runs up to 4 agents in par-
allel, with each agent operating within a dedicated Git work-
tree. The agent timeout is set to 1 hour. For conditions
where evaluation hack detection is enabled, the detection
agent uses the inexpensive gpt-5.1-codex-mini, per-
forming hack detection with a model separate from the main
agent.
OpenEvolve Settings
OpenEvolve calls the LLM state-
lessly through the Chat Completions API. LLM temperature
is set to 0.7, top p to 0.95, and maximum output tokens to
32,768. Prompts include the top 3 programs by score and 2
programs for diversity, with template stochasticity enabled.
Evaluation uses cascade evaluation (thresholds 0.5, 0.75)
with a maximum of 4 parallel executions. The random seed
is fixed at 42.
Cost Estimation Method
To estimate costs from token
counts, we calculated blended rates (mixed unit prices)
per model from OpenAI’s billing data. The blended rate
is the total cost divided by total tokens for each model,
representing a weighted average of input, cached input,
and output pricing.
gpt-5.2-codex is $9.77/M to-
kens, gpt-5.1-codex-mini is $1.05/M tokens, and
gpt-5.2 (API) is $2.68/M tokens. Cumulative cost for
each experiment is estimated by multiplying cumulative
tokens by the blended rate.
B. Division of Roles Between DB Observation
and Island Model Migration
DB observation and island model migration play comple-
mentary roles. Migration directly adds top solutions from
other islands into the local parent selection pool, sharing the
solutions themselves between islands. DB observation, in
contrast, enables agents to reference the trial history across
all islands, acquiring strategy-level knowledge about which
approaches were effective and which failed. Even when an
agent discovers a high-scoring solution from another island
in the DB, it serves only as reference information and does
not enter the parent selection candidates. Migration handles
direct propagation of solutions, while DB observation rein-
forces improvement direction decisions; this division allows
both to function independently.
C. Cost Comparison at Equal Expenditure
Figure 4 shows the best score progression versus cumula-
tive API cost, including a supplementary experiment where
OpenEvolve’s token budget was expanded to match Vesper’s
cost ($392, 146M tokens).
10


--- Page 11 ---
Effective Harness Engineering for Algorithm Discovery with Coding Agents
0
100
200
300
400
Cumulative cost (USD)
2.20
2.25
2.30
2.35
2.40
2.45
2.50
2.55
2.60
2.65
Best score (sum of radii)
AlphaEvolve (2.635)
Human (2.634)
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.2
OpenEvolve, gpt-5.1-mini
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.2-codex, hack OFF
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack ON
Vesper, gpt-5.1-mini, hack OFF
Figure 4. Best score progression versus cumulative API cost. Each marker represents an individual (algorithm) that updated the best
score. Even when OpenEvolve’s budget is expanded to match Vesper’s cost ($392, 146M tokens), its score plateaus at 2.502. Vesper
approaches the human best at $42 (gpt-5.1-codex-mini) and surpasses AlphaEvolve at $391 (gpt-5.2-codex). Diamonds
indicate OpenEvolve at the 40M token ($107) point.
11
