--- Page 1 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking: Human Interaction
with AI-Guided Mathematical Discovery
Alex Bäuerle∗
Google DeepMind
Paris, France
Adam Connors∗
Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
Alexander Novikov
Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
Adam Zsolt Wagner
Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
Ngân V˜u
Google DeepMind
London, United Kingdom
Fernanda Viegas
Google DeepMind
Cambridge, USA
Martin Wattenberg
Google DeepMind
Cambridge, USA
Lucas Dixon
Google DeepMind
Paris, France
Figure 1: Sensemaking Dashboard for an AlphaEvolve experiment. (A) An overview of the experiment’s progress, the number
of generated candidates, and authorship information. (B) Best scores, shows the current best metrics per score and the progress
for the selected score. (C) Programs view, showing the evolution tree of candidates. (D) Selected program sidebar, showing a
quick overview of the selected program’s characteristics and artifacts. Interactive examples of AlphaEvolve experiments can be
found at: http://alphaevolve-examples.web.app.
Abstract
Artificial intelligence offers powerful new tools for scientific discov-
ery, but the interaction paradigms required to effectively harness
these systems remain underexplored. In this paper, we present find-
ings from a formative user study with 11 expert mathematicians
who used AlphaEvolve, an evolutionary coding agent, to tackle
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
advanced problems in their fields of expertise. We identify and char-
acterize a distinct workflow we term intentmaking, the iterative
process of discovering, defining, and refining one’s experimental
goals through active system interaction. We frame this as a natural
extension to sensemaking, the cognitive process of building an un-
derstanding of complex or novel data. We suggest that users enter a
cycle of intentmaking (defining and updating their experiment) and
sensemaking (interpreting the results) which repeats many times
arXiv:2605.05921v1  [cs.AI]  7 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Bäuerle and Connors et al.
during the course of an investigation. Our documentation of these
themes suggests an approach to designing AI tools for scientific
discovery that goes beyond the existing question/answer model of
many current systems, treating them as collaborative instruments
rather than opaque black-box assistants.
1
Introduction
The integration of artificial intelligence into scientific and mathe-
matical discovery has generated immense excitement, promising to
accelerate breakthroughs across numerous domains [38]. However,
finding the optimal way for domain experts to harness this potential
remains a complex challenge that demands more rigorous interface
design [1, 26].
Coding agents such as Antigravity, Cursor, and Claude Code,
take a conversational approach with frequent user intervention, but
they differ from AI scientist systems in two important ways: first,
the trajectories in scientific systems tend to be considerably longer
(AlphaEvolve can run for multiple days or weeks and generate
many tens of thousands of programs in the course of responding
to a user query); second, the scientific questions being asked are,
by their nature, more open-ended, and not fully knowable at the
outset of the experiment.
In contrast to popular coding agents, current systems designed
for automated scientific discovery (e.g., Kosmos [25], AI co-scientist
[11], and AlphaEvolve [28]) often treat their underlying models
as opaque boxes in which the user enters a query and awaits a
result, with the human-in-the-loop element relegated to the space
between subsequent requests. There are two chief limitations with
this approach: first, users are provided with limited support to
frame their goals in terms the system is best equipped to tackle;
and second, users are expected to parse and validate large amounts
of returned data, generated at significant cost, before determining
their next action.
In this paper, we present findings from the deployment and qual-
itative user study of an experimental user-interface designed to
facilitate an iterative interaction with AlphaEvolve [28]. We devel-
oped this interface alongside internal subject matter experts (SMEs)
over a period of nine months and tested it with 11 external mathe-
maticians over a period of three months. During the expert evalua-
tion, participants used the system to tackle novel research problems
in combinatorics, geometry, and probability. The mathematicians
who had access to AlphaEvolve used the interface presented in this
paper to create more than 2,300 distinct experiments, successfully
identified novel solutions to a range of problems that were part of
their specialized subject areas, and have since published multiple
papers on their findings (e.g., [7], [4], [3]).
Based on our observations, we propose intentmaking as a mode
of operation distinct both from existing coding agents and tradi-
tional specification alignment. When working with coding agents,
the user’s intent is largely known, and the challenge is in commu-
nicating it to the system. With long horizon, open-ended scientific
questions, the user’s interaction with the system is inherently an
experiment: the scientist iteratively develops their intuition of the
problem space, builds a mental model of the behaviour of their
experimental apparatus (the AI), and eliminates systematic errors
in pursuit of their results.
Intentmaking is the process of discovering and refining one’s
own intent by interacting with an AI system, iteratively propos-
ing experiments, observing results, and adjusting the specification
accordingly. We see this as a natural extension to sensemaking,
and posit that AI assisted scientific discovery naturally takes this
form, in which users alternate between intentmaking (updating
their experiment) and sensemaking (interpreting the results) many
times in the course of an investigation [30]. We suggest that this
conceptualization offers a path to a more optimal design for future
scientific AI systems.
2
Related Work
This work bridges two intersecting domains: the methodological
evolution of AI support for scientific discovery, and the HCI domain
of defining intent and analyzing results for agentic systems.
2.1
AI Support for Scientific Discovery
The integration of computer aid into scientific research has a long
history of enabling and accelerating discovery [2, 13]. The intellec-
tual lineage of the "AI Scientist" paradigm begins with early expert
systems, such as the DENDRAL project in the 1960s, which uti-
lized task-specific heuristic programming to infer molecular struc-
tures [22], and the BACON systems of the 1980s, which relied on
data-driven search heuristics to rediscover quantitative empirical
laws [20]. While foundational, these early symbolic systems were
often limited by the combinatorial explosion of modern scientific
data.
Today, computation-supported research is ubiquitous across sci-
entific domains [38] and modern AI for science has brought spe-
cialized methodologies that drive significant breakthroughs. Re-
inforcement learning has formalized proof search in automated
theorem proving [15, 37]. Bayesian optimization and active learn-
ing are routinely deployed in self-driving laboratories to navigate
high-dimensional experimental parameters with minimal physical
trials [19]. Additionally, symbolic regression frameworks utilize
reinforcement learning and Bayesian methods to uncover human-
interpretable mathematical expressions from noisy observational
data, bypassing the limitations of traditional genetic programming
[5, 12, 29].
AlphaEvolve [28] is part of a family of emerging systems that
take advantage of test-time compute [11] to spend additional re-
sources at inference time in order to progress towards a goal. The
underlying mechanics of AlphaEvolve build upon the rich intersec-
tion of Evolutionary Computation (EC) and LLMs, where language
models act as intelligent mutation operators to guide evolutionary
search toward promising regions of a solution space [23].
Most notable siblings include Co-scientist [11], which is designed
to formulate novel research hypotheses and proposals based on a
user prompt, and Kosmos [25], which attempts to automate data-
driven scientific discovery. Concurrently, systems like "The AI Sci-
entist" and various Agent Laboratory frameworks attempt to close
the entire research loop autonomously, from literature synthesis
to manuscript generation [24, 31]. All these systems necessarily
require some kind of user interaction and both Co-scientist and
Kosmos have rich Web-based interfaces to receive the user prompt
and supporting data, and return the AI-generated answers.


--- Page 3 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
However, a critical limitation of these highly autonomous sys-
tems is their reliance on relatively coarse-grained user interaction.
They typically consist of a high-level input question, a long-running
opaque computational process, and a large dump of returned in-
formation for the user to parse. In contrast, the AlphaEvolve user
interface we tested is built around a more fine-grained interaction
principle in which users iteratively adapt their problem statement
and evaluation criteria based on partial results from the system, us-
ing the system more like a scientific instrument (akin to an electron
microscope) than an assistant as which AI is often characterized.
2.2
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
Within the field of HCI, human-in-the-loop is a well explored con-
cept [26] with implications both in the training, steering, and ex-
plainability of AI. Our work can be considered as a practical ap-
plication of human-in-the-loop concepts in the field of scientific
discovery.
The HCI community has investigated the analysis process of
large or complex data under the term sensemaking [30]. A key
challenge in this domain is that standard, linear conversational
interfaces are often insufficient for complex sensemaking tasks;
systems like Sensecape [35] have demonstrated that providing mul-
tilevel abstractions and visual hierarchies is crucial to help users
manage cognitive overload when processing extensive LLM outputs.
At the same time, agentic AI systems are described as a new UI
paradigm [27] and call for HCI to consider novel, emergent usability
paradigms [26].
In traditional HCI and design, the process of tackling ill-defined
problems is often understood through Schön’s concept of reflection-
in-action [32], where a practitioner engages in a continuous con-
versation with the situation to simultaneously understand, solve,
and redefine a problem. We propose that intentmaking represents
the necessary evolution of this reflective practice when applied to
agentic AI. While traditional reflection-in-action involves manip-
ulating static or predictable materials, intentmaking captures the
unique cognitive friction of collaborating with a non-deterministic,
opaque, and goal-oriented system. Users are not simply refining a
static specification; they must continuously co-evolve their prob-
lem definition alongside their growing mental model of the AI’s
behaviors, capabilities, and tendencies to reward-hack. Thus, based
on our observations when designing a UI for AlphaEvolve, we high-
light intentmaking as an integral but not yet well-studied aspect of
working with agentic systems.
Our work is closely related to Interactive AI Alignment [8, 34, 36],
which highlights alignment work in the specification, process, and
evaluation phases of working with an agentic AI system. In this
paper, we add to existing work around AI design guidelines [1] and
argue that users typically don’t fully know how to describe their
objective before getting started, and instead rely on experimentation
to help them define it.
The proposed intentmaking process, which maps Horvitz’s prin-
ciples of mixed-initiative user interfaces [14] to AI-assisted discov-
ery, is especially important when bringing AI assistants to domain
experts who might have a less clear mental model of the AI’s ca-
pabilities compared to AI experts [17, 18, 39–41]. We observe a
bidirectionality in the process of hypothesis, experimentation, and
refinement enabled by our system, similar to what is described in
Shen et al.’s position paper on bidirectional alignment between hu-
mans and AI systems [33]. However, Shen’s work is more focused
on value alignment [6, 16, 21] than refining user intent.
In summary, our work is at the intersection of AI for scientific
discovery [38] and research on HCI paradigms when interacting
with AI systems [26]. We observe that when using agentic AI sys-
tems, especially in the domain of open-ended scientific discovery,
formulating a user intent is an iterative process of intentmaking
and sensemaking, requiring the user to continuously build and
update their mental model of the system and refine their problem
specification.
3
Interacting with AlphaEvolve
AlphaEvolve [28] is an evolutionary coding agent that orchestrates
a pipeline of LLMs to iteratively optimize a piece of python code.
In its simplest form, user interaction with AlphaEvolve requires
the user to express their goal with three artifacts:
(1) Problem Statement: The problem statement describes the
goal of the experiment and scientific problem in natural
language. It is used as an augmentation to the prompt given
to AlphaEvolve and helps the model understand the user’s
intent.
(2) Initial Program: Typically a naive, non-optimized solution
to the problem. This serves as the starting point for evolu-
tion from where the first candidate is created by asking the
model to produce a code diff.
(3) Evaluation Function: A function called for every gener-
ated candidate that returns scores for a user-defined set of
metrics. This function cannot be modified by the AlphaE-
volve system.
Based on this experimental specification, AlphaEvolve applies
evolutionary optimization techniques to iteratively propose and
evaluate improved solutions. The results of this process are returned
to the user through a running best score and the candidate responsi-
ble for that score for each metric. Using this approach, AlphaEvolve
has achieved a significant number of state-of-the-art results [9].
However, the practical application of this process is limited by a
number of complexities. During observational studies with internal
SMEs we identified the following key themes:
(1) Underspecified Constraints: While users typically started
with a clear mathematical objective (e.g., “maximize the
number of unit spheres that can be packed around another
unit sphere”), there remained many unknowns around how
to approach and define this problem. Analogously, in clas-
sical scientific workflows, many details of the proposed
experiment often only surface as experimentation takes
place, and crystallize in the light of initial results.
(2) Incompatible Problem Statements: The user-conceived
problem statement (e.g., “please find a new lower-bound for
kissing numbers in 24 dimensions”) often does not align with
the patterns that enable AlphaEvolve to discover an opti-
mal solution. Viewed through an HCI lens, this represents
a Gulf of Envisioning [34]. Users struggle to anticipate the


--- Page 4 ---
Bäuerle and Connors et al.
literal or pathological ways an agentic system might inter-
pret a mathematically sound objective. Consequently, SMEs
expended significant effort over many months engaging in
intentmaking — iteratively bridging this gulf by discover-
ing the hidden constraints and reward landscapes that best
guided AlphaEvolve toward valid solutions.
(3) Meaningless Progress: The LLM-driven process that gen-
erates program candidates can sometimes find solutions
that improve the score in non-functional ways, e.g., by
returning an unexpected type in order to trick the evalu-
ation function into providing a high-score. Similarly, the
LLM-driven process can get caught in non-productive loops,
perhaps incrementally improving on the score by virtue of
random chance without making real progress.
Based on these insights, we developed an interactive interface for
creating and monitoring AlphaEvolve experiments. In the following
we will describe this system through the lenses of the intentmak-
ing and sensemaking processes, which together form an iterative
experiment specification and monitoring loop.
Figure 2: Initial prompt for the user to enter a description of
the problem they want to solve. An experiment configuration
assistant will use this description alongside a system prompt
to scaffold a new experiment.
3.1
Intentmaking
To understand this workflow, we formalize the concept of intent-
making. Drawing from Schön’s reflection-in-action [32], where
problem-solving and problem-setting occur simultaneously, intent-
making applies this reflective practice to open-ended scientific
discovery. In this paradigm, users do not simply execute a pre-
defined plan; instead, they engage in an iterative, experimental
loop of observing the AI’s behavior, discovering unforeseen facets
of their own experiment, and adjusting their mental model to align
the AI’s actions with their true, evolving goals. In the context of
AlphaEvolve, the intentmaking process applies both to experiment
definition and the creation of variants of earlier experiments.
AlphaEvolve experiments are defined in the form of a natural
language problem definition, an initial program, and an evaluation
function (both defined in python). We designed a minimal initial
interface with a single high-level prompt familiar from many other
systems (see Figure 2), and an experiment definition process that re-
sembles traditional agentic code-editors (Figure 3). This experiment
definition UI consists of a chat panel on the left (Figure 3, A), and
tabs for the three main artifacts needed to scaffold an AlphaEvolve
experiment on the right (Figure 3, C): the problem context, initial
program, and evaluation function.
Several patterns have been developed to enable AlphaEvolve
to perform optimally, but even experienced users don’t have the
same level of in-depth knowledge of the system as the core team.
To bridge this gap, we added this knowledge as a prompt to the
experiment configuration assistant such that the system will guide
the user to apply patterns that are best suited to AlphaEvolve to
their own specific problem. To illustrate the benefit of this, consider
the challenge of finding lower bounds for kissing numbers in high
dimensions, a fundamental problem in discrete geometry that asks
for the maximum number of non-overlapping unit spheres that can
touch a central unit sphere [9]. Rather than asking AlphaEvolve
to directly generate an optimal point cloud, SMEs discovered that
the system performed better if the problem was framed as a time-
bounded search which updated the initial points and the search
function in tandem. The experiment definition process captured
this institutionalized knowledge and guided users to frame their
own experiments in a form that AlphaEvolve was best equipped to
tackle successfully.
Based on the initial specification provided by the user, and build-
ing on our learnings from SMEs, the coding agent proposes an
initial experiment setup. We use the agent to generate a title and
description for the experiment in addition to the three main arti-
facts mentioned above. This setup enables users who don’t typically
interact with code to set up their AlphaEvolve experiments from
just an abstract problem specification. Internal tests showed that
neither the initial problem specification provided by the user, nor
the generated experiment setup were always fully correct on the
first try. In many cases, the provided problem specification lacked
details which led to an underspecified experiment setup. To further
help users advance in their intentmaking process, we designed this
second stage of intentmaking with a focus iteration and testing.
To make it easier for users to understand individual candidate
solutions, we incentivize the experiment configuration assistant to
generate not just evaluation metrics, but also visualization code.
Visualizations serve as a high-level boundary object between code
and human understanding of its functionality, allowing users to
get an understanding of the code’s functionality without having to
inspect the code directly.
Running a full evolutionary experiment in AlphaEvolve is com-
putationally intensive, requiring thousands of LLM calls potentially
over several days. For many researchers without access to massive
compute clusters, launching an underspecified or flawed experi-
ment is prohibitively expensive. Whilst some facets of a problem
only emerge as a result of the evolution process itself, we designed
a test-stage to eliminate as many common issues as possible during
experiment definition. In this stage, users can see the resulting
metrics and visualization that their configuration produces, leading
to a better understanding of the experiment setup before starting a
potentially expensive optimization process. We coupled this with a
critique agent that uses knowledge about AlphaEvolve to suggest
improvements, ensuring users could iteratively debug their intent at
near-zero compute cost before committing to a costly optimization
process.


--- Page 5 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
Figure 3: Experiment setup assistant. The user describes their problem and may request changes to the experiment setup in a
chat interface (A). An automatically generated title and description can be changed by the user (B). The experiment setup with
its full configuration is generated and can be edited by the user (C). Before starting an experiment, users do a test run that
assures them the experiment is set up as intended (D).
3.2
Sensemaking
AlphaEvolve can run for several days and generate many tens of
thousands of programs which are often thousands of lines long.
Clearly, presenting all these programs to a human user is of limited
value. After discussing with internal SMEs and participants, we
identified several patterns of usage which are covered in detail in
section 5, and we designed the experiment dashboard (Figure 1) to
address those usage patterns.
At the highest level, users can see basic experiment metrics (gen-
erated programs, executed programs, failed programs), as shown
in Figure 1 (A). AlphaEvolve experiments can fail for various op-
erational reasons (e.g. jobs may be preempted by other systems
requiring resources, or LLM quota might be exhausted) and ex-
periment metrics provide the first, simple sanity check that the
experiment is still running.
The current best score that AlphaEvolve has found is often the
key information users need to decide if an interesting result has
been achieved. The Best Programs Graph shown in Figure 1 (B)
provides an indication of how scores have progressed over time.
Most graphs tend to have a similar shape, with rapid gains made
early on, followed by gradual, asymptotic improvement. The bar
chart below the main graph provides an indication of how many best
programs have been identified as a function of time. This provides
users with an important indication of whether their experiment is
still generating potential new solutions.
The Programs Panel, shown in Figure 1 (C) provides three ways
for users to reason about the generated programs as a whole. These
are the AI Overview, Evolution Tree, and Programs Table (Figure 4).
We opted to experiment with multiple representations for this view
since they all serve different use cases. The AI Overview gives a
high level overview of what has been explored in the experiment,
whereas the Evolution Tree allows users to investigate specific
branches. The Programs Table can be filtered and sorted, so it’s best
suited to explore the top programs for a given metric.
Selecting any program from the Best Program Graph or the
Programs Panel causes it to be displayed in the Selected Program
panel. This panel shows several pieces of information that relate
to one specific program. As discussed in the results section, the
program code itself is often not the best artifact with which to
judge the success of the experiment. Several additional artifacts are
provided that make it easier for the user to assess the state of the
experiment such as the construction (e.g., any data generated by
the program), the visualization (often based on the construction),
or the AI generated summary of the program (cf. Figure 4).
4
Design and Evaluation
The process of developing an interface to AlphaEvolve followed
multiple design and feedback cycles. We started from a functional
version of AlphaEvolve that was available internally but was noth-
ing more than a command line interface, which made it hard for


--- Page 6 ---
Bäuerle and Connors et al.
Figure 4: Program table showing candidate solutions, in this case sorted by the currently selected metric. The program table
shows images generated during evaluation and AI summaries can be generated to give the user insight on the candidate’s
approach.
users to start working with, and even harder for them to monitor
the progress of their experiments.
For our first version of the new UI, we gathered requirements
from early internal adopters. After prioritizing requests, we imple-
mented an initial version of the user-interface with just the most
important information. This initial version, which consisted mainly
of high-level experiment metrics (Figure 1 A+B), was deployed
internally at Google to collect initial feedback.
From there, the UI has been continually improved based on user
feedback. Initially, this improvement focused on the sensemaking
workflow, as most internal users started their experiments from
the command line. Internally, the AlphaEvolve UI had roughly 150
monthly active users at the time of writing this paper.
While this internal deployment helped us refine and improve
the interface to AlphaEvolve, our internal user-base was already
familiar with AlphaEvolve and benefited from hands on support
from the core team. To explore approaches with a more representa-
tive group, we also gave 11 external mathematicians access to the
interface.
We recruited a pool of participants consisting of top-tier aca-
demic mathematicians from different universities across the US
and Europe based on pre-existing collaborations or scientific con-
nections with our internal SMEs. We orientated participants with
a 45 minute session in which we showed them the interface and
guided them to start their first experiment. To enable a low-friction
feedback channel as well as facilitating discussion and exchange of
ideas between participants, we created a chat group that included
all expert evaluation participants and the AlphaEvolve team. After
roughly three weeks of usage, we scheduled a follow-up session
with our expert evaluation participants and asked them for feedback
on the system.
5
Results
Over three months of usage, our 11 participants created over 2,300
experiments (mean: 59; median: 20) focused on their own areas of
expertise: combinatorics, geometry, and probability and published
multiple papers based on their findings (e.g., [7], [4], [3]). In the
following, we will present the qualitative results of this expert
evaluation obtained through user interviews and observations as
described in section 4. We identified a number of usage patterns
that we believe are generally applicable across AI scientist systems.
5.1
Intentmaking
A primary goal of our interface was to lower the barrier to entry,
particularly for domain experts who do not write code daily. Our
participants told us that, with the experiment configuration assis-
tant, “the barrier to getting started is so low, I just think of something
and I think ‘well, let’s try that’.”
For many participants, a lower barrier to entry meant that they
could try out ideas they might not otherwise have had the confi-
dence to invest time in. One participant commented on the enabling
nature of the tool: “The fact that I don’t have to write any of the code
myself is very, very nice ... if I had to write this code myself, I would
have never really gotten anywhere.”
Aligned with AI powered coding agents, users did not expect to
get it right on the first try; rather, they expected a conversational,
iterative refinement process. As one expert summarized: “I think I
take it to be a given that there’s going to be an iterative process where I
set it up and then I’m like oops no I want to change it and I don’t want
to start over.” During the experiment definition, we observed that
users heavily relied on the low-cost test-stage to iterate rapidly with
visual feedback. Because setting up an experiment only required a
high-level prompt, one user noted they “deliberately didn’t spend too


--- Page 7 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
long trying to think about what I wanted it to do... I thought it would
be easier to see what it guessed and then try and correct it.” Users
treated the initial AI-generated specification as a disposable starting
point, running fast, local tests to evaluate the generated code and
visual feedback before safely committing to a full experiment.
Furthermore, although some users still painstakingly “copy pasted
a very detailed description of the problem,” most gave a very light-
weight initial problem statement in the expectation of refining it
during the definition stage. Despite this rich experiment definition
stage, users rarely ran just one single experiment for a given prob-
lem (cf. Figure 5). This experimental interaction is a key observation
that motivates our concept of an intentmaking, sensemaking loop.
The following dialogue between one of the participants and a
member of the team gives a good flavour of this process, in which
both the characteristics of the problem, and the behaviours of Al-
phaEvolve have to be considered together in order to refine the
experiment definition.
team: I think the reason it’s not working well is that the
reward is too sparse. It’s easy to do n (or n-1 with
your hint) but after that it just keeps trying new
ideas without knowing whether or not it’s going in
the right direction.
user:
Is there a way to add partial scores, so that a score
of 5.1 means 6 hyperplanes, but it’s close to 5.
team: Maybe if 5 hyperplanes cover almost all points,
that’s better than having 6 hyperplanes covering
1/6 each?
user:
A natural one is slicing most of the edges, but it’s
the kind of problem where the 99% case is very
different from the 100% case.
team: If we set the penalty for missing edges pretty high,
then it will have flexibility to move around while
still prioritizing 100% constructions.
In this conversation, the team discusses how to compensate for a
sparse reward function. Another common pattern was for users to
introduce ‘cross-check’ metrics to rule out obviously pathological
results. For example: “I need the best score that has no violations”.
5.2
Sensemaking
Immediately after experiment launch, and multiple times through-
out the first day, users used the overall metrics to ensure that their
experiment was running: “A flat line on any of the key metrics in-
dicates a problem”. Thereafter, they tended to check-in daily, or
sometimes wait multiple days before next checking their exper-
iment. In this phase, users were looking at the overall shape of
the score-chart, evolution tree, constructions, and visualizations to
determine if their experiment was likely to be successful if allowed
to run for longer: “I want to see if my experiment is making ‘real’
progress”. We also found out that users often know what answer
they’re looking for. For example, if “-0.5 is the interesting region, I
can see it’s getting closer but I don’t think it’s ever going to actually
get there”. In such cases, helping users understand an experiment’s
trajectory has been highly appreciated.
Whilst programs are typically the main deliverable of AlphaE-
volve, diagnosing the progress of the experiment by reviewing a
1000+ line program is not efficient. Users tended to rely on a range
of supplementary information to determine if their experiment was
progressing. In many cases the score-chart itself provided the most
immediate clues (e.g., whether increments were within the bounds
of random chance and rounding error or whether larger strate-
gic improvements were still being made); beyond the score-chart,
the constructions (data generated by the programs) and visualiza-
tions of the constructions, were the most used artifacts. Finally, we
provided AI Summaries of the programs (Figure 4, right). Whilst
these were just simple, single-shot AI generated summaries and
provided only vague overviews of the strategies used, they provided
a valuable signal that helped users decide whether to investigate
programs more closely.
Users often had to check the robustness of candidate solutions,
and “let it run a bit longer because I wanted to see how other solutions
evolved and whether simpler ones might emerge.” This is important
for three reasons: firstly, to rule out systematic errors and false-
positives (“I think there’s a lot of sanity checking to be done on the
things it gives me”); secondly, because (“I can’t tell if this was just
a lucky configuration or an interesting new strategy”); thirdly, if a
novel strategy is suspected, “to understand what this idea was? —
because this branch had lots of good ideas.” in order to generalize it
and apply it to other problems.
5.3
Reward Hacking
Reward Hacking is a form of specification misalignment in which
the system maximizes the evaluation function without making
useful progress towards the intended goal. It is common in many
reinforcement-learning and evolutionary systems, and a frequent
failure pattern in AlphaEvolve experiments. In the case of AlphaE-
volve, reward hacks can be particularly ingenious because the sys-
tem relies on LLM powered code mutation. For example, one user
told us the system “created a new class type list in which it updated
the meaning of length.” Such reward hacks are notoriously hard to
foresee, and “it takes a lot of effort to close the loopholes and get it to
search for the thing that you’re actually looking for.”
The critique agent employed during experiment setup as shown
in Figure 6 provided a valuable safety net here. Many common
patterns that lead to reward hacks have already been identified
by the AlphaEvolve team during development, and we captured
these in a prompt. As with experiment definition, where the prompt
guided the users to find the most appropriate AlphaEvolve patterns
to tackle their specific problem, the critique prompt was effective at
identifying common reward hacks before the evolutionary process
had started.
Despite the critique agent, it was still common for reward hacks
to emerge as part of the evolutionary process As such, one user
pointed out that often, when they “thought it was doing well, it
was cheating.” Hence, attempting to treat them as opaque boxes or
intelligent assistants proved to be a risky strategy. Conceptualiz-
ing these systems as scientific instruments where users discover
step-by-step “how you actually specify the objective in a way that it’s
actually what you want”. Users were often starting an initial exper-
iment, then observing it for a while, before restarting a modified
version of the experiment (cf. Figure 5).


--- Page 8 ---
Bäuerle and Connors et al.
Figure 5: Experiment start and stop times for an indicative participant, showing the process of starting with short-lived
experiments and gradually refining the experiment setup before running multi-day experiments. The participant had several
such runs going in parallel, working on different problems, but this graph only shows experiments for the same matrix
connectivity problem for illustrative purposes.
5.4
Workflow Friction: Versioning and
Boundaries
While the core interaction loop was successful, the expert evalu-
ation revealed friction points in experiment management and UI
affordances. Because intentmaking requires heavy iteration, users
quickly generated dozens of slightly modified experiments, leading
to cognitive overload. “Telling my experiments apart is really difficult
and I have to click into the experiment to remind myself what was
different,” one mathematician reported. Users expressed a strong
need for better version control and visual provenance across ex-
periments. One requested “a better view like an overview a tree of
the modifications ... and a better and more efficient way of restoring
previous versions.”
Additionally, the conceptual boundaries of the system were not
always clear to first-time users. A participant admitted they “actu-
ally didn’t know that we could edit manually... until yesterday” and
weren’t “really sure they liked the separation between initial program
and evaluation code.” Furthermore, the agent’s eagerness to rewrite
code sometimes caused destructive edits, with another noting that
asking it to update one function sometimes “destroys the rest of the
evaluation code.”
6
Discussion
A classic human-centered goal is for AI is to augment human in-
telligence rather than replace it, but the patterns that enable the
practical implementation of this goal remain subject to open re-
search. In many ways, AlphaEvolve lends itself well to this because
computer programs are, by their nature, easier to automatically val-
idate. This makes it simpler to filter the vast amounts of generated
data into human-sized chunks, and to extract structured data that
will allow users to derive meaning more easily. More general AI
scientist tools that deal in human-language generation (e.g., hy-
pothesis generation) face a more challenging task, although the
overall patterns explored here remain relevant.
Based on the findings from the user study and our discussions
with expert mathematicians, we summarize below a set of design
considerations for future user interfaces for AI-driven scientific
discovery systems.
6.1
Elevating Intentmaking and Iteration
Getting the most out of a complex system like AlphaEvolve re-
quires the user to develop a very sophisticated mental model of the
system [10], which we observed users building primarily through
trial-and-error.
Lowering the barrier to entry. For scientists, the simplicity of
being able to try out new ideas is not just a question of convenience,
it’s a vitally important contribution that any AI scientist system
should prioritize. In the course of daily work, scientists have many
ideas, all with varying levels of potential impact. The practicalities
of academic and industrial time and budget constraints mean that


--- Page 9 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
scientists continually have to make choices about where to invest
their time based on little more than their expert intuition, which
inevitably leads to many potentially important ideas remaining on
the shelf.
A primary goal of an AI scientist system should be to enable the
rapid, low-cost validation of ideas, thus enabling scientists to try
out ideas they would otherwise have had to leave untested. We be-
lieve this is an important shift in perspective, from asking questions
to trying out ideas. It’s possible that the single most effective way
that AI will accelerate science in the near-term isn’t by generating
novel ideas that a human couldn’t have thought of themselves, but
by making “the barrier to getting started so low, I just think [...] ’well,
let’s try that’.” However, there is an important caveat: the barrier to
entry must consider not just the cost of making the initial query,
but also the cost of validating the answers and then iteratively
refining the question. As such, we see the primary user interaction
with AI-assisted scientific discovery systems as an intentmaking
loop where the problem specification (intent) evolves alongside the
candidate solution.
Defining and Elevating a Boundary Object. To give users a
high-level entry-point to defining and understanding the experi-
ment setup, it helps to define a naturally understandable boundary
object. In the case of AlphaEvolve, this could be the problem context
which is used to instruct new program generations, but the form of
this boundary object generally depends on the type of experiment
and user at hand. Users must intuitively understand this boundary
object, and modifying it should facilitate the definition and changes
to an experiment.
6.2
Enhancing Sensemaking and Diagnosis
Effective use of complex agentic systems like AlphaEvolve requires
the user to have a deep, intuitive understanding of how that system
works born of direct experience, a tacit knowledge rather than a
rules based one. This is particularly true with the kind of LLM-
powered agentic systems that are currently popular in AI scientist
tools.
Prioritize the Experimental Loop. AI scientist systems should
prioritize an iterative intentmaking — sensemaking process that
more closely resembles traditional experimental method. We ob-
served a nuanced behaviour, in which two forms of experimenta-
tion take place in parallel: firstly, users are discovering previously
unknown characteristics of the problem they’re investigating; sec-
ondly, users are discovering previously unknown characteristics of
the way AlphaEvolve tackles those problems. The core workflow
for AI-assisted scientific discovery should prioritize the need to
constantly restart, modify, or fork experiments upon learning from
a promising or failed strategy. This is analogous to many scientific
domains, in which a portion of time is spent interpreting results
and revising hypotheses; but an equally, if not larger, portion of
time is spent ruling out systematic errors and refining instruments
to achieve the required levels of accuracy, stability, etc.
At a high-level, the following quote from one of our participants
might act as a useful north star for future design: “I feel like I could
just go down a rabbit hole of playing with this thing all day... This is
kind of like playing a computer game, right? We’re sort of exploring
the world.”
Elevate Program Constructions and Visualizations. Users pri-
marily assess a solution by eyeballing higher-level outputs such as
constructions and visualizations. We found that such a process is
much more efficient than trying to understand the full solution for
every AI-generated candidate. This is important especially if the
solution includes artifacts that the user is not an expert in, such as
generated code for mathematicians.
Invest in Understanding and Debugging. Users need help to
quickly grasp the strategy of a candidate solution of experiment. Au-
tomatic summaries and explanations of strategies can be provided
across the solution space to aid in tracing ideas and understanding
fundamental differences between different candidate solutions.
Provide Tools to Debug Metrics. Since reward hacking is a con-
stant problem when working with AI assistants, one must pro-
vide robust tools to diagnose issues with the defined metrics of
success. This includes support for multi-objective evaluation (e.g.,
Pareto fronts) and synthesizing experiment progression insights
to draw conclusions on potential metrics flaws and is supported
by the above-mentioned understanding and visualization. One ap-
proach we explored was to capture the same kind of institutional
knowledge that allowed problems statements to be mapped onto
AlphaEvolve patterns in a cross-check prompt that attempted to
identify flaws in the experiment design at test time. (cf. Figure 6).
Users found this helpful to more quickly identify flaws in their
evaluation functions, and thus tightened the experimental cycle,
but more work is needed to ensure that the advice generated here
can be mapped onto improved experiment performance.
6.3
Fostering Robust Interaction
Our findings suggest the interaction model should be robust to the
non-deterministic nature of AI-assisted discovery, enabling users
to maintain control and ask conceptual questions.
Robust Provenance and Versioning. Keeping track of many
iterations of an experiment is a significant book-keeping burden
on scientists, and cataloging that knowledge in a separate system
is likely to lead to duplicated effort and inaccuracy; with so much
invested in AI scientist systems, it seems natural that these systems
should invest equally in rich experiment tracking and provenance
functionality.
Support Conceptual Inquiry. Allow users to ask conceptual
questions of the AI assistant without aggressively or automatically
modifying the experiment or the underlying code. This supports
brainstorming and non-altering refinement of intent.
Altogether, our findings suggest that a user interface for AI-assisted
scientific discovery greatly benefits from being designed to quickly
answer the user’s most important questions, which we found to
revolve around:
(1) Is it still running? (e.g., time since last generation)


--- Page 10 ---
Bäuerle and Connors et al.
Figure 6: Automated diagnostic summary generated to vali-
date the experiment design. This summary is generated when
testing an experiment setup. It describes the setup in natural
language and includes checks for design patterns based on
expert feedback.
(2) Is it still doing useful work? (e.g., time since last improve-
ment)
(3) Have I reached my target? (e.g., did a solution beat some
threshold)
7
Limitations
We believe that many of our findings generalize to other AI sci-
entist systems, but we acknowledge that our narrow focus on Al-
phaEvolve as a system, and mathematics as a domain, limits the
generalizability of some of our recommendations. Specifically, for
problem domains where results are not as automatically verifiable
or systems where turnaround times are much lower, we anticipate
that further research is needed to identify better boundary objects
and richer diagnostic tools that facilitate an effective intentmaking
— sensemaking loop.
Within the time available, we explored a number of ways to
support users to better frame their questions and understand the
system’s responses, but in many cases the solutions we built were
simple first cuts based on single-shot AI prompts, and empirical
evidence for their effectiveness is limited. One area that would
benefit from further work is in the diagnostic tools provided to the
user. There’s an obvious synergy between the tendency of agentic
systems to generate large amounts of data, and the incredible ability
of LLMs to summarize data, but figuring out how to represent results
in a way that’s manageable for a user but doesn’t risk dropping
potentially significant insights, remains an open question.
Furthermore, we must acknowledge that this study was con-
ducted within a highly resourced environment. While our interface
incorporates features like the test-stage and configuration assistant
specifically to minimize unnecessary compute cycles, the partici-
pants in our expert evaluation did not face strict financial or quota
constraints when launching their experiments. In broader academic
and industry settings, compute access remains a significant bot-
tleneck. Future research must investigate how user behavior and
sensemaking strategies change under strict resource constraints,
and how UI affordances might better communicate estimated com-
pute costs and budget management directly within the interaction
loop.
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we present an interactive interface to AlphaEvolve.
This interface was built in coordination with SMEs, who provided
invaluable details around the requirements of users of the system.
We deployed this interface to high-profile, external mathematicians
in a expert evaluation setup, where they were able to use the system
to create their own experiments, and provided qualitative feedback
that we distilled into a number of learnings for AI-assisted scientific
discovery applications. Our results suggest that even when utilizing
highly capable agentic AI systems, deliberate interface design plays
an essential role in making these tools usable for complex tasks.
We see the intentmaking and sensemaking loop, which mirrors
traditional scientific discovery and helps users set up and debug
experiments, as a central framework for AI-assisted scientific ap-
plications, along with rich diagnostic tooling and guidance to map
problem statements to known patterns, so that users can effectively
formulate their problems, observe their experiment’s progress, and
validate their results in an iterative loop. This suggests that using
AI to reduce the cost of trying out ideas is as important (if not more
important) a contribution to science as using AI to generate ideas,
and that thinking of AI scientist systems as scientific instruments
might be a more useful mental model than the more familiar idea
of a scientific assistant.
Acknowledgments
We thank all internal and external collaborators for the extensive
feedback they provided for this work. We especially thank Gabi
Cardoso, Anna Trostanetski, Victoria Johnston, Yosuke Ushigome,
Richard Green, and our early external mathematical partners.


--- Page 11 ---
Intentmaking and Sensemaking
References
[1] Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira
Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N Bennett, Kori Inkpen,
et al. 2019. Guidelines for human-AI interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 chi
conference on human factors in computing systems. 1–13.
[2] Kenneth Appel, Wolfgang Haken, and John Koch. 1977. Every planar map is
four colorable. Part II: Reducibility. Illinois Journal of Mathematics 21, 3 (1977),
491–567.
[3] Gergely Bérczi. 2026. Evolving Local Corrections for Global Constructions in
Combinatorics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.06692 (2026).
[4] Gergely Bérczi. 2026. Evolving Ranking Functions for Canonical Blow-Ups in
Positive Characteristic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06553 (2026).
[5] Oussama Boussif, Mohammed Mahfoud, Younesse Kaddar, Moksh Jain, Sida Li,
Damiano Fornasiere, Xiaoyin Chen, Yoshua Bengio, and Nikolay Malkin. 2025.
Bayesian Symbolic Regression with Entropic Reinforcement Learning. (2025).
[6] Brian Christian. 2020. The alignment problem: Machine learning and human
values. WW Norton & Company.
[7] Jordan Ellenberg, Nicolas Libedinsky, David Plaza, José Simental, and Geordie
Williamson. 2026. Bruhat intervals that are large hypercubes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2601.01235 (2026).
[8] KJ Feng, Kevin Pu, Matt Latzke, Tal August, Pao Siangliulue, Jonathan Bragg,
Daniel S Weld, Amy X Zhang, and Joseph Chee Chang. 2024. Cocoa: Co-planning
and co-execution with ai agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10999 (2024).
[9] Bogdan Georgiev, Javier Gómez-Serrano, Terence Tao, and Adam Zsolt Wag-
ner. 2025. Mathematical exploration and discovery at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.02864 (2025).
[10] Google. 2026.
PAIR Guidebook: Mental Models + Expectations.
https:
//pair.withgoogle.com/guidebook/chapters/mental-models-and-expectations Ac-
cessed: 2026-03-04.
[11] Juraj Gottweis, Wei-Hung Weng, Alexander Daryin, Tao Tu, Anil Palepu, Petar
Sirkovic, Artiom Myaskovsky, Felix Weissenberger, Keran Rong, Ryutaro Tanno,
et al. 2025. Towards an AI co-scientist. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18864 (2025).
[12] Roger Guimerà, Ignasi Reichardt, Antoni Aguilar-Mogas, Francesco A Massucci,
Manuel Miranda, Jordi Pallarès, and Marta Sales-Pardo. 2020. A Bayesian machine
scientist to aid in the solution of challenging scientific problems. Science advances
6, 5 (2020), eaav6971.
[13] Thomas C Hales and Samuel P Ferguson. 2006. A formulation of the Kepler
conjecture. Discrete & Computational Geometry 36, 1 (2006), 21–69.
[14] Eric Horvitz. 1999. Principles of mixed-initiative user interfaces. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 159–166.
[15] Thomas Hubert, Rishi Mehta, Laurent Sartran, Miklós Z Horváth, Goran Žužić,
Eric Wieser, Aja Huang, Julian Schrittwieser, Yannick Schroecker, Hussain Ma-
soom, et al. 2025. Olympiad-level formal mathematical reasoning with reinforce-
ment learning. Nature (2025), 1–3.
[16] Geoffrey Irving, Paul Christiano, and Dario Amodei. 2018. AI safety via debate.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.00899 (2018).
[17] Ellen Jiang, Kristen Olson, Edwin Toh, Alejandra Molina, Aaron Donsbach,
Michael Terry, and Carrie J Cai. 2022. Promptmaker: Prompt-based prototyping
with large language models. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems Extended Abstracts. 1–8.
[18] Ishika Joshi, Simra Shahid, Shreeya Manasvi Venneti, Manushree Vasu, Yantao
Zheng, Yunyao Li, Balaji Krishnamurthy, and Gromit Yeuk-Yin Chan. 2025. Co-
prompter: User-centric evaluation of LLM instruction alignment for improved
prompt engineering. In Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Intelli-
gent User Interfaces. 341–365.
[19] A Gilad Kusne, Heshan Yu, Changming Wu, Huairuo Zhang, Jason Hattrick-
Simpers, Brian DeCost, Suchismita Sarker, Corey Oses, Cormac Toher, Stefano
Curtarolo, et al. 2020. On-the-fly closed-loop materials discovery via Bayesian
active learning. Nature communications 11, 1 (2020), 5966.
[20] Pat Langley, Gary L Bradshaw, and Herbert A Simon. 1981. BACON. 5: The
discovery of conservation laws. In IJCAI, Vol. 81. 121–126.
[21] Jan Leike, Miljan Martic, Victoria Krakovna, Pedro A Ortega, Tom Everitt, An-
drew Lefrancq, Laurent Orseau, and Shane Legg. 2017. AI safety gridworlds.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09883 (2017).
[22] Robert K Lindsay, Bruce G Buchanan, Edward A Feigenbaum, and Joshua Leder-
berg. 1993. DENDRAL: a case study of the first expert system for scientific
hypothesis formation. Artificial intelligence 61, 2 (1993), 209–261.
[23] Yiping Liu, Liting Xu, Yuyan Han, Xiangxiang Zeng, Gary G Yen, and Hisao
Ishibuchi. 2023. Evolutionary multimodal multiobjective optimization for trav-
eling salesman problems. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 28, 2
(2023), 516–530.
[24] Chris Lu, Cong Lu, Robert Tjarko Lange, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, and David Ha.
2024. The ai scientist: Towards fully automated open-ended scientific discovery.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06292 (2024).
[25] Ludovico Mitchener, Angela Yiu, Benjamin Chang, Mathieu Bourdenx, Tyler
Nadolski, Arvis Sulovari, Eric C Landsness, Daniel L Barabasi, Siddharth
Narayanan, Nicky Evans, et al. 2025. Kosmos: An ai scientist for autonomous
discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02824 (2025).
[26] Meredith Ringel Morris. 2025. HCI for AGI. Interactions 32, 2 (2025), 26–32.
[27] Jakob Nielsen. 2023. AI: First new UI paradigm in 60 years. Nielsen Norman
Group 18, 06 (2023), 2023.
[28] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen
Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco JR
Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific
and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 (2025).
[29] Brenden K Petersen, Mikel Landajuela, T Nathan Mundhenk, Claudio P Santiago,
Soo K Kim, and Joanne T Kim. 2019. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering
mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1912.04871 (2019).
[30] Daniel M Russell, Laura Koesten, Aniket Kittur, Nitesh Goyal, and
Michael Xieyang Liu. 2024. Sensemaking: What is it today?. In Extended Abstracts
of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–5.
[31] Samuel Schmidgall, Yusheng Su, Ze Wang, Ximeng Sun, Jialian Wu, Xiaodong
Yu, Jiang Liu, Michael Moor, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. Agent
laboratory: Using llm agents as research assistants. Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025 (2025), 5977–6043.
[32] Donald A Schön. 2017. The reflective practitioner: How professionals think in
action. Routledge.
[33] Hua Shen, Tiffany Knearem, Reshmi Ghosh, Kenan Alkiek, Kundan Krishna,
Yachuan Liu, Savvas Petridis, Yi-Hao Peng, Li Qiwei, Chenglei Si, et al. [n. d.]. Po-
sition: Towards Bidirectional Human-AI Alignment. In The Thirty-Ninth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Position Paper Track.
[34] Hari Subramonyam, Roy Pea, Christopher Pondoc, Maneesh Agrawala, and
Colleen Seifert. 2024. Bridging the gulf of envisioning: Cognitive challenges in
prompt based interactions with LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 1–19.
[35] Sangho Suh, Bryan Min, Srishti Palani, and Haijun Xia. 2023. Sensecape: En-
abling multilevel exploration and sensemaking with large language models. In
Proceedings of the 36th annual ACM symposium on user interface software and
technology. 1–18.
[36] Michael Terry, Chinmay Kulkarni, Martin Wattenberg, Lucas Dixon, and Mered-
ith Ringel Morris. 2023. Interactive AI alignment: Specification, process, and
evaluation alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.00710 (2023).
[37] Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He, and Thang Luong. 2024. Solving
olympiad geometry without human demonstrations. Nature 625, 7995 (2024),
476–482.
[38] Hanchen Wang, Tianfan Fu, Yuanqi Du, Wenhao Gao, Kexin Huang, Ziming Liu,
Payal Chandak, Shengchao Liu, Peter Van Katwyk, Andreea Deac, et al. 2023.
Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence. Nature 620, 7972 (2023),
47–60.
[39] Qian Yang, Aaron Steinfeld, Carolyn Rosé, and John Zimmerman. 2020. Re-
examining whether, why, and how human-AI interaction is uniquely difficult to
design. In Proceedings of the 2020 chi conference on human factors in computing
systems. 1–13.
[40] JD Zamfirescu-Pereira, Heather Wei, Amy Xiao, Kitty Gu, Grace Jung, Matthew G
Lee, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian Yang. 2023. Herding AI cats: Lessons from de-
signing a chatbot by prompting GPT-3. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Designing
Interactive Systems Conference. 2206–2220.
[41] J Diego Zamfirescu-Pereira, Richmond Y Wong, Bjoern Hartmann, and Qian
Yang. 2023. Why Johnny can’t prompt: how non-AI experts try (and fail) to
design LLM prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI conference on human factors
in computing systems. 1–21.
