--- Page 1 ---
Evolutionary Ensemble of Agents
Zongmin Yu
National University of Singapore
yuzongmin@u.nus.edu
Liu Yang∗
National University of Singapore
yangliu@nus.edu.sg
Abstract
We introduce Evolutionary Ensemble (EvE), a decentralized framework
that organizes existing, highly capable coding agents into a live, co-evolving
system for algorithmic discovery. Rather than reinventing the wheel within
the “LLMs as optimizers” paradigm, EvE fixes the base agent substrate and
focuses entirely on evolving the cumulative guidance and skills that dictate
agent behaviors. By maintaining two co-evolving populations, namely
functional code solvers and agent guidance states, the system evaluates
agents through a synchronous race, updating their empirical Elo ratings
based on the marginal gains they contribute to the current solver state.
When applied to a research bottleneck in In-Context Operator Networks
(ICON), EvE autonomously discovered a robust rescale-then-interpolate
mechanism that enables reliable example-count generalization. Crucially,
controlled ablations reveal the absolute necessity of stage-dependent agent
adaptation to navigate the shifting search landscapes of complex codebases.
Compared to variants driven by a fixed initial agent or even a frozen “best-
evolved” agent, EvE uniquely avoids phase mismatch, demonstrating that
organizing agents into a self-revising ensemble is the fundamental driver
for breaking through static performance ceilings.
1
Introduction
The pursuit of automated scientific research and algorithmic discovery driven
by Large Language Models (LLMs) represents a profound ambition in artifi-
cial intelligence. In recent years, LLM-based code-evolution systems, such as
FunSearch (Romera-Paredes et al., 2024), AlphaEvolve (Novikov et al., 2025),
OpenEvolve (Algorithmic Superintelligence, 2026), CodeEvolve (Assumpção
et al., 2025), and ShinkaEvolve (Lange et al., 2025), have made exciting strides
∗Corresponding author.
1
arXiv:2605.09018v1  [cs.NE]  9 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Figure 1: Three paradigms of LLM-driven algorithmic discovery. (a) LLM as
Optimizer. An LLM proposes a code block, which is scored and re-prompted
to LLM. (b) Coding Agent. A modern coding agent operates on a full code
repository with autonomous planning, tool use, and sub-agent invocation. (c)
Evolutionary Ensemble (this work). A decentralized ensemble of coding
agents that evolves with another population of functional components within a
code repository.
by showing that program search can discover useful algorithms. However, despite
these achievements, their operational capabilities on complex codebases still fall
significantly short of those of modern coding agents.
Today, the capabilities of modern coding agents are already exceptionally
advanced. They can operate with autonomous planning, complex reasoning,
sophisticated context management, and sub-agent invocation, often without
human intervention. Because these foundational agentic capabilities are already
highly mature, we choose to shift toward organizing existing, highly capable
coding agents, rather than reinventing the wheels. In particular, we believe
the challenge lies in scalable orchestration of agents, knowledge sharing, and
management of agent guidance and skills. In this paper, we present Evolutionary
Ensemble (EvE) of agents as an exploration in this direction (Figure 1).
We aim to develop an agent ensemble that continuously refines both down-
stream task solvers, represented as functional components within a code reposi-
tory, and the agents themselves. Given that modern coding agents are already
exceptionally capable, and their behaviors are predominantly steered by cus-
tomized guidance and skills, we fix the base agent substrate and conceptualize
the evolution of the guidance and skills as the evolution of the agents themselves.
Notably, the EvE framework remains fully compatible should the base agent
substrate be explicitly incorporated into the evolutionary loop.
In our design, EvE addresses the aforementioned challenges for organizing
agents in an elegant way.
2


--- Page 3 ---
First, EvE unlocks scalable orchestration through a completely decentralized
ensemble architecture. By abandoning rigid agent roles (e.g., “leaders” versus
“workers”), EvE achieves universal compatibility. In principle, any existing agent
or multi-agent system can be seamlessly encapsulated as a single individual
with the ensemble. More profoundly, this naturally supports recursive nesting,
allowing an entire ensemble to function as an individual inside a higher-level
ensemble. Consequently, EvE can adapt to various state-of-the-art systems with
minimal structural modifications.
Second, knowledge sharing is seamlessly achieved across the agent ensemble
through an evolutionary substrate. This occurs on two interconnected levels.
On the first level, agents observe prior solver attempts generated by their peers,
allowing them to learn from both successes and failures. On the second level,
EvE continuously generates new guidance and skills, which directly take existing
agents and their working logs as references.
Finally, EvE realizes the autonomous management and evolution of agent
skills in a rigorous evolutionary way. Agents are encouraged to improve guidance
and skills while editing code repositories. This guidance and these skills are then
repeatedly evaluated during future coding edits, with concrete scores that drive
sampling probability.
We applied EvE on a task encountered during our own research, in particular,
the positional-encoding design for in-context operator networks (ICON) (Yang
et al., 2023; Yang and Osher, 2024; Yang et al., 2025; Cao et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2026; Zhang et al., 2025a; Meng et al., 2025; Cole et al., 2026; Liu et al., 2023;
Cole et al., 2024; Mishra et al., 2025). In an ablation study with controlled
token budgets, EvE achieves the strongest, most stable performance compared
to a fixed initial agent or “best-evolved” agent. These results validate that
organizing agents into a live, evolving ensemble is the fundamental driver of
breaking through performance ceilings. The repository for EvE and the generated
artifacts for ICON are hosted at https://github.com/scaling-group/eve.
2
Method
2.1
Agents and Solvers
EvE maintains two scored populations (Figure 2):
S = {(sj, ls
j, vs
j)},
A = {(ai, la
i , va
i )}.
Here sj represents a solver, defined as a set of code files within the base repository
B, associated with its evaluation log ls
j and score vs
j provided by the task evaluator
f. ai denotes an agent with its cumulative working logs la
i and a score va
i .
Scoring agents plays a critical role in the evolution of agents. It acts not
only as a gatekeeper for sampling probability but also as a compass for agent
improvement. The primary difficulty lies in the shifting requirements of the
solver; much like a human organization, the ideal structure for a startup phase
differs fundamentally from that of a mature enterprise. In alignment with the
3


--- Page 4 ---
Figure 2: The EvE framework. EvE maintains two co-evolving populations:
a solver population S containing functional components in a code repository,
and an agent population A where each agent carries cumulative working logs
and an Elo-based score. In each iteration, a “synchronous race” is conducted:
multiple working agents ai are sampled to operate within mutually independent
yet identical workspaces. While the environmental context, comprising reference
solvers ¯Sn, reference agents ¯
An, and the base repository B, is held constant,
each agent utilizes its unique guidance and skills to produce a new solver ˆsi
and a revised agent ˆai. This controlled setup allows agent Elo ratings to be
updated based on the performance of their newly generated solvers, effectively
distinguishing the effectiveness of each agent’s strategy.
No Free Lunch theorem, which posits that no single optimization strategy excels
across all problem domains, a universal agent is inherently sub-optimal across
the entire lifecycle of algorithmic discovery. As the solver evolves from a “startup”
phase to a “late-stage refinement” phase, the underlying search landscape shifts,
requiring a corresponding evolution in agent guidance and skills.
EvE manages this complexity by scoring the agents via a dynamic benchmark-
ing mechanism, where the value of an agent is tied to its marginal contribution
to the current states of solvers. Specifically, EvE ranks agents by treating each
optimization iteration as a synchronous race. Multiple agents are sampled to
refine the same set of high-performing solvers, and their relative Elo ratings
are updated based on the quality of their respective outputs. This pairwise
competition among agents focuses on their ability to extract marginal gains
from an identical baseline, allowing the ensemble to identify and promote the
most effective optimization strategies for the current developmental stage. This
Elo-based scoring method is adopted from Escher-Loop (Liu et al., 2026).
Specifically, in each iteration n, EvE samples a set of high-performing working
4


--- Page 5 ---
agents An, along with reference sets of solvers ¯Sn and agents ¯
An, which are
combined with the base code repository B to provide context for the evolutionary
step. Each working agent ai ∈An operates on the same reference set to generate
new solvers and agents. This execution is denoted as:
(ˆsi, ˆai, ˆla
i ) = ai( ¯Sn, ¯
An, B).
(1)
The outputs consist of a new solver candidate ˆsi, a potentially revised agent
guidance ˆai, and a session log ˆla
i documenting the generation process.
By forcing all sampled agents ai ∈An to refine the same reference set, EvE
constructs a strictly pairwise competition where the variance in the resulting
solver quality {ˆvs
i }i∈I is directly attributed to the effectiveness of each agent’s
specific strategy. As detailed in Algorithm 1, this process begins with the con-
struction of a win-loss matrix W based on the evaluation results of the solver
candidates. These outcomes are then processed via the EloUpdate function to
adjust the agents’ scores {va
i }i∈I. This approach isolates the marginal contri-
bution of each agent relative to an identical baseline, allowing the ensemble to
identify and promote the most effective optimization strategies for the current
developmental stage.
Following evaluation, the agent ensemble is expanded by integrating modified
agents ˆai ̸= ai along with their session logs ˆla
i into A, ensuring that new
optimization strategies and their underlying procedural evidence, including
reasoning traces and failed attempts, are preserved.
2.2
Integrated Agent Workspace
Modern coding agents are extremely proficient at navigating complex file systems
and manipulating source code within a structured environment. EvE leverages
this by constructing a dedicated workspace for each agent, with all dependencies
included in the workspace. The agent then performs a series of file-system
operations to produce the refined solvers and agents, with its modification scope
explicitly restricted to designated files and subsequently enforced by rigorous
post-generation checks. This marks a departure from the early experimentation
of Escher-Loop, which remains limited to the “LLMs as optimizers” paradigm
by evolving code blocks and LLM prompt builders, with limited capability on
complex tasks.
Instead of the rigid, alternating multi-phase process of the original Escher-
Loop, EvE integrates solver improvement and self-referential agent optimization
into a single, unified stage. In this way, EvE maximizes the scalability and
parallelism of the entire evolutionary system. Furthermore, this integrated design
provides a much broader context for both solver and agent refinement, compared
with the decoupled multi-phase evolution in Escher-Loop. EvE grants the working
agent full visibility into the examples of solvers and agents, their scores and
logs, and the base code repository all at once, ensuring that the self-referential
agent optimization undergoes more purposeful, context-aware evolution, directly
adapting their strategies to the specific structure and optimization bottlenecks
of the codebase they are improving.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Algorithm 1: Evolutionary Ensemble of Agents
Input: Base code repository B, Task evaluator f; initial solver
population S0; initial agent population A0; total iterations T.
Output: Updated populations S and A.
S ←S0; A ←A0
for n = 1, . . . , T do
An = {(ai, la
i , va
i )}i∈I ←Sample(A)
// Sample working agents
¯Sn = {(sj, ls
j, vs
j)}j∈J ←Sample(S)
// Sample reference solvers
¯
An = {(ak, la
k, va
k)}k∈K ←Sample(A)
// Sample reference agents
for i ∈I in parallel do
(ˆsi, ˆai, ˆla
i ) ←ai( ¯Sn, ¯
An, B)
// Generate new solver and agent
(ˆls
i , ˆvs
i ) ←f(ˆsi)
// Evaluate solver
S ←S ∪{(ˆsi, ˆls
i , ˆvs
i )}
// Add to solver population
la
i ←la
i ∪ˆla
i
// Update agent working logs
end
W ←Competition({ˆls
i }i∈I)
// Construct pairwise win-loss matrix
{va
i }i∈I ←EloUpdate(W, {va
i }i∈I)
// Update agent Elo ratings
A ←A ∪{(ˆai, ˆla
i , ˆva
i = va
i ) | i ∈I, ˆai ̸= ai} // Expand agent ensemble
end
return S, A
3
Task
3.1
In-Context Operator Networks
Operator learning is the problem of approximating the map between functions
from data. A broad range of the scientific machine learning problems can be
formulated as operator learning. For example, problems in weather prediction,
fluid dynamics, and molecular simulation can be abstracted as approximating
the solution operator of a differential equation that maps an initial condition to
the future state.
Standard neural operator methods learn these maps from input-output func-
tion pairs, training one model per operator. In-Context Operator Networks
(ICON) (Yang et al., 2023) makes a leap forward: a single model receives k
input-output example pairs at inference time and infers the hidden operator on
the fly without fine-tuning. Several extensions have advanced the core framework:
ICON-LM (Yang et al., 2025) incorporates an autoregressive architecture with a
next-function prediction training paradigm; Yang and Osher (2024) demonstrated
generalization to new PDE forms unseen during training; GenICON (Zhang
et al., 2025a) introduced probabilistic modeling and uncertainty quantification by
interpreting ICON as implicit Bayesian inference. The paradigm has also been
applied to multi-physics fluid dynamics (Cao et al., 2024), graph-structured spa-
6


--- Page 7 ---
tiotemporal prediction (Wu et al., 2026), and optimal execution in finance (Meng
et al., 2025; Cole et al., 2026). Theoretically, it is supported by robustness
guarantees under domain shift (Liu et al., 2023), generalization bounds (Cole
et al., 2024), and connections to gradient descent in function spaces (Mishra
et al., 2025).
As an example, we consider ICON for the prediction of 1D systems governed
by conservation law (Yang and Osher, 2024) with periodic boundary condition:
∂tu(t, x) + ∂xf(u(t, x)) = 0,
x ∈[0, 1],
(2)
where f is the flux function. For simplicity, we use ut to denote the function
u(t, ·). We can define the forward operator Ff,τ : u0 7→uτ, and input and output
of ICON model Tθ (realized as a transformer) write as
bu(q)
τ
= Tθ
 {(u(i)
0 , u(i)
τ )}k
i=1, u(q)
0

,
(3)
where each contextual example pair (u(i)
0 , u(i)
τ ) exemplify the operator Ff,τ via
relationship u(i)
τ
= Ff,τ(u(i)
0 ). The output bu(q)
τ
aims to approximate u(q)
τ
=
Ff,τ(u(q)
0 ) corresponding to the query function u(q)
0 .
3.2
Challenge: Example-Count Generalization
We hope to achieve test-time scaling for ICON: more in-context examples should
give the model more information about the hidden operator and therefore produce
more accurate predictions. In the original ICON architecture (Yang et al., 2023),
however, this scaling remains an open problem.
The core bottleneck lies in the gap between training constraints and test-time
requirements. The model is typically trained with a fixed number of examples
(e.g., k = 5), but must generalize to much larger k at inference. As k increases,
the sequence length grows, placing tokens from additional examples at positions
the model never encountered during training. In the original design, positions are
encoded using a learned embedding table indexed by example slots. This table
has a fixed capacity: it lacks entries for any examples beyond the fifth, causing
prediction performance to degrade sharply as soon as the sequence exceeds its
pre-defined limit.
Redesigning the positional encoding (PE) and model architecture to support
variable example counts presents a concrete research problem with a vast design
space. Solving it is not a simple parameter tweak; it requires navigating a complex
research codebase, combining domain expertise with coordinated engineering
changes across multiple files, and validating candidates through a complicated
training and evaluation pipeline. We applied EvE to this problem, with the
agent ensemble operating directly on the full ICON source repository, a complete
research codebase with model implementation, training pipeline, and evaluation
infrastructure.
7


--- Page 8 ---
3.3
Experiment Setup
The experiments in this work use the benchmark of 1D conservation law with
random cubic flux from Yang and Osher (2024):
∂tu + ∂x(au3 + bu2 + cu) = 0,
x ∈[0, 1],
(4)
where a, b, c ∼Uniform[−1, 1] are sampled independently for each operator
instance. Each instance maps an initial condition drawn from a periodic Gaussian
random field to the solution at τ = 0.1 (details in Appendix A). The training
set contains 1,000 operator instances with 100 initial conditions each.
At training time the model sees k = 5 in-context examples. At evaluation it
is tested with k = 1, 2, . . . , 10: the first five fall within the training distribution,
while k = 6 through k = 10 constitute a strict out-of-distribution regime in
which the model must handle longer sequences than it ever encountered during
training.
For each example count k, the error is the mean absolute error on a held-out
validation set:
ek = 1
|V|
X
v∈V
1
Nx
Nx
X
j=1
bu(v)
τ (xj) −u(v)
τ (xj)
,
(5)
where V is the validation set and Nx = 100 is the number of spatial grid points.
The headline metric averages over all example counts:
e = 1
10
10
X
k=1
ek.
(6)
The solver score used by EvE (corresponding to vs
j in Algorithm 1) is s = −e
(higher is better). During the evolutionary search, each candidate is trained for
2,000 steps, sufficient to rank PE designs and enable rapid iteration.
4
Results
4.1
EvE Variants
We design three experimental conditions to isolate the contribution of the live
agent ensemble. Each condition is run twice independently under identical
compute and training budgets:
• EvE: the full ensemble condition. The agent population is sampled, scored,
and updated continuously alongside solver production.
• Static-Initial: the initial agent is used throughout the entire search, with
no agent evolution.
• Static-Final: the single best-rated agent from the corresponding com-
pleted EvE run is extracted and frozen. The same solver search is then
run with this agent held static.
8


--- Page 9 ---
The three conditions form a gradient: no evolution (Static-Initial), full
evolution followed by freezing the best agent (Static-Final), and continuous
evolution (EvE). This isolates whether evolving agents helps, and if so, whether
a single evolved agent suffices or the adaptation must continue alongside the
search. In all runs we set T = 15 iterations with |I| = 2 working agents running
in parallel, |J| = 8 reference solvers, and |K| = 4 reference agents per iteration
(Algorithm 1). Further configuration details are provided in Appendix A.2.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Equivalent tokens (M)
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.30
0.50
Best-so-far error
 Seed
EvE
Static-Initial
Static-Final
Figure 3: Search trajectories for all three variants (two independent runs each).
The y-axis is the running minimum of mean error e (lower is better); the x-axis
is cumulative equivalent tokens Teq in millions (Appendix A.1). The gray dashed
line marks the Seed baseline.
Figure 3 compares all three variants. The two EvE runs (red) descend in
near-lockstep, converging to almost identical final errors. The two Static-Initial
runs (blue) diverge: one eventually approaches EvE, while the other plateaus at
a visibly higher level. One might expect Static-Final to consistently outperform
Static-Initial, since it starts from a higher-rated agent. Instead, one Static-Final
run (green) plateaus early above even the worse Static-Initial run, while the
other lands between the two Static-Initial curves. The likely explanation is phase
mismatch: the frozen agent was optimized for the late stage of the original EvE
run, where the solver population was already strong, but a fresh search starts
from the Seed and requires early-stage exploration strategies that this agent no
longer carries (Section 4.3 provides direct evidence for this phase dependence).
Collectively, these comparisons demonstrate that continuous evolution is
indispensable. Eliminating this process, either by omitting it entirely (Static-
Initial) or by fixing a specific snapshot (Static-Final), compromises performance
and robustness. In Section 4.3, we examine the specific agent behaviors that
underpin these findings.
9


--- Page 10 ---
4.2
Example-Count Generalization
The challenge motivating this work is example-count generalization: whether the
model can handle more in-context examples than it was trained on (Section 3.2).
The headline metric e averages over both in-distribution (k ≤5) and out-of-
distribution (k > 5) example counts, so it cannot distinguish whether a variant
improves within the trained range or also generalizes beyond it. Figure 4 resolves
this by plotting per-example-count error curves for the best PE method from
each of the two independent runs per variant. To investigate the performance of
the fully trained model, the top solvers are also evaluated with 10,000 training
steps for comparison.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Example count k
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.0
Error
EvE
Static-Initial
Static-Final
Seed
(a) 2,000 training steps
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Example count k
0.03
0.05
0.10
0.20
0.50
1.0
Error
EvE
Static-Initial
Static-Final
Seed
(b) 10,000 training steps
Figure 4: Per-example-count error curves (k = 1 through k = 10) at two training
budgets. Each variant contributes the best PE method from each of its two
independent runs; the Seed (gray, ICON vanilla PE) is the reference baseline.
See Table 1 for method details.
The Seed (gray) exposes the baseline failure: error is moderate for k ≤5
but collapses catastrophically once the example count exceeds the training
boundary. All evolved methods avoid this collapse. Among them, the EvE (red)
performs the best, with error staying below 0.15 even at k = 10 in the 2,000-step
budget and below 0.08 at k = 10 under full training. Both Static-Initial (blue)
and Static-Final (green) under-perform the EvE, and demonstrate the lack of
robustness.
4.3
Stage-Dependent Agent Adaptation
Figures 5 and 6 show how agent behavior shifts over the course of each of the
two independent EvE runs.
10


--- Page 11 ---
(a) Agent guidance update
at iteration 1
“Updated the search
directions to make the
structured-position family
more actionable for ICON
specifically. Added a note
that the stock index_pos is
block-level rather than
token-level, and recorded the
slot/role/offset
decomposition as a clean
diversification probe when
examples are dominated by
learned-absolute baselines.”
▷Identifies flat index_pos as
the bottleneck and steers
search toward slot/role/offset
decomposition.
(b)
Agent
guidance
up-
date at iteration 4
“Recorded a workspace-local
result: demo-slot position
interpolation is currently
the strongest visible family
in the sampled evidence and
should be treated as an
active direction rather than
a fallback. This is intended
to steer later Phase 2 runs
away from overcommitting
to the copied structured-PE
prefill.”
▷Promotes demo-slot
interpolation to the active
direction and steers working
agents to extend it.
(c) Agent guidance update
at iteration 8
“Recorded local workspace
evidence: interpolation-only
variants underperformed the
best structured+bias solver,
and overflow-triggered
hybrids were the unstable
family. Added a concrete
follow-up suggestion to
probe role-conditioned
long-context bias
compression before
revisiting more aggressive
overflow hybrids.”
▷Retracts global rescale and
overflow hybrids; redirects
search toward conservative
long-context compression.
(d) Solver PE at iter 2
(e = 0.117)
InterpolatedDemoPE.forward
(excerpt):
demo_id = index_pos // 3
# slot
role
= index_pos %
3
# role
scaled
= demo_id * (mt / max(1,
demo_max))
lo, hi
= scaled.floor(), scaled.
ceil()
emb
= lerp(table[lo], table[hi],
scaled-lo)
return emb + role_emb(role)
Implements the slot/role
split from (a), rescaling
unseen demo indices into
the trained [0, 5] range.
(e) Solver PE at iter 5
(e = 0.186)
OverflowAware
InterpolatedDemoPE
(excerpt):
emb_base = interp_demo(demo_id)
overflow = relu(demo_id - max_train)
gate
= sigmoid(gate_param)
residual = sin_cos(overflow * freqs)
return emb_base + role_emb(role) +
gate * overflow_scale *
residual
Extends (b)’s interpolation
backbone with a gated
sinusoidal residual beyond
the trained demo range.
(f) Solver PE at iter 11
(e = 0.139)
InterpolatedDemoPE
overflow-only (excerpt):
in_range = clamp(demo_id, max=mt)
overflow = relu(demo_id - mt)
compr
= log1p(overflow / k) * k
coord
= in_range + compr
# no
global rescale
emb
= lerp_table(coord)
return emb + role_emb(role)
Follows (c): preserves
in-range geometry and
compresses only the
overflow tail with log1p.
Figure 5: Run 1: from agent guidance to solver code. Top row: agent guidance
updates appended at iterations 1, 4, and 8. Bottom row: PE code written
by later working agents that read those updates. Each column traces how a
guidance update (top) materializes as solver code (bottom). Columns (c) and
(f) show a late-phase strategy reversal: the agent retracts an earlier direction,
and the matching code change lands within a few iterations.
11


--- Page 12 ---
(a) Agent guidance update
at iteration 1
“Added a note under the
position-interpolation
family: when ICON uses a
learned embedding over
coarse demo/role IDs,
long-context failure may be
caused by untrained
embedding rows rather than
attention behavior. The
recommended probe is to
decompose the coarse ID
into demo-index plus role
and interpolate demo
coordinates back into the
trained range before lookup.”
▷Identifies untrained
embedding rows and
proposes demo/role
decomposition with in-range
interpolation.
(b)
Agent
guidance
up-
date at iteration 5
“Recorded a local lesson from
this workspace: once a
structured/interpolated
absolute PE is already in
place, a cleaner next probe
than adding more absolute
gating is to inject
demo-distance plus role-pair
relative attention bias in the
transformer.”
▷Marks gated hybrids as
risky and redirects search
from absolute-side gating to
relative attention bias.
(c) Agent guidance update
at iteration 14
“Recorded a concrete
follow-up: keep the
structured/interpolated PE
and structured RoPE path,
but change only the
relative-bias distance
coordinate so the trained
demo window stays exact
and overflow distance is
compressed smoothly instead
of globally rescaled.”
▷Keeps the dominant PE
fixed while compressing only
overflow distance smoothly.
(d) Solver PE at iter 1
(e = 0.121)
InterpolatedDemo
RoleEmbedding (excerpt):
demo_id = index // num_roles
role
= index %
num_roles
denom
= max(demo_id.max(), mt, 1)
scaled
= demo_id * (mt / denom)
lo, hi
= scaled.floor(), clamp(lo+1,
mt)
demo_pe = lerp(table[lo], table[hi],
scaled-lo)
return demo_pe + role_emb(role)
Implements (a)’s in-range
interpolation as pure
demo/role lookup tables,
without local sinusoid.
(e) Solver PE at iter 6
(e = 0.117)
StructuredFunctionPE
simplified (excerpt):
# absolute side: bare baseline
table = nn.Embedding(mt + 1, dim)
demo_pe = lerp_in_range_table(
demo_id)
role_pe = role_emb(role)
local
= scale * sin_cos(offsets)
return demo_pe + role_pe + local
# relative bias in
transformer_evolve.py
Acts on (b): restores the
simplest interpolated
absolute PE and moves
complexity to relative bias.
(f) Solver PE at iter 15
(e = 0.108)
StructuredFunctionPE log1p
(excerpt):
in_range = clamp(demo_id, max=mt)
overflow = relu(demo_id - mt)
compr
= k * log1p(overflow / k)
coord
= in_range + compr
scale
= mt / max(coord.max(), mt)
demo_pe
= lerp_table(coord * scale)
return demo_pe + role_emb(role) +
local
Implements (c): keeps
in-range coordinates exact
and compresses overflow
with log1p before rescaling.
Figure 6: Run 2: from agent guidance to solver code, with the same layout
as Figure 5. Top row: agent guidance updates at iterations 1, 5, and 14.
Bottom row: PE code written by working agents. Column (a) and (d) are
parallel outputs from the same iteration (the guidance update and the solver
were produced in the same agent session); columns (b)→(e) and (c)→(f) show
later working agents reading accumulated guidance.
One can clearly see the stage-dependent agent adaptation. In the early
iterations (column a), agents identify the structural bottleneck and propose
broad exploration directions. In the middle phase (column b), agents ground
their updates in accumulated solver evidence: they promote the most promising
12


--- Page 13 ---
PE family observed so far and steer subsequent working agents toward extending
it. In the late phase (column c), agents retract earlier strategies that have
stopped producing gains and redirect search toward finer-grained refinements.
The matching solver-side changes (bottom row) confirm that these agent updates
materialize as concrete code within a few iterations.
The two independent runs exhibit the same progression, suggesting that
this pattern of stage-dependent agent adaptation is a robust property of EvE.
Appendix A.5 describes all six evolved solvers and the Seed baseline in detail.
4.4
Computational Cost
All coding-agent sessions run on Codex, included in a single ChatGPT Pro
subscription ($200/month) with no additional API billing. The equivalent-token
metric Teq (Appendix A.1) uses API list prices solely as normalization weights
for comparison; the actual agent-side cost is fully covered by the subscription. A
single EvE run of 15 iterations with 2 working agents fits comfortably under the
rate limit of one account.
For the GPU usage in model training and evaluation, each iteration evaluates
2 solver candidates in parallel, each taking no more than 40 minutes on 2
NVIDIA A40 GPUs (typically around 20 minutes; the variation depends on
the computational efficiency of the candidate’s implementation). Each iteration
completes in roughly 40 to 60 minutes end-to-end, including the coding-agent
session. Over 15 iterations, one complete run takes approximately 10 to 15 hours,
consuming 20-30 A40 GPU-hours.
5
Related Work
LLM-guided code evolution.
Evolutionary search over executable code
has a long history, from genetic programming (Koza, 1992) through AutoML-
Zero (Real et al., 2020). The recent generation of LLM-guided program search
(Lehman et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Romera-Paredes et al., 2024; Novikov
et al., 2025; Algorithmic Superintelligence, 2026; Assumpção et al., 2025; Lange
et al., 2025) shows that language-model-driven proposals can discover useful
scientific and algorithmic code. In all of these systems, however, the evolving
object is a single code artifact and the search organization around it (mutation
operators, diversity descriptors, archive policies) is fixed at design time. Classical
coevolution demonstrated that search dynamics can be shaped by interactions
between evolving populations (Hillis, 1990; Paredis, 1995; Rosin and Belew,
1997). Escher-Loop (Liu et al., 2026) introduced this dual-population structure
into LLM-based code search, evaluating guidance states through the solvers they
produce. EvE inherits this credit-assignment mechanism but departs from the
“LLMs as optimizers” paradigm: instead of evolving prompt builders around
weaker solvers, EvE evolves agent guidance and skills that steer already-capable
coding agents.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Self-modifying agents.
A separate line of work evolves the agent itself.
Darwin Gödel Machine (Zhang et al., 2025b) maintains an expanding archive
of agent variants selected by empirical fitness. Huxley-Gödel Machine (Wang
et al., 2025) refines this with clade-level credit assignment, evaluating an agent
variant by the aggregate performance of its descendants. HyperAgents (Zhang
et al., 2026b) extends the idea to a fully self-referential program in which the
meta-level modification procedure is itself editable. SICA (Robeyns et al., 2025)
removes the separation between task agent and meta agent entirely, letting a
single agent edit its own code. These systems share a common design choice: the
base agent substrate is part of what evolves. EvE takes the opposite position,
fixing the base agent substrate and restricting evolution to the agent guidance
and skills that organize each agent’s behavior.
Skill and guidance evolution.
Rather than modifying the agent, a grow-
ing body of work evolves the skills, prompts, or guidance that agents receive.
OPRO (Yang et al., 2024) showed that language models can optimize prompts
from scored histories, and PromptBreeder (Fernando et al., 2024) extended this
by evolving the mutation prompts themselves. More recently, CoEvoSkills (Zhang
et al., 2026a) co-evolves structured skill packages alongside surrogate verifiers
as two coupled populations. Group-Evolving Agents (Weng et al., 2026) treats
the group as the evolutionary unit, enabling experience sharing across agent
branches. CORAL (Qu et al., 2026) combines persistent shared memory with
asynchronous multi-agent exploration for open-ended discovery. EvE belongs to
this family: it fixes the coding agent and evolves agent guidance and skills as
a scored population. The distinguishing mechanism is dual-population credit
assignment, where agent fitness is determined solely by the downstream improve-
ment of the solvers they help produce, rather than by intrinsic skill quality or
surrogate verification.
6
Conclusion
In this work, we introduced Evolutionary Ensemble (EvE), a decentralized
framework for algorithmic discovery that organizes highly capable coding agents
into a co-evolving system. Rather than reinventing the wheel within the “LLMs
as optimizers” paradigm, EvE fixes the base agent substrate and focuses entirely
on evolving the cumulative guidance and skills that dictate agent behaviors.
By maintaining two co-evolving populations, namely functional code solvers
and agent guidance states, EvE elegantly integrates solver refinement and self-
referential agent optimization into a single, highly parallelized stage.
We demonstrated the efficacy of EvE on a challenging research problem: the
positional-encoding bottleneck for example-count generalization in In-Context
Operator Networks (ICON). EvE autonomously discovered a robust rescale-
then-interpolate mechanism that significantly surpassed the original baseline
design. Crucially, our controlled ablations revealed the absolute necessity of
stage-dependent agent adaptation. Compared to variants constrained by a fixed
14


--- Page 15 ---
initial agent or even a frozen “best-evolved” agent, the full EvE framework
uniquely avoided early stagnation and phase mismatch. These findings confirm
that organizing agents into a live, self-revising ensemble is the fundamental driver
for breaking through static performance ceilings.
Looking forward, EvE’s role-free design achieves universal compatibility,
establishing a highly flexible foundation for agentic discovery. This architecture
naturally supports recursive nesting, allowing any existing multi-agent system, or
even an entire ensemble itself, to be seamlessly encapsulated as a single individual
within the evolutionary loop. We believe that such self-revising, decentralized
ensembles will play a pivotal role in scaling robust automated scientific research.
The evolutionary ensemble perspective also introduces a significant frontier
for future inquiry: the optimization of inter-agent connection topology. Much
like the interactions in an Ising model, where global order emerges from local
spin alignments, the efficacy of an ensemble depends on the precise “coupling”
between its constituent agents.
Future research should address how these
connections, which govern information flow and cognitive alignment, can be
properly configured. Optimizing these topologies will be essential to ensure
that decentralized ensembles do not descend into stochastic noise or, conversely,
a collapsed state of perfect alignment where the loss of diversity stifles true
discovery. The goal is instead to achieve a phase transition into coherent large-
scale scientific reasoning.
Acknowledgements
Liu Yang acknowledges support from the National Research Foundation, Sin-
gapore, under the NRF fellowship (Project No. NRF-NRFF17-2025-0006). We
acknowledge NUS IT’s Research Computing group for providing computational
support.
References
Algorithmic Superintelligence. OpenEvolve. GitHub repository, 2026. https:
//github.com/algorithmicsuperintelligence/openevolve.
Henrique Assumpção, Diego Ferreira, Leandro Campos, and Fabricio Murai.
CodeEvolve: An open source evolutionary coding agent for algorithm discovery
and optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14150, 2025.
Yadi Cao, Yuxuan Liu, Liu Yang, Rose Yu, Hayden Schaeffer, and Stanley J.
Osher. VICON: Vision in-context operator networks for multi-physics fluid
dynamics prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16063, 2024.
Frank Cole, Yulong Lu, Wuzhe Xu, and Tianhao Zhang. In-context learning of
linear systems: Generalization theory and applications to operator learning,
2024.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Frank Cole, Dixi Wang, Yineng Chen, Yulong Lu, and Rongjie Lai. In-context
operator learning on the space of probability measures, 2026.
Chrisantha Fernando, Dylan Banarse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero,
and Tim Rocktäschel. Promptbreeder: Self-referential self-improvement via
prompt evolution. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2024.
W. Daniel Hillis.
Co-evolving parasites improve simulated evolution as an
optimization procedure. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1-3):228–234,
1990. doi: 10.1016/0167-2789(90)90076-2.
John R. Koza. Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by
Means of Natural Selection. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992.
Robert Tjarko Lange, Yuki Imajuku, and Edoardo Cetin. ShinkaEvolve: Towards
open-ended and sample-efficient program evolution, 2025. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/2509.19349.
Joel Lehman, Jonathan Gordon, Shawn Jain, Kamal Ndousse, Cathy Yeh,
and Kenneth O. Stanley.
Evolution through large models.
In Handbook
of Evolutionary Machine Learning, Genetic and Evolutionary Computation,
pages 331–366. Springer Nature, Singapore, 2023. doi: 10.1007/978-981-99-
3814-8\_11.
Fei Liu, Xialiang Tong, Mingxuan Yuan, Xi Lin, Fu Luo, Zhenkun Wang, Zhichao
Lu, and Qingfu Zhang. Evolution of heuristics: Towards efficient automatic
algorithm design using large language model.
In Proceedings of the 41st
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
Jerry Weihong Liu, N. Benjamin Erichson, Kush Bhatia, Michael W. Mahoney,
and Christopher Re. Does in-context operator learning generalize to domain-
shifted settings?
In NeurIPS 2023 Workshop on the Symbiosis of Deep
Learning and Differential Equations (DLDE III), 2023.
Ziyang Liu, Xinyan Guo, Xuchen Wei, Han Hao, and Liu Yang. Escher-loop:
Mutual evolution by closed-loop self-referential optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.23472, 2026.
Tingwei Meng, Moritz Voß, Nils Detering, Giulio Farolfi, Stanley J. Osher, and
Georg Menz. Solving optimal execution problems via in-context operator
networks, 2025.
Abhiti Mishra, Yash Patel, and Ambuj Tewari. Continuum transformers perform
in-context learning by operator gradient descent, 2025.
Alexander Novikov, Ngan Vu, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen
Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Fran-
cisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat
Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli,
16


--- Page 17 ---
and Matej Balog. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic
discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
Jan Paredis. Coevolutionary computation. Artificial Life, 2(4):355–375, 1995.
doi: 10.1162/artl.1995.2.4.355.
Ao Qu, Han Zheng, Zijian Zhou, Yihao Yan, Yihong Tang, Shao Yong Ong,
Fenglu Hong, Kaichen Zhou, Chonghe Jiang, Minwei Kong, Jiacheng Zhu,
Xuan Jiang, Sirui Li, Cathy Wu, Bryan Kian Hsiang Low, Jinhua Zhao, and
Paul Pu Liang. CORAL: Towards autonomous multi-agent evolution for
open-ended discovery, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.01658.
Esteban Real, Chen Liang, David R. So, and Quoc V. Le.
AutoML-Zero:
Evolving machine learning algorithms from scratch. In Proceedings of the 37th
International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 119 of Proceedings of
Machine Learning Research, pages 8007–8019. PMLR, 2020.
Maxime Robeyns, Martin Szummer, and Laurence Aitchison. A self-improving
coding agent, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.15228.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov,
Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jor-
dan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhus-
sein Fawzi. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language
models. Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06924-6.
Christopher D. Rosin and Richard K. Belew. New methods for competitive
coevolution. Evolutionary Computation, 5(1):1–29, 1997. doi: 10.1162/evco.
1997.5.1.1.
Wenyi Wang, Piotr Piękos, Nanbo Li, Firas Laakom, Yimeng Chen, Mateusz Os-
taszewski, Mingchen Zhuge, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Huxley-gödel machine:
Human-level coding agent development by an approximation of the optimal
self-improving machine, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21614.
Zhaotian Weng, Antonis Antoniades, Deepak Nathani, Zhen Zhang, Xiao Pu,
and Xin Eric Wang. Group-evolving agents: Open-ended self-improvement
via experience sharing, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.04837.
Chenghan Wu, Zongmin Yu, Boai Sun, and Liu Yang. Graph in-context op-
erator networks for generalizable spatiotemporal prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.12725, 2026.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou,
and Xinyun Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2309.03409.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Liu Yang and Stanley J. Osher. PDE generalization of in-context operator
networks: A study on 1D scalar nonlinear conservation laws. Journal of
Computational Physics, 519:113379, 2024. doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2024.113379.
Liu Yang, Siting Liu, Tingwei Meng, and Stanley J. Osher. In-context operator
learning with data prompts for differential equation problems. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 120(39):e2310142120, 2023. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.2310142120.
Liu Yang, Siting Liu, and Stanley J. Osher. Fine-tune language models as
multi-modal differential equation solvers. Neural Networks, 2025. doi: 10.
1016/j.neunet.2025.107455.
Benjamin J. Zhang, Siting Liu, Stanley J. Osher, and Markos A. Katsoulakis.
Probabilistic operator learning: Generative modeling and uncertainty quantifi-
cation for foundation models of differential equations, 2025a.
Hanrong Zhang, Shichen Fan, Henry Peng Zou, Yankai Chen, Zhenting Wang,
Jiayuan Zhou, Chengze Li, Wei-Chieh Huang, Yifei Yao, Kening Zheng, Xue
Liu, Xiaoxiao Li, and Philip S. Yu. CoEvoSkills: Self-evolving agent skills via
co-evolutionary verification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.01687, 2026a.
Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin
gödel machine: Open-ended evolution of self-improving agents, 2025b. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.22954.
Jenny Zhang, Bingchen Zhao, Wannan Yang, Jakob Foerster, Jeff Clune, Minqi
Jiang, Sam Devlin, and Tatiana Shavrina. Hyperagents, 2026b. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2603.19461.
18


--- Page 19 ---
A
Experimental Details
This appendix provides the implementation details needed to reproduce the
ablation and interpret the figures.
A.1
Compute Normalization
Figure 3 uses cumulative equivalent tokens Teq as the x-axis. Each working-agent
session records three token categories: cached input tokens Tcache (context reused
across turns via prompt caching), fresh input tokens Tfresh (new content per
turn), and output tokens Tout. We normalize these into a single equivalent-token
measure weighted by their relative API cost:
Teq = Tcache + 2 Tfresh + 12 Tout,
(7)
where the weights 1 : 2 : 12 reflect the pricing ratio of cached input ($1.25/M),
fresh input ($2.50/M), and output ($15.00/M) tokens for GPT 5.4 (medium
reasoning effort), the model used in all coding-agent sessions via Codex. This
normalization maps heterogeneous token types to a single cost-weighted scale.
For each iteration t with working-agent set Wt,
stepTeq,t =
X
w∈Wt
Teq(w),
cumulativeTeq,t =
X
τ≤t
stepTeq,τ.
Cache efficiency.
Across all six ablation runs, cached tokens account for
94.1% of total input tokens. This high cache-hit rate arises because coding-
agent sessions maintain a persistent conversation context: repository files, task
instructions, and prior tool-call outputs are re-sent on every turn, hitting the
prompt cache. Each working agent averages 13 turns per session, so the effective
fresh-input fraction is only 5.9%. The total equivalent-token budget per run is
34–42M Teq, corresponding to approximately 186M raw tokens but only 13M
tokens of novel content.
This makes the equivalent-token cost of the entire ablation comparable to a
single large-scale training job. GPU training and remote evaluation costs are
not included in Teq.
19


--- Page 20 ---
A.2
Run Configuration
Item
Setting
Task
ICON PE design on the conservation-law bench-
mark
Coding-agent model
GPT 5.4 (medium reasoning effort) via Codex
Variants
EvE, Static-Initial, Static-Final
Independent runs
2 per variant
Total iterations T
15
Working agents |I|
2 per iteration (parallel)
Reference solvers |J|
8 per iteration (rank-biased sampling)
Reference agents |K|
4 per iteration (rank-biased sampling)
Solver training
2,000 steps, 2-GPU DDP, bf16
Agent ratings
Elo-style relative ratings (see below)
Elo rating system.
Agents are rated through pairwise comparison of the
solvers they produce within each iteration. Each agent starts with a rating
of 1500. After an iteration, the agent whose solver achieved lower error wins
the comparison. Ratings are updated using the standard Elo formula with
update factor K = 32: if the expected win probability for agent i is Ei =
1/(1 + 10(Rj−Ri)/400), then the rating update is Ri ←Ri + K · (Si −Ei), where
Si ∈{0, 0.5, 1} is the match outcome. Higher-rated agents are sampled more
frequently via rank-biased Softmax selection.
Each run consists of a seed evaluation (iteration 0) plus 15 evolutionary
iterations with 2 working agents each, yielding a maximum of 31 solvers per run.
EvE produced 31 and 30 valid solvers across its two runs (the single missing
solver is due to a boundary-check violation at iteration 7 of run 2). Static-Initial
and Static-Final each produced 31 valid solvers per run.
A.3
Working-Agent Interface
Each working agent ai from Algorithm 1 is instantiated as a single working-
agent session. Section 2.2 describes the workspace at the algorithmic level; for
reproduction, the important interface facts are the editable surface, the validation
contract, and the score semantics.
Each working agent starts from a repository snapshot plus a prefilled positional-
encoding candidate. It may edit exactly five Python/YAML files:
• configs/experiment/evolve_base.yaml
• configs/model/icon_evolve.yaml
• src/models/icon/icon_evolve.py
• src/models/base/transformer_evolve.py
• src/models/icon/pe_evolve.py
These files shadow the vanilla ICON model and define the complete solver
submission surface for the ablation.
20


--- Page 21 ---
Before stopping, the working agent must invoke the configured check-runner
validation contract. The check verifies that edits stay inside the permitted surface,
that the modified code imports, and that the candidate can run the target smoke
evaluation. Candidates that violate the boundary are not counted as valid solvers.
Valid candidates are then scored by the ICON evaluator using Equation 6; the
solver score stored by EvE is s = −e, so higher is better.
The working agent also leaves process evidence. Session notes and evaluation
artifacts are preserved with the produced solver and, when the guidance tree is
revised, with the resulting agent entry. These logs are the concrete source of the
cumulative working logs la
i in Equation 1.
A.4
Seed Guidance
All runs start from the same seed guidance. The agent’s guidance is stored as a
file tree (the guidance tree) containing four documents and one skill:
• problem.md
• directions.md
• mutation_surface.md
• literature_notes.md
• skills/read-eval/SKILL.md
In the EvE variant, this tree is updated by the agent population as the search
progresses; in the Static-Initial variant, it remains unchanged throughout.
Task Context
problem.md: Task context provided to each working agent
ICON is a transformer-based in-context operator network trained on the
conservation-law benchmark.
In this example, training uses num_examples=5,
then evaluation measures error across d1..d10 example counts. The practical goal
is simple: find a positional encoding change that helps the model generalize across
example count without damaging the short-context regime.
The solver score is the negative of mean_d1_d10, so lower average error on d1..d10
means a better score. Keep an eye on mean_d1_d4 and the full d1..d10 curve as
diagnostics: a candidate that improves the average by collapsing the short-context
regime is not a satisfying result.
The training budget is intentionally modest: 2k steps, 2-GPU DDP, bf16 mixed
precision, roughly one iteration-scale experiment.
21


--- Page 22 ---
Positional-Encoding Search Menu
directions.md: Seed search menu (abbreviated)
Eight positional-encoding families are presented as a structured search menu.
Each entry gives a short description, and several entries point to representative
references or ICON-specific adaptations.
1. Sinusoidal absolute: fixed sinusoidal bases, extrapolation-friendly.
2. Learned absolute: per-position learned embeddings, vanilla baseline.
3. RoPE family: relative phase via Q/K rotations; NTK-aware and YaRN
variants for interpolation.
4. ALiBi family: distance-dependent attention bias, no explicit position
vectors.
5. Relative position bias: pairwise distance bias in the attention matrix.
6. Position interpolation / context-length scaling: map long-context
positions back into the trained coordinate range.
7. Structured / hierarchical decomposition: multi-axis encoding separat-
ing example identity from within-example token role.
8. Hybrid / gated mechanisms: combine two or more PE signals with
learned gating.
Meta-rule: The family list is a starting map, not a closed set. If the running
best has stalled, the search has narrowed, not exhausted the surface. Workers are
encouraged to explore non-dominant families and cite literature when introducing
new mechanisms.
Editable Files
mutation_surface.md: Editable file boundaries
Five files may be edited, starting as no-op shadows of vanilla ICON:
• configs/experiment/evolve_base.yaml: dataset and runtime defaults.
• configs/model/icon_evolve.yaml: Hydra entrypoint for model composi-
tion.
• src/models/icon/icon_evolve.py: top-level model hook.
• src/models/base/transformer_evolve.py: attention-side PE changes.
• src/models/icon/pe_evolve.py: scratch space for new positional modules.
22


--- Page 23 ---
Persistent Literature Notes
literature_notes.md: Accumulated research notes
This document starts empty and serves as persistent memory for literature findings.
Workers are instructed to append method names, sources, and short applicability
notes when external positional-encoding references inform a guidance update.
Evaluation-Reading Skill
skills/read-eval/SKILL.md: Guidance-local skill
The seed guidance exposes a small skill for interpreting ICON PE evaluations.
It tells the working agent to read score cards and evaluation summaries, inspect
both mean_d1_d10 and mean_d1_d4, distinguish broad curve improvements from
single-count wins, and separate visible evidence from speculation when writing
future guidance.
23


--- Page 24 ---
A.5
Evolved Positional-Encoding Methods
The evolutionary search produced six evolved solvers across five distinct PE
class names from the three ablation variants, plus the ICON vanilla baseline.
We keep the logged PE class name as the row label because it is the stable
identifier recorded in the run artifacts, but several winning solvers also revise the
attention-side position mechanism. Table 1 summarizes the combined position-
handling design and compares performance at 2,000 and 10,000 training steps
under identical conditions.
Variant
Run
PE Class
Key Mechanism
e2k
e10k
EvE
1
InterpolatedDemoPE
Interpolated demo PE + structured demo/role attention bias
0.114
0.041
EvE
2
StructuredFunctionPE
Interpolated demo PE + local sinusoid + structured RoPE/bias
0.108
0.045
Static-Initial
1
StructuredDemoRolePE
Power-law demo compression + sinusoid + demo-aware ALiBi/RoPE
0.115
0.045
Static-Initial
2
RoleOnlyPE
Role-only PE + compressed-demo rotary attention
0.159
0.072
Static-Final
1
StructuredInterpolationPE
Linear clamp + sinusoidal example signal
0.197
0.117
Static-Final
2
StructuredDemoRolePE
Tanh demo compression + structured RoPE/bias
0.128
0.053
Seed
n/a
VanillaICON (nn.Embedding)
Flat learned lookup (no structure)
0.485
0.480
Table 1: Evolved PE methods and their performance under standardized retrain-
ing at 2,000 and 10,000 steps. These scores differ from the search-time scores in
the per-iteration tables (Appendix A.6) because standardized retraining uses a
fresh random seed and fixed hyperparameters, whereas search-time evaluation is
conducted within the iteratively constructed solver snapshot. Rows are indexed
by the logged PE class name, while the Key Mechanism column summarizes
any paired attention-side change. All evolved methods improve from 2k to 10k;
Static-Final run 1 remains the weakest transfer because its high-example-count
tail stays large.
All six evolved solvers exploit the role/example decomposition of the flat
token-position index p into a within-example role r = p mod 3 (Key, Value, or
Query) and an example index m = ⌊p/3⌋somewhere in the position-handling
stack. Five encode the example axis directly in the additive PE; RoleOnlyPE
removes it from the additive PE but reintroduces it through demo-aware rotary
attention. The methods diverge in how they compress overflow demos and in
whether they also add structured attention bias. We describe each method below,
starting from the vanilla baseline.
Seed: ICON Vanilla PE (nn.Embedding)
The default ICON positional encoding is a standard learned embedding table:
PE(p) = E[p],
E ∈RN×d,
where N = 100 is a fixed table size and p is the flat integer position index.
During training with k = 5 examples, the largest example index mtrain takes the
value 5 in the rescaling formulas below, and the flat position indices range from 0
to 17 (each of the six slots, five demos plus the query, is allocated three indices to
maintain a consistent p mod 3 role decomposition, though two of the 18 indices
24


--- Page 25 ---
are structurally unused at runtime due to the training configuration, and the
query output block is the prediction target rather than an input, so 16 positions
carry input tokens despite the 3k + 2 = 17 semantic block count in Section 3.2).
At test time with k > 5, each additional example introduces new position indices
beyond this range, corresponding to untrained embedding rows and producing
essentially random vectors. This explains the dramatic OOD collapse visible in
Figure 4: error jumps from ∼0.05 (in-distribution) to ∼0.9 (out-of-distribution),
an 18× degradation. The Seed demonstrates that positional-encoding design,
not model capacity, is the bottleneck for example-count generalization.
EvE Run 1: InterpolatedDemoPE
Agent: evolved. The same PE family first appeared at iteration 2, but the best
solver using this PE design was produced at iteration 15. Best at: iteration 15
(e = 0.096).
This method decomposes the flat index into role and example axes, then
globally rescales all example indices into the training range:
r = p mod 3,
m = ⌊p/3⌋,
˜m = m ·
mtrain
max(mmax, mtrain),
where mtrain = 5 is the maximum example index seen during training and mmax
is the largest example index in the current batch. The rescaled coordinate ˜m is
guaranteed to lie in [0, mtrain] for any test-time example count.
The positional signal is computed by interpolating between adjacent rows of
a small learned embedding table D ∈R(mtrain+1)×d:
PE(p) = R[r] + (1 −f) · D[⌊˜m⌋] + f · D[⌈˜m⌉],
where f = ˜m −⌊˜m⌋is the fractional part and R ∈R3×d is a learned role
embedding. The key insight is that role identity is preserved exactly (discrete
lookup) while the example axis is continuously compressed, allowing smooth
generalization to unseen example counts.
The published solver is not PE-only. Its transformer also replaces vanilla
self-attention with a structured additive bias over rescaled demo distance, same-
demo matches, and role pairs. In other words, both the additive PE and the
attention logits use the same demo/role decomposition. On the additive-PE side,
the new parameters are still small: two embedding tables (3d + 6d = 9d), plus
a lightweight set of attention-bias scalars and role-pair residuals in the evolved
encoder layer.
EvE Run 2: StructuredFunctionPE
Agent: evolved (post-seed, suggested “adding a relative attention bias over
example distance”). Best at: iteration 11 (e = 0.097).
This solver keeps the same demo-axis interpolation as EvE run 1 but changes
both the additive PE and the attention path. The additive PE is
PE(p) = D[ ˜m]interp + T[r] + λ · sinusoid(o(p)),
25


--- Page 26 ---
where T ∈R3×d is a token-type embedding, λ is a learned scalar, and o(p) is the
local offset assigned to repeated occurrences of the same flat index. The example
index is rescaled identically to EvE run 1: ˜m = m · mtrain/ max(mmax, mtrain).
The transformer then threads the same structured coordinates through self-
attention: it applies RoPE separately on the demo-id and local-offset axes,
and adds a demo-distance bias over role pairs. Despite being produced by a
different agent than EvE run 1, this solver independently converged to the same
rescale-then-interpolate mechanism for the demo axis, providing evidence that
the evolutionary search robustly discovers this solution.
Static-Initial Run 1: StructuredDemoRolePE
Agent: seed (fixed, no evolution). Best at: iteration 15 (e = 0.098).
Without evolved guidance, this method uses a sinusoidal encoding for the
example axis (rather than learned interpolation) combined with a nonlinear
overflow compression:
˜m =
(
m
if m ≤mtrain
mtrain + α · (m −mtrain)0.5
otherwise
where α is the extrapolation_scale parameter. The square-root compression
ensures that overflow positions grow sublinearly, staying close to the training
boundary. The positional signal is:
PE(p) = gd · sinusoid( ˜m) + gr · R[r],
where gd, gr are learned scalar gates that balance the example and role compo-
nents. This solver also revises the attention-side position mechanism, pairing
the same demo/role coordinates with ALiBi-style distance bias and partial struc-
tured RoPE. It achieves strong 10k performance (0.045), competitive with EvE,
showing that a sinusoidal demo axis can remain effective when both the additive
PE and the attention path share the same compressed structure.
Static-Initial Run 2: RoleOnlyPE
Agent: seed (fixed, no evolution). Best at: iteration 13 (e = 0.125).
This is the most aggressive simplification of the additive PE:
PE(p) = λ · R[p mod 3],
where λ is a single learned scalar. With only 3 embedding rows and one scalar,
this PE has the fewest learnable parameters of any method (3d + 1).
The example axis is not removed from the solver entirely, however. The
custom attention layer still uses compressed demo coordinates
˜m =
(
m
if m ≤mtrain
mtrain + α log

1 + m−mtrain
α

otherwise
26


--- Page 27 ---
inside full rotary attention, with the scalar position formed from both ˜m and
the role index r. This design therefore removes example structure from the
additive PE while keeping it in the attention coordinates. It works surprisingly
well in-distribution but shows the widest gap between 2k (0.159) and 10k (0.072)
performance among the successful methods, suggesting that longer training
partially compensates for the weaker explicit PE signal but cannot fully replace
a richer demo-aware position map.
Static-Final Run 1: StructuredInterpolationPE
Agent: best-evolved agent from EvE run 1, then frozen. Best at: iteration 2
(e = 0.165 during search).
This method uses fixed-frequency sinusoidal encoding with linear overflow
clamping:
˜m =
(
m
if m ≤mtrain
mtrain + 0.5 · (m −mtrain)
otherwise
PE(p) = sinusoidfixed( ˜m) + σ · R[r],
where the sinusoidal frequencies are precomputed buffers (not learned) and σ
is the role_scale parameter. Unlike EvE’s learned interpolation, the fixed
frequencies cannot adapt their spectral content to the test-time position range.
In contrast to the other successful methods, the transformer stays on the vanilla
attention path here: the mutation lives entirely in the additive PE.
Under standardized retraining, this method is trainable and improves with
longer training, but it remains the weakest evolved transfer because the linear
overflow rule leaves a large high-k tail (see case study below).
Static-Final Run 2: StructuredDemoRolePE
Agent: best-evolved agent from EvE run 2, then frozen. Best at: iteration 12
(e = 0.117).
The agent guidance for this run explicitly noted: “decompose the ID into
example-index and role, then interpolate example-index coordinates back into
the trained range.” The resulting PE uses bounded tanh compression:
˜mPE =
(
m
if m ≤mtrain −1
mtrain −1 + ∆· tanh
  m−(mtrain−1)
τ

otherwise
where ∆is the overflow span and τ is an overflow temperature. The tanh mapping
guarantees that overflow positions are bounded within [mtrain−1, mtrain−1+∆).
In the actual solver, the furthest demo in the current sequence is then explicitly
anchored back to mtrain, preventing the last OOD slot from drifting past the
trained boundary. The positional signal is:
PE(p) = gd · sinusoid( ˜mPE) + gr · R[r],
27


--- Page 28 ---
with learned scalar gates gd, gr. The transformer uses the same tanh-compressed
demo/role coordinates inside both structured RoPE and a demo-distance role-
pair bias. This method achieves solid 10k performance (0.053), demonstrating
that frozen guidance, when it carries the right structural insight, can produce
competitive designs even without live adaptation.
Case study: Static-Final run 1 transfer degradation.
Static-Final run 1
is the weakest evolved method when transferred to the standardized training
pipeline, but it shows degradation rather than total collapse. Its error is 0.197
at step 2,000 and 0.117 at step 10,000: longer training repairs the in-distribution
regime, but the tail remains large, reaching 0.393 at k = 10. In contrast, the
same PE scored 0.165 during the original evolutionary search (the worst evolved
score, but still far better than the baseline’s 0.485).
Three factors converge to explain this degradation:
1. Weak overflow compression. The PE clips overflow example indices
with a fixed linear scale factor (extrapolation_scale=0.5). This keeps
positions closer to the training boundary than the vanilla embedding
table, but it still lets large example counts drift farther than the learned-
interpolation and tanh-compression designs.
2. Fixed spectral signal.
The example axis is encoded by sinusoidal
frequencies stored as buffers rather than learned interpolation rows. The
signal is useful enough to train down the short-context region, but it cannot
reshape itself around the OOD portion of the curve.
3. Context mismatch. The frozen agent was originally the best agent from
EvE run 1, where it operated within a diverse, evolving population. When
frozen into Static-Final’s static environment, its guidance could not adapt
to the solvers it was now directing. The PE therefore preserved a locally
useful structured sinusoidal design, but never received the later pressure
that pushed the live EvE runs toward stronger learned interpolation or
bounded overflow compression.
This case illustrates a key advantage of the live ensemble: agent adaptation
keeps pressure on the unresolved tail across iterations, whereas frozen guidance
cannot revise itself in response to the curve it is now producing.
A.6
Per-Iteration Results
The tables below show per-iteration results for all six runs, including cumulative
equivalent tokens Teq (Equation 7). Tables are ordered EvE, Static-Initial,
Static-Final, with the two independent runs of each variant on adjacent pages.
All six tables share the same five-column schema; the PE Class column tracks
architecture choice per iteration (see Section A.5 and Table 1 for the defini-
tion of each logged PE class name).
Some winning solvers also revise the
28


--- Page 29 ---
attention-side position mechanism; Section A.5 summarizes that full solver sur-
face (PE classes that appear only in early iterations and are superseded, such as
InterpolatedDemoRoleEmbedding in EvE run 2 iteration 1, are not described
separately). For EvE runs this column varies as the agent evolves; for Static-
Initial and Static-Final runs the fixed agent consistently produces the same
PE class, making the contrast between evolved and frozen PE labels directly
visible. Each iteration nominally uses two independent working agents; the e
column reports the best of the two. Bold entries in the best-so-far column mark
iterations where the running minimum was matched or improved. Iterations
where a working agent failed are footnoted under the relevant table.
Table 2. EvE run 1 per-iteration results.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
StructuredFunctionPE
0.2504
0.2504
2.1
2
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1169
0.1169
4.5
3
StructuredFunctionPE
0.2211
0.1169
6.3
4
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1086
0.1086
8.5
5
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1142
0.1086
11.1
6
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1021
0.1021
15.0
7
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1021
0.1021
17.0
8
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0999
0.0999
19.4
9
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1008
0.0999
23.2
10
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.1009
0.0999
25.1
11
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0959
0.0959
26.6
12
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0959
0.0959
28.3
13
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0959
0.0959
30.0
14
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0959
0.0959
32.1
15
InterpolatedDemoPE
0.0957
0.0957
34.5
Table 3. EvE run 2 per-iteration results.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
InterpolatedDemoRoleEmbedding
0.1208
0.1208
2.6
2
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1215
0.1208
4.4
3
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1221
0.1208
5.8
4
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1167
0.1167
8.4
5
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1167
0.1167
13.6
6
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1167
0.1167
16.2
7∗
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1203
0.1167
18.2
8
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1709
0.1167
22.0
9
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1208
0.1167
23.7
10
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1166
0.1166
26.0
11
StructuredFunctionPE
0.0966
0.0966
28.6
12
StructuredFunctionPE
0.0966
0.0966
30.6
13
StructuredFunctionPE
0.0966
0.0966
34.2
14
StructuredFunctionPE
0.0993
0.0966
36.0
15
StructuredFunctionPE
0.1036
0.0966
37.5
∗Iteration 7 used one working agent out of two due to a boundary-check violation.
29


--- Page 30 ---
Table 4. Static-Initial run 1 per-iteration results. PE class fixed to StructuredDemoRolePE
after the seed iteration.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.2336
0.2336
1.7
2
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1357
0.1357
3.1
3
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1323
0.1323
7.3
4
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1323
0.1323
9.0
5
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1466
0.1323
11.7
6
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1069
0.1069
13.4
7
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1215
0.1069
15.7
8
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1605
0.1069
18.0
9
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.0996
0.0996
21.0
10
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.0996
0.0996
24.8
11
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.0996
0.0996
27.1
12
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1155
0.0996
29.9
13
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1018
0.0996
31.5
14
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1040
0.0996
33.6
15
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.0978
0.0978
35.7
Table 5. Static-Initial run 2 per-iteration results. PE class fixed to RoleOnlyPE after the seed
iteration.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
RoleOnlyPE
0.2475
0.2475
2.0
2
RoleOnlyPE
0.1797
0.1797
4.1
3
RoleOnlyPE
0.1893
0.1797
6.0
4
RoleOnlyPE
0.1570
0.1570
8.9
5
RoleOnlyPE
0.1647
0.1570
10.9
6
RoleOnlyPE
0.1865
0.1570
12.9
7
RoleOnlyPE
0.1700
0.1570
14.9
8
RoleOnlyPE
0.1721
0.1570
19.4
9
RoleOnlyPE
0.1746
0.1570
23.9
10
RoleOnlyPE
0.1611
0.1570
26.2
11
RoleOnlyPE
0.1598
0.1570
28.7
12
RoleOnlyPE
0.1770
0.1570
31.1
13
RoleOnlyPE
0.1246
0.1246
33.8
14
RoleOnlyPE
0.1348
0.1246
35.4
15
RoleOnlyPE
0.1647
0.1246
37.0
Table 6. Static-Final run 1 per-iteration results. PE class fixed to
StructuredInterpolationPE after the seed iteration.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2520
0.2520
1.5
2
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1653
0.1653
3.9
3
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2695
0.1653
5.9
4
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2738
0.1653
9.6
5
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1733
0.1653
11.1
6
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2058
0.1653
17.1
7
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1957
0.1653
19.9
8
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2050
0.1653
23.2
9
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1989
0.1653
25.9
10
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1971
0.1653
29.4
11
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.2085
0.1653
32.0
12
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1678
0.1653
35.0
13
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1956
0.1653
37.4
14
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.1913
0.1653
39.5
15
StructuredInterpolationPE
0.7127
0.1653
41.4
30


--- Page 31 ---
Table 7. Static-Final run 2 per-iteration results. PE class fixed to StructuredDemoRolePE
after the seed iteration.
Iter
PE Class
e
Best-so-far
Teq (M)
0
VanillaICON
0.4848
0.4848
0.0
1
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1273
0.1273
3.3
2
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1628
0.1273
5.3
3
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1356
0.1273
9.0
4
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1368
0.1273
11.1
5
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1356
0.1273
13.2
6
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1458
0.1273
15.2
7
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1672
0.1273
18.1
8
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1217
0.1217
19.7
9
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1217
0.1217
21.6
10
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1255
0.1217
23.9
11
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1193
0.1193
26.4
12
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1166
0.1166
29.1
13
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1193
0.1166
30.8
14
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1166
0.1166
32.5
15
StructuredDemoRolePE
0.1422
0.1166
34.0
31
