--- Page 1 ---
Adapting AlphaEvolve to Optimize Fully
Homomorphic Encryption on TPUs
Shruthi Gorantala, Jianming Tong†, Asra Ali, Baiyu Li, Jonathan Katz, Jeremy Kun
Thomas Steinke‡, Abhradeep Thakurta‡, Julian Walker‡, Amir Yazdanbakhsh‡
Google
†Georgia Institute of Technology
‡Google DeepMind
Abstract—The deployment of Fully Homomorphic Encryption
(FHE) at scale is hindered due to its heavy computational overhead.
While specialized hardware accelerators like Google Tensor
Processing Units (TPUs) can help, mapping complex cryptographic
kernels onto such architectures remains a challenge. Efficient
execution requires co-optimization between the systolic array-
based Matrix Multiplication Unit (MXU) and Vector Processing
Units (VPUs), as well as the orchestration of data movement across
the vector register files. Existing compiler stacks often abstract
low-level hardware utilization, requiring developers to adopt a
manual trial-and-error process that often results in fragmented
execution and underutilized resources.
To accelerate this development process, we use AlphaEvolve
to automate the exploration of hardware-aware cryptographic-
kernel optimizations. We frame optimization as an evolutionary
search problem, utilizing the closed-loop system provided by
AlphaEvolve, that leverages LLM-driven code generation. We
use real-world feedback from hardware execution and rigorous
correctness testing to guide the evolution process. We evaluate
AlphaEvolve optimization on primitives for both the TFHE
(Jaxite) and CKKS (CROSS) FHE schemes on Google Cloud
TPUv5e, a contemporary TPU architecture. Within 24 hours of
automated exploration, AlphaEvolve discovered implementation-
level optimizations that improve TFHE bootstrap latency by 2.5×
and CKKS rotation and multiplication latency by 1.31× and
1.18×, respectively, relative to human-engineered state of the
art. These results demonstrate that AlphaEvolve can be used to
enable researchers to navigate the optimization trade-offs between
cryptography, compilers, and hardware accelerators.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid proliferation of personal data in AI ecosystems
has created a demand for privacy-enhancing technologies
(PETs). Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) [9] stands
as a foundational Privacy Enhancing Technology (PET) by
enabling arbitrary computations on encrypted data without
requiring decryption. Despite its privacy guarantees, Fully
Homomorphic Encryption (FHE) incurs orders-of-magnitude
compute and memory overheads, severely hindering its scalable
deployment [10]. To mitigate these bottlenecks, the community
has increasingly pivoted toward specialized accelerators like
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs).
Mapping FHE primitives to accelerators requires engineering
optimizations that spans across tiling workloads to strictly
align with the underlying vector register granularity, navigating
frontend abstractions (e.g., JAX and Pallas APIs for TPUs)
to bypass costly, implicit layout transformations and sizing
tensor granularities to effectively reduce off-chip memory
latency. Modern compiler stacks like XLA [17] abstract these
microarchitectural details. However performance tuning then
becomes a slow trial-and-error tuning loop where high-level
code modification must traverse the compilation pipeline to
observe its hardware impact. Current systems lack a systematic
approach to map transformed cryptographic primitives onto
commodity hardware designed for low-precision, GEMM-heavy
workloads.
AI coding agents such as AlphaEvolve [16] have demon-
strated significant advances in multiple fields including algo-
rithm design, improving code efficiency, architecture discovery,
and enabling discovery across scientific domains. Further,
the use of AI to improve cryptographic implementation
remains largely unexplored. This is primarily because LLM
hallucinations might introduce security vulnerabilities which
are unacceptable in cryptographic implementations.
In this paper, we use AlphaEvolve, an agentic framework,
to optimize FHE kernels on hardware accelerators, such as
Google’s TPU, with rigorous correctness checking. We for-
mulate kernel optimization as an evolutionary search problem
using AlphaEvolve, with real-world hardware feedback. By
automating the discovery of micro-architectural improvements,
AlphaEvolve enables cryptographic developers to explore
architectural ideas and co-optimize cryptographic primitives
on specialized hardware. The main contributions of our work
are:
• We formulate JAX/Pallas-level FHE-on-TPU kernel opti-
mizations as an evolutionary search problem.
• We design a hardware-in-the-loop evaluator that scores
candidates using real TPU latency while rejecting candi-
dates that fail robust functional correctness tests.
• We identify concrete optimization patterns discovered
by the search that outperform domain-expert baselines:
loop unrolling to reuse common parameters, finer-grained
scheduling to hide off-chip memory access latency, mini-
mize datatype conversion, and XLA-favorable tiling that
improves VReg utilization.
• Within 24 hours of exploration, AlphaEvolve achieved
a 2.5× reduction in TFHE bootstrapping latency and
speedups of 1.31× and 1.18× for CKKS rotation and
multiplication, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. AlphaEvolve
AlphaEvolve [16] is an agentic framework designed for
algorithmic and scientific discovery by combining LLMs with
1
arXiv:2605.14718v1  [cs.CR]  14 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
the evolutionary search. It could be used to automatically evolve
code in any programming language through a flywheel of code
generation and code evaluation.
The workflow begins with a human programmer configuring
the system based on expert-guided, task specific instructions,
an initial code example to seed the evolutionary database and
an evaluator that scores the generated code.
Next, the system samples code database and a pool of
prompts. These prompts are fed into LLMs to generate new
code modification. The generated code blocks are then compiled
and fed into the evaluators, where they are scored, ranked,
and only top-rank correct programs are added back to the
evolutionary database. The ranking and evolution employs
structured evolutionary techniques, such as island-based models
or MAP-Elites algorithms [16]. These techniques balance
genetic diversity based on inherent metrics (e.g., program
length, code complexity) and performance on the evaluator
metrics (fitness score). This optimization loop improves the
code to find better program based on the fitness score.
B. Fully Homomorphic Encryption
FHE [9] enables computation on encrypted data. A homo-
morphic operation transforms ciphertexts so that the decrypted
results are the same as if the operation were performed on the
underlying plaintext data. Existing FHE schemes can be broadly
categorized into scalar schemes and vector schemes based on
the type of data they encrypt. Scalar schemes such as TFHE
[5] encrypt bits or short integers, and supports general-purpose
computation on encrypted data. Vector schemes such as CKKS
[4] pack a vector of real or complex numbers into a ciphertext,
and are widely used for privacy-preserving machine-learning
and numerical workloads as vectors of data are processed
in a SIMD fashion. Both approaches lead to 2∼5 order-of-
magnitude memory and computation overhead.
In this paper, we use AlphaEvolve to optimize implementa-
tions of both schemes on TPUs.
1) TFHE - TFHE-bootstrap: This is the key primitive
in TFHE used in Google transpiler [11] and HEIR compiler
[3]. TFHE bootstrap algorithms utilize the so-called Ring-
GSW scheme defined over a polynomial residual ring RQ =
ZQ[X]/(Xn +1) and a special, cryptographic accumulator to
perform decryption homomorphically. The primary bottleneck
in the bootstrap operation is blind_rotate, which consists
of a sequence of multiplication-accumulation operations on
polynomials. Note that we reformulate polynomial multiplica-
tions in RQ as Toeplitz matrix-vector products to take advantage
of MXUs in TPUs.
2) CKKS - CKKS-Rot and CKKS-Mult: They perform
homomorphic slot rotation and slot-wise multiplication, re-
spectively, which are the backbone components in almost all
CKKS use cases. We optimize their implementations from
CROSS [18], combining automorphisms, key switching, rescal-
ing, tensor multiplication, and modular reduction operations.
C. TPU Execution Model
Fig. 2 summarizes the TPU features. On-chip vector memory
(VMEM) is partitioned across 128 lanes. Each lane contains
Algorithm: ToeplitzMul(a,b)
Input: a = (a0,...,an−1), b = (b0,...,bn−1)
Construct a Toeplitz matrix T(a) ∈Zn×n:
T(a) =


a0
a1
···
an−1
−an−1
a0
···
an−2
...
...
...
...
−a1
−a2
···
a0


// Note: Negacyclic entries account for reduction modulo Xn +1.
Compute the matrix-vector product c = T(a)·b ∈Zn
q.
return c
// Represents the polynomial c(X) = ∑n−1
i=0 ciXi.
Fig.
1:
Polynomial
multiplication
a(X) · b(X) ∈RQ =
ZQ[X]/(Xn +1) via Toeplitz matrix-vector product, where a
and b are coefficient vectors of a(X) and b(X), respectively.
8 sublanes, and each sublane provides 32 32-bit registers.
Registers are organized into (8,128) blocks, called vector
registers (VRegs), each formed by selecting one register from
every sublane across all 128 lanes. The XLU performs data
reorganization, while the VPU and MXU accelerate vector
and matrix operations. Both computation and data movement
execute in a single-instruction, multiple-data (SIMD) manner
over one (8,128) VReg at a time. Consequently, programs
that fully utilize VRegs achieve higher efficiency, whereas
operations requiring fine-grained or irregular data access incur
significant overhead.
For FHE, the implication is direct: mathematically equivalent
implementations can differ sharply in performance depending
on shapes, layout and scheduling choices of JAX/Pallas tensors.
D. The TPU Compiler Stack
We inherit the multi-layer TPU compilation stacks and
profiling system to support FHE computations:
1) JAX: expresses high-level numerical and cryptographic
computation. Both expert-crafted TPU libraries, Jaxite [2] and
CROSS [18], use JAX / Pallas as the frontend.
2) Pallas: serves as a kernel language that allows for the
creation of custom, low-level hardware kernels within JAX. Our
system relies on Pallas kernels to establish fine-grained control
over data movement and memory staging on the TPU [14].
3) XLA: lowers JAX/Pallas programs to TPU executables
and applies optimizations such as fusion and layout selec-
tion [12], [17]. XLA compilation passes are shape-sensitive.
4) Xprof: is an integrated profiling tool within the XLA
ecosystem that captures high-fidelity hardware execution traces.
It extracts metrics such as compute and memory bandwidth
utilization as well as on-chip and off-chip storage occupancy.
E. Challenge: Compiler-Obscured Performance Engineering
TPU performance engineering demands rigorous optimiza-
tions: (1) tiling workloads to strictly align with VReg granu-
larities, (2) navigating frontend abstractions to bypass implicit
layout transformations, and (3) sizing tensors to effectively
hide off-chip memory latency behind compute.
Developers are strictly bound to high-level programming
interfaces such as JAX and Pallas, limiting the easy access to
manipulating the low level schedule. At this level of abstraction,
2


--- Page 3 ---
"SIMD"
Coarse-Grained
Control
VPU
SIMD
1~10 TOPS
HBM
10~100 GB
Lane 0
0.125~1 MB
Lane 127
Lane 1
VMEM
~0.1 GB
~1000 GB/s
~10 TB/s
VReg
4 KB
MXU
Systolic Array (MatMul)
100~1000 TOPS
Compute
XLU
Layout Transform
Scalar Unit
SReg, SMEM
For control
CPU
1~10 TOPS
10~200 GB/s
TPU
8
32
PCI-E
128
32-bit
regs
Fig. 2: TPU microarchitecture overview – SIMD machine.
every source modification must traverse hundreds of opaque
compilation passes within stacks like XLA [17] before finally
materializing as a low-level TPU execution trace. Because
these intermediate layers obscure critical microarchitectural
details, adapting an algorithm for TPU execution devolves into
a sluggish trial-and-error process. Developers are forced to
experimentally deduce the specific shapes, casts, loops, and
tiling parameters at frontend JAX/Pallas that cause XLA to
produce a good TPU program.
This paper adapts AlphaEvolve to automate this compiler-
steering loop while preserving correctness and security guar-
antees.
The use of AI to improve cryptographic implementation
is challenging as LLM hallucinations may introduce security
vulnerabilities prone to side channel attacks. We use optimizing
FHE as an initial case study where the data is encrypted.
III. ADAPTING ALPHAEVOLVE FOR CRYPTOGRAPHY
Configuring AlphaEvolve requires users to specify initial
prompts (which establish a persona, algorithm and hardware
platform), initial programs (which will be optimized by AlphaE-
volve), the AlphaEvolve framework itself and an evaluation
strategy (which validates the correctness, and then feeds reward
as feedback back to AlphaEvolve).
Fig. 3 provides an overview of various parts of the system
with details described below:
A. Initial Prompts
The initial prompts describe the task and role of AlphaE-
volve as an expert in hardware-aware kernels engineering.
The prompts also include a functional description of the
cryptographic algorithms being optimized, architecture of the
hardware accelerator, optimization strategies and a pool of
potential optimization strategies.
B. Initial Program
We feed well-optimized reference codes into the evolutionary
search framework as the initial programs. The choice of initial
program needs a balance between providing enough code for
AlphaEvolve to optimize while not allowing it to change the
security guarantees provided by the algorithm. We use co-
evolution as a process to evolve multiple kernels in tandem
to find kernel improvements within various aspects of the
cryptosystem. In addition to co-evolution, co-optimization can
Controller (AlphaEvolve)
Scaffolding: LLM with Evolutionary Search 
SandBox
Evaluator
TPU
program 1
program 2
program 10
SandBox
Evaluator
TPU
SandBox
Evaluator
TPU
Slow
Fast
program 2
Drop
Island 2
Island 1
Island 10
Parent 
Programs
Prompt
Pools
Filtered fast programs
Loop
until
Manual
Stop
Post-AlphaEvolve Optimized program
Initial Cryptography Program (Jaxite or CROSS)
Correctness
     Checking
Correctness
     Checking
Correctness
     Checking
Manual Stop
Score: 
"Latency"
Feedback: 
"Execution
Trace"
Performance
Profiling
(XProf)
Performance
Profiling
(XProf)
Fig. 3: Workflow for adapting AlphaEvolve to cryptographic
kernel optimization. AlphaEvolve samples parent programs,
prompts an LLM to generate candidate JAX/Pallas implemen-
tations, and evaluates each candidate in a sandbox on TPU
hardware. Invalid candidates are rejected by correctness and
security checks. Valid candidates are scored by latency and
profiled through execution traces. Fast candidates are returned
to the evolutionary population for further search.
be used to evolve security parameters and kernels, which allows
for tuning security parameters for accelerator-specific kernel
super-optimization.
C. Evaluation Engine
The evaluation engine only rewards candidate kernels that sat-
isfy these multi-tiered correctness and security checks, thereby
pruning invalid or insecure code early in the evolutionary search
process.
1) Correctness Checks: To mitigate the risks of reward
hacking and code hallucination inherent in LLM-generated
kernels, we enforce strict correctness tests using randomized
input vectors across all computational sub-layers. The cor-
rectness checking requires correct compilation to mitigate the
risks of unintended bugs and erroneous code. This is done
by testing subset of sub-modules as well as incorporating
end-to-end tests which initializes the cryptosystem with valid
security parameters, generates randomized inputs, encrypts
the inputs, optionally runs cryptographic computations on
the ciphertexts such as homomorphic computations for FHE
cryptosystem, decrypts the resultant ciphertexts and checks
against the expected plaintext outputs.
2) Security Checks: Our system validates any modifications
to the parameters of the cryptosystem maintain standardized
security guarantees (example: at least 128-bit security for
3


--- Page 4 ---
Fully Homomorphic Encryption utilizing acceptable parameters
generated from industry standard lattice estimators [1]). Further-
more in case of fully homomorphic encryption, we implement
safeguards to prevent the selection of scheme parameters that
could lead to decryption failures by adding additional end-to-
end test with high depth computation.
3) Target Hardware Latency as Reward: By deploying
directly on the target platform, we use real-world latency as
the primary reward score. In this paper, candidate kernels in
Jaxite and CROSS are lowered through the XLA compiler
and executed on physical TPU hardware. Our reward score
uses microsecond-level execution latency of the resulting
cryptographic primitive, excluding XLA compilation overhead
to isolate runtime performance.
A persistent bottleneck in FHE acceleration is the lack of
parity between isolated primitive speedups and actual end-to-
end performance due to the bottlenecks introduced by data
movement between host and device and also between devices.
To ensure primitive kernel speedup translates to end-to-end
speedup, AlphaEvolve evolves the one or more primitive kernels
simultaneously, while using end-to-end latency across the entire
functional module as the score. Measuring end-to-end latency
proves to be a useful reward metric for co-evolution and co-
optimization techniques.
4) Feedback: To facilitate the autonomous discovery of
hardware-optimal execution patterns, our system captures high-
fidelity execution traces during the evaluation cycle using xprof
integrated with XLA. These metrics from profiling including
compute and memory bandwidth utilization as well as on-chip
and off-chip storage occupancy are fed back to AlphaEvolve
as diagnostic feedback. By analyzing these traces, the agent
can algorithmically identify latency bottlenecks and instances
where the XLA compiler needs additional signal through
JAX (or Pallas), enabling targeted iterative refinements to the
cryptographic kernels.
D. Manual reviews / Functional equivalence
The best program generated by the evolutionary loop can
be integrated into the original library after human review.
Currently, a human programmer reviews the best program and
merges the improved code into the original library. To reduce
human-in-the-loop reviews, in principle a module to check
functional equivalence of the initial code and the AlphaEvolve
generated code could be used, though doing this is currently
an unsolved research problem.
E. Putting it all together
After configuring initial prompts, initial programs, evaluation
engine, and setting up appropriate hardware environment for
the evaluators, AlphaEvolve begins the discovery process
of automatically optimizing the cryptographic kernels. After
reaching convergence based on the fitness function, the best
generated program can be further tested for correctness through
human reviews. The final code can then be merged into the
original library and deployed for use.
IV. ALPHAEVOLVE FOR OPTIMIZING FHE
A. Setup
1) Initial programs: For TFHE, we use the bootstrap imple-
mentation from jaxite [2] and allow AlphaEvolve to modify
various parts of blind_rotate. For CKKS, we adopt
CKKS-Rot and CKKS-Mult from the TPU-based CKKS
library, CROSS [18] that offers state-of-the-art throughput, as
the initial programs and apply AlphaEvolve to search for faster
implementations. We expose the implementations of RESCALE,
TENSORMULTIPLY, KEYSWITCH, APPROXMODDOWN, and
AUTOMORPHISM from both kernels to AlphaEvolve.
2) Prompt Setup: We use the system prompt together with
a prompt sampled uniformly from §A. These prompts are
designed to steer AlphaEvolve towards implementation-level
improvements, especially scheduling and layout choices that
increase VReg utilization in TPU and minimize implicit layout
transformation, rather than toward new algorithms discovery.
3) Correctness, and Performance Tests: For TFHE, we
incorporate end-to-end tests where the cryptosystem is initiated
with parameters offering 128-bit security and random inputs are
encrypted and evaluated against the generated code. The outputs
are then decrypted and compared against the expected plaintext
values. All values of the 3-bit lookup tables are evaluated for
correctness.
For CKKS, functional correctness is enforced using a hidden
test set with fixed ciphertext inputs and expected ciphertext
outputs.
For both schemes, performance is measured from XProf
traces, and we return the negative kernel latency as the
optimization score so that lower latency corresponds to a higher
score.
We run the evolution process with 10 controllers and 10
evaluators per controller, for a total of 100 TPUv5e chips.
TABLE I: Latency Comparison to SoTA [2], [18]
Workload
Latency Improvement
Code/Analysis
Blind Rotation (TFHE)
9.4 ms (TPUv5e-1)
Code: jaxite [2]
+ Unrolling
10 →7.8 ms
Code: [6] Reason: §IV-B1
+ Fine-grained scheduling
7.8 →6.3 ms
Code: [7] Reason: §IV-B2
+ Type Cast Removal
6.3 →3.5 ms
Code: [8] Reason: §IV-B3
Post-AlphaEvolve blind Rotation
9.4 ms →3.5 ms
2.85× speedup
Post-AlphaEvolve bootstrap
10 →4 ms
2.5× speedup
CKKS-Mult (CKKS)
6340 µs (TPUv5e-1)
Code ↗[18]
+ XLA-favor tiling choice
5359 µs (TPUv5e-1)
Code: ↗Reason: §IV-C
Post-AlphaEvolve CKKS-Mult
6340 →5359 µs
1.18× speedup
CKKS-Rot (CKKS)
4854 µs (TPUv5e-1)
Code: ↗[18]
+ XLA-favor tiling choice
3714 µs (TPUv5e-1)
Code: ↗Reason: §IV-C
Post-AlphaEvolve CKKS-Rot
4854 →3714 µs
1.3× speedup
B. AlphaEvolve for TFHE
AlphaEvolve explored several distinct classes of optimiza-
tions, ranging from standard loop transformations to complex
kernel scheduling and data type optimizations.
1) Loop
Unrolling
for
Parameter
Reuse
[6]:
In
the
negacyclic
vector-matrix
polynomial
multiplication
(negacyclic_vector_matrix_polymul) routine [2],
the system independently discovered that unrolling the
primary for loop by a factor of 8 yielded significant latency
reductions. In the baseline trace, the loop executes in serial,
loading the common parameters repeatedly. By unrolling the
loop, common parameters get reused across multiple loop
4


--- Page 5 ---
iterations. Because the target parameter size (3.51 MB) fit
within the available on-chip memory, this transformation
reduced latency from 10 ms to 7.8 ms. This highlights that
AlphaEvolve could automatically identify and exploit loop
unroll optimizations.
2) Fine-Grained Memory and Compute Scheduling [7]:
The system optimized data access patterns by adjusting the
tiling and scheduling choice of the kernel. Specifically, it tiled
one big JAX tensor into two blocks with shape halved. This
modification allowed the XLA compiler to schedule more
fine-grained data loading from off-chip memory, and hiding
it behind computation. This optimization reduced the overall
bootstrapping latency from 7.8 ms to 6.3 ms.
3) Elimination of Redundant Type Casts [8]: The most
significant single optimization involved the removal of an ex-
plicit bitcast operation. The baseline implementation explicitly
cast a right-hand side (rhs) operand to 8-bit integers (i8).
AlphaEvolve identified that the dynamic range of the input data
(values from 0 to 255 due to RLWE decomposition in [8]) was
already sufficiently captured by the existing bf16 precision.
By removing the redundant and expensive bitcast operator, the
system reduced the execution time from 6.29 ms to 3.35 ms.
This optimization requires a deep understanding of both the
mathematical dynamics of TFHE and the specific hardware
execution costs of bitcast operations, making it difficult for
human engineers to consistently identify.
C. AlphaEvolve for CKKS
• CKKS-Rot: On TPUv5e, AlphaEvolve reduces the la-
tency of CKKS-Rot from 4874 µs to 3754 µs, yielding
a 1.31× speedup. This performance gain is primarily
achieved by partitioning a tensor into two smaller sub-
tensors. This strategic split triggers specialized XLA
optimizations that significantly improve Vector Register
(VReg) utilization during the AUTOMORPHISM stage.
Consequently, AUTOMORPHISM’s contribution to the
total end-to-end latency drops from 12% to just 4%.
These results demonstrate AlphaEvolve’s ability to expose
and exploit non-intuitive, compiler-specific performance
“sweet spots” that are exceedingly difficult for human
engineers to discover manually.
• CKKS-Mult: On TPUv5e, AlphaEvolve reduces latency
of CKKS-Mult from 6340 µs to 5359 µs, corresponding to
a 1.18× speedup. Such performance improvement comes
from the scheduling optimization to reuse common parame-
ters. The modest improvement indicates that CKKS-Mult
is less constrained by underlying compiler inefficiencies.
These results show that AlphaEvolve can improve CKKS kernel
performance on TPU by discovering implementation changes
that increase effective VReg utilization and reduce inefficiencies
in the execution schedule.
D. Takeaways
The three workloads show that AlphaEvolve is most effective
for cryptographic kernels when the bottleneck is caused
by a mismatch between cryptographic data layout and the
Data
Wasted
51
2
128
8
65536
...
Register
Register
Wasted
128
8
Fully Used
Initial Program
Post-Evolved Program
Fig. 4: Effect of the discovered layout changes. The initial
program leaves substantial VReg capacity unused because
operations are expressed at a granularity that does not match
VReg. The evolved program exposes fuller VReg utilization.
TPU compiler/hardware execution grain. In TFHE, the search
discovers both conventional locality improvements and a
non-obvious cast elimination that depends on the ciphertext
decomposition range. In CKKS, the search finds tensor shapes
that steer XLA toward higher VReg utilization. Across all
cases, the successful edits preserve the correctness and security
while improving how the algorithm is presented to the compiler.
By using AlphaEvolve to expose the performance headroom
in the current TPU deployment flow, we also identify a key
software bottleneck: existing programmable APIs force tensor
reshapes and layout reorganizations that are not inherent to the
hardware, introducing avoidable overhead.
V. RELATED WORK
To our knowledge this is the first application of AI tech-
nologies to improve cryptographic performance. The closest
work for improving kernel generation is done by autocomp
[13] and EvoX [15] where agentic infrastructure has been used
to improve machine learning kernels.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents the first application of agentic AI to
optimize FHE primitives on TPUs. We detail the design of
using AlphaEvolve, a closed-loop system that combines LLMs
with real-world hardware execution feedback and rigorous
correctness checks. We demonstrate the framework’s ability to
autonomously discover performance improvements on TPUs.
Our results demonstrate that AI-driven search uncovers
optimizations frequently missed by domain experts.
A. Experience and Lessons Learned using AlphaEvolve
Some of our experiences and learnings in adapting AlphaE-
volve for cryptographic optimization are described below:
1) Granularity of Optimization: Targeting isolated opera-
tions, such as polynomial multiplication (polymul [2]), failed
to produce end-to-end speedups. We found that the agent
requires visibility into broader operational scopes to make
a meaningful impact on overall latency.
2) Co-evolution and System-Level Scoring: Building on the
need for broader visibility, shifting to the co-evolution of the
external_product and scoring it against the complete
bootstrapping execution successfully reduced latency from
10 ms to 5.6 ms.
5


--- Page 6 ---
3) Guided
Domain
Constraints:
While
evolving
the
blind-rotate operation [2], the system discovered that
RLWE decomposition allowed input tensors to safely use
int8 rather than int32, and that unrolling the loop by a
factor of eight yielded significant benefits. This underscores
the importance of domain experts selectively granting the AI
permission to modify high-impact code blocks.
4) Comprehensive Correctness Tests: Initial attempts to
evolve the AND-gate failed to cover all values of a 3-input
lookup table (lut3 [2]). We had to update the evaluator to
exhaustively verify all lookup table values, demonstrating that
strict, comprehensive validation is essential to prevent the
model from reward hacking.
5) Security Checks: Because performance cannot come
at the expense of cryptographic integrity, we introduced a
standardized parameter check using a lattice estimator to ensure
at least 128-bit security when co-optimizing scheme parameters.
6) Feedback and Prompts: To effectively steer the evolu-
tionary search, we integrated hardware profiling tools (xprof)
directly into the feedback loop and provided hardware-specific
optimization guidelines as automated compilation prompts.
B. Future Work
Our initial results focus on TPUs but the framework is
extensible and can potentially optimize FHE primitives as
well as any cryptographic primitives on a variety of hardware
accelerators. It can also be integrated with simulators to guide
specialized hardware-software co-design. To ensure security
guarantees are maintained during hardware optimization, future
iterations can integrate parameter selection with noise tracking.
Furthermore, the bottleneck of manual code reviews can be
reduced by adding functional equivalence checkers directly into
the validation pipeline. Finally, a fundamental open question
remains in the design of reward functions to safely allow AI
agents to discover novel cryptographic algorithms and protocols
while preserving security guarantees.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work represents an equal contributions between the first
two authors, with contributing co-authors listed alphabetically
The authors express their gratitude to Charles Hong, Andrew
Ferraiuolo, Ben Kreuter, and Cindee Madison for their valuable
feedback during various phases of this work. We thank Po-
Sen Huang, Ngˆan (NV) V˜u, and the AlphaEvolve team for
their assistance in establishing the experimental framework.
We thank Drew Angeloff, Ankita Malviya Bairaria, Naomi
Black, Elie Burzstein, Bryant Gipson, Pankaj Rohatgi, Amanda
Walker, Moti Yung and the Safeworks leadership team for their
guidance throughout this project. Finally, we also thank our
extended team at Google DeepMind for their support of this
research direction.
We also acknowledge the use of large language models
(LLMs) in the preparation of this manuscript. Specifically, the
models were used for proofreading, summarizing text, and
generating LaTeX outlines. The authors have reviewed and
verified all generated content and take full responsibility for
the final manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] M. R. Albrecht, R. Player, and S. Scott, “On the concrete hardness of
learning with errors,” Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2015/046, 2015.
[Online]. Available: https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/046
[2] A. Ali, E. Astor, B. Gipson, S. Gorantala, M. Guevara, J. Kun, W. Lam,
R. Misoczki, R. Springer, J. Takeshita, J. Tong, C. Tew, and C. Yun,
“Jaxite: A fully homomorphic encryption backend targeting TPUs and
GPUs, written in JAX,” https://github.com/google/jaxite, 2024.
[3] A. Ali, J. Choi, B. Gipson, S. Gorantala, J. Kun, W. Legiest,
L. Lim, A. Viand, M. Z. Demissie, and H. Zheng, “Heir: A universal
compiler for homomorphic encryption,” 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.11095
[4] J. H. Cheon, A. Kim, M. Kim, and Y. Song, “Homomorphic encryption
for arithmetic of approximate numbers,” in Advances in Cryptology –
ASIACRYPT 2017, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10624.
Springer, 2017, pp. 409–437.
[5] I. Chillotti, N. Gama, M. Georgieva, and M. Izabach`ene, “TFHE: Fast
fully homomorphic encryption over the torus,” Journal of Cryptology,
vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 34–91, Jan 2020.
[6] code perspective, “Add an unroll factor of 8 (reduces bootstrap speedup
on tpu by 2 ms),” https://github.com/google/jaxite/pull/88, 2026, gitHub
Pull Request #88, Accessed: 2026-05-06.
[7] code perspective, “Improvements to the vector_matrix_polymul
provides a speedup of 1.7 ms,” https://github.com/google/jaxite/pull/89,
2026, gitHub Pull Request #89, Accessed: 2026-05-06.
[8] code perspective, “Update
i32 matmul unreduced cggi to use single
bfloat16 (instead of 4) for int32 multiplications,” https://github.com/
google/jaxite/pull/90, 2026, gitHub Pull Request #90, Accessed: 2026-
05-06.
[9] C. Gentry, “Fully homomorphic encryption using ideal lattices,” in
Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory
of Computing, ser. STOC ’09.
New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2009, p. 169–178. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/1536414.1536440
[10] S. Gorantala, R. Springer, and B. Gipson, “Unlocking the potential of fully
homomorphic encryption,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 66, no. 6,
pp. 68–75, jun 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3582500
[11] S. Gorantala, R. Springer, S. Purser-Haskell, W. Lam, R. J. Wilson,
A. Ali, E. P. Astor, I. Zukerman, S. Ruth, C. Dibak, P. Schoppmann,
S. Kulankhina, A. Forget, D. Marn, C. Tew, R. Misoczki, B. Guillen,
X. Ye, D. Kraft, D. Desfontaines, A. Krishnamurthy, M. Guevara,
I. M. Perera, Y. Sushko, and B. Gipson, “A general purpose transpiler
for fully homomorphic encryption,” CoRR, vol. abs/2106.07893, 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.07893
[12] X. He, “Accelerated linear algebra compiler for computationally efficient
numerical models: Success and potential area of improvement,” PLOS
ONE, vol. 18, no. 2, p. e0282265, 2023.
[13] C. Hong, S. Bhatia, A. Cheung, and Y. S. Shao, “Autocomp: A powerful
and portable code optimizer for tensor accelerators,” 2025. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18574
[14] JAX Developers, “Pallas quickstart — JAX documentation,” https://docs.
jax.dev/en/latest/pallas/quickstart.html, 2024.
[15] S. Liu, S. Agarwal, M. Maheswaran, M. Cemri, Z. Li, Q. Mang,
A. Naren, E. Boneh, A. Cheng, M. Z. Pan, A. Du, K. Keutzer,
A. Cheung, A. G. Dimakis, K. Sen, M. Zaharia, and I. Stoica, “Evox:
Meta-evolution for automated discovery,” 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.23413
[16] A. Novikov, N. V˜u, M. Eisenberger, E. Dupont, P.-S. Huang, A. Z.
Wagner, S. Shirobokov, B. Kozlovskii, F. J. Ruiz, A. Mehrabian et al.,
“Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
[17] OpenXLA Project, “OpenXLA: Accelerated linear algebra,” https://github.
com/openxla/xla, 2026.
[18] J. Tong, T. Huang, J. Dang, L. de Castro, A. Itagi, A. Golder, A. Ali,
J. Jiang, J. Kun, Arvind, G. E. Suh, and T. Krishna, “Leveraging asic ai
chips for homomorphic encryption,” ser. HPCA’26. Australia: 2026 IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), 2026.
6


--- Page 7 ---
APPENDIX
A. LLM Instruction-Prompt Pool
• Prompt 1: Suggest a new way to minimize data reorganiza-
tion in the program.
• Prompt 2: Suggest a new way to keep the logical shapes of
JAX arrays invariant throughout execution.
• Prompt 3: Suggest a new way to hide off-chip memory
latency behind computation.
• Prompt 4: Suggest a new optimization idea based on your
expert knowledge of TPU performance tuning.
B. Role and Hardware Architecture Prompts
• Role: You are an expert hardware-aware compiler optimizer
specializing in TPU architectures.
• Objective: Optimize the input computational graph for
maximum performance on the TPU v5e architecture. You
must make strategic decisions regarding operation mapping
(Vector vs. Matrix units), memory hierarchy management, and
parallelism.
• Target Hardware Specifications:
• Compute Capabilities (Peak):
– Clock Frequency: 1.50 GHz
– Matrix Units (MXU): 197 TFLOPS (bf16/fp8), 394
TOPS (int8), 788 TOPS (int4).
– Vector
Units
(VPU):
vmatmul
(1.54
TB/s),
vmatpush (6.16 TB/s).
• Memory Constraints (CRITICAL):
– CMEM: None (0 bytes). Do not tile data into CMEM.
– Vmem (Vector Memory): 128 MB. Read: 18.5 TB/s,
Write: 6.16 TB/s.
– HBM (High Bandwidth Memory): ∼17.2 GB at 820
GB/s.
• Interconnect: 2D Torus, 4 links/chip, 45 GB/s per link.
• Optimization Strategies Required:
• Compute Mapping: Map matrix multiplications to the
Systolic Array (MXU). Map element-wise, reduction, and
non-matmul ops to the Vector Unit (VPU).
• Memory Tiling & Fusion: All functional tiling must
target the 128 MB Vmem. Perform loop fusion to avoid
spilling back to HBM.
• Precision Tuning: Evaluate suitability for int8 quanti-
zation for 2× throughput.
• Pipeline Parallelism: Overlap HBM-to-Vmem DMA
transfers with VPU/MXU execution.
•Output Requirements: Generate optimized code/IR and
summarize: theoretical peak utilization, memory bandwidth
utilization, and a bottleneck analysis.
7
