--- Page 1 ---
1
TriVAL: A Tri-Validation Framework for Faithful Automatic
Optimization Modeling
Ziyang Fang, JinXi Wang, Jinghui Zhong, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yew-Soon Ong, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Optimization modeling serves as the pivotal bridge
between natural-language problem descriptions and optimization
solvers, and remains a cornerstone for bringing operations
research (OR) into real-world decision making. Recent advances
in large language models (LLMs) have driven significant progress
in automatic optimization modeling. However, existing methods
still lack explicit validation during the modeling process, allowing
errors introduced in earlier stages to carry through the pipeline
and ultimately reduce final modeling accuracy. To address this
challenge, we introduce TriVAL, a tri-validation framework
that performs explicit validation at three stages of automatic
optimization modeling: semantic specification, mathematical for-
mulation, and code generation. At each stage, TriVAL follows
a construct-validate-revise loop that assesses the current result
against stage-specific criteria and revises it when needed. This
design helps identify and correct errors before they accumulate
across stages, helping preserve faithfulness throughout the mod-
eling process. To evaluate automatic optimization modeling on
more challenging combinatorial problems, we further introduce
NL4COP, a benchmark of 150 instances across 50 diverse prob-
lem types with more complex decision logic, more tightly coupled
constraints, and more demanding modeling requirements than
existing benchmarks. Experiments on NL4COP and established
benchmarks show that TriVAL consistently outperforms state-of-
the-art methods, with the largest gains on the most challenging
problems.
Index Terms—Combinatorial optimization, large language
models, mathematical programming, automatic optimization
modeling, optimization model validation
I. INTRODUCTION
O
PTIMIZATION modeling constitutes the essential con-
duit for translating real-world decision problems into
formal optimization models; nevertheless, it has long been
the primary bottleneck preventing the large-scale deployment
of operations research (OR) by non-specialist users. This
bottleneck is particularly consequential in domains such as
supply chain planning [1], production scheduling [2], and
transportation [3], where the need for optimization model-
ing far exceeds the availability of expert modelers [4]. In
practice, optimization problems are rarely presented as fully
specified mathematical programs. They are typically described
in natural language, often with intricate decision logic, tightly
coupled requirements, and assumptions that are left implicit.
(Corresponding author: Jinghui Zhong.)
Ziyang Fang, JinXi Wang, and Jinghui Zhong are with the School of
Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technol-
ogy, Guangzhou 510000, China (e-mail: 202520143514@mail.scut.edu.cn,
202511095364@mail.scut.edu.cn, jinghuizhong@scut.edu.cn).
Yew-Soon Ong is with the Centre for Frontier AI Research, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138632, and also with the
College of Computing and Data Science, Nanyang Technological University,
Singapore 639798 (e-mail: asysong@ntu.edu.sg).
Constructing a correct mathematical model from such descrip-
tions requires far more than direct formalization—it demands
abstraction, semantic understanding, and careful modeling
judgment. Advancing this capability matters both for research
on automatic optimization modeling and for extending the
practical reach of OR beyond expert modelers [5], [6].
Automatic optimization modeling is difficult because cor-
rectness must be maintained across a sequence of dependent
modeling stages: understanding the problem, formulating it,
and generating code [7]–[9]. Each stage produces a result that
constrains the next; a flaw at any earlier stage can propagate
forward; later results may still be internally coherent while
disconnected from the original problem. Thus, the true bot-
tleneck in automatic optimization modeling is no longer just
the generation of code, but the robust containment of errors
across dependent modeling stages to preserve faithfulness to
the original problem.
Recent large language models (LLMs) have significantly
advanced automatic optimization modeling [5], [6], [10]. As
optimization modeling tasks become more complex, existing
work has increasingly adopted multi-step strategies to im-
prove modeling capability. Current approaches can be broadly
categorized into two main lines: learning-based methods and
prompt-based methods. Learning-based methods enhance opti-
mization modeling capability through large-scale data synthe-
sis and model training [7], [11]–[13], whereas prompt-based
methods improve inference-time modeling through multi-step
decomposition and the incorporation of modeling knowledge
[8], [14]–[17]. Both directions have improved the quality of
generated models. However, while these approaches enhance
multi-step generation, they typically treat intermediate results
from earlier stages as inherently reliable, giving much less
attention to explicitly validating results before they are used
in later stages. Without explicit validation, early hallucinations,
misinterpretations, or faulty reasoning can easily embed them-
selves into stage results. Because later stages directly build on
these inputs, they merely translate already-flawed modeling
decisions into code. The final program may thus execute
perfectly yet solve the wrong problem. To mitigate semantic
drift, automatic optimization modeling must explicitly validate
key stage results, catching defects before they become difficult
to correct later.
Recognizing that maintaining faithfulness requires catching
defects at each stage before they become difficult to correct
later, we propose TriVAL, a dedicated tri-validation framework
for automatic optimization modeling that organizes the mod-
eling process around explicit validation of intermediate mod-
eling results. It introduces three validations targeting distinct
stages of the modeling process: semantic, formulation, and
arXiv:2605.23966v1  [cs.CL]  12 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
code. For each target, TriVAL follows a construct-validate-
revise loop: it first constructs the current modeling result,
then validates it against criteria tailored to the specific risk
at that stage, and revises it when necessary before proceeding.
Through this design, TriVAL contains early errors before they
propagate, safeguarding the correct mapping from problem to
solution throughout the modeling process.
The detrimental impact of error propagation is largely
masked in existing LP and MILP benchmarks, where problem
logic and formulation requirements are relatively straightfor-
ward. However, in complex combinatorial settings with greater
modeling difficulty, errors in problem understanding and for-
mulation become more pervasive, making explicit validation
critically important. To evaluate optimization modeling where
faithfulness is difficult to preserve, we introduce NL4COP, a
new benchmark comprising 150 instances across 50 diverse
combinatorial problem types with more complex decision
logic and greater modeling difficulty than existing bench-
marks. Experiments on NL4COP and established benchmarks
show that TriVAL consistently outperforms state-of-the-art
methods, with the largest gains on the most challenging tasks.
The main contributions of this work are threefold:
1) We propose TriVAL, a dedicated tri-validation frame-
work for automatic optimization modeling that organizes
the modeling process around explicit validation of three
key modeling results: semantic specification, mathe-
matical formulation, and generated code. Each result
is evaluated and, when necessary, revised before the
process proceeds, helping contain error propagation and
preserve faithfulness throughout the modeling process.
2) We introduce NL4COP, a new benchmark for auto-
matic optimization modeling on challenging combina-
torial problems. It comprises 50 problem types and
150 instances with complex decision logic and tightly
coupled constraints, providing a more challenging and
discriminative evaluation than existing benchmarks.
3) Through
extensive
experiments
on
NL4COP
and
established
benchmarks,
we
show
that
TriVAL
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art optimization-
modeling methods, with the largest gains on the most
challenging problems. The results further highlight
NL4COP as a challenging and discriminative benchmark
for demonstrating the benefits of explicit validation.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related work and clarifies our positioning.
Section III presents the proposed TriVAL framework. Sec-
tion IV introduces the NL4COP benchmark and reports the
experimental evaluation. Finally, Section V concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Automatic
optimization
modeling
translates
natural-
language problem descriptions into formal formulations and
executable code for mathematical modeling frameworks
and solvers such as CVXPY [18], Gurobi [19], and OR-
Tools [20]. Recent literature applying LLMs to this task
generally pursues two main directions. The first direction
trains specialized models via data synthesis, supervised
fine-tuning, or alignment training. The second direction
guides general-purpose models using prompt engineering,
reasoning frameworks, or external knowledge injection. After
reviewing these foundational approaches, we discuss the
literature most closely aligned with our contribution: the
evaluation of generated outputs and explicit optimization
validation.
A. Learning-Based Methods for Optimization Modeling
Learning-based methods primarily advance automatic op-
timization modeling via supervised fine-tuning or alignment
training, leveraging optimization-oriented data and feedback.
One prominent line of work focuses on constructing structured
datasets to teach models to produce accurate formulations.
For instance, ORLM [11] and LLMOPT [7] design multi-
element schemas that link natural-language descriptions, math-
ematical formulations, and code, enabling instruction tuning
for optimization modeling. Alternatively, ReSocratic [21] and
OptMATH [12] employ formulation-centered synthesis, gen-
erating data bidirectionally between mathematical expressions
and problem descriptions to expand training diversity with
controllable complexity.
A complementary direction incorporates verifiable solver
signals directly into model alignment and inference. SIRL [13]
treats optimization solvers as reward sources, using executable
code and formal models to guide reinforcement-learning-
based alignment. Building upon this verifiable feedback loop,
OptiMind [22] applies solver signals at test time, combining
class-based error summaries with self-consistency to reduce
common modeling mistakes.
While these learning-driven approaches successfully pro-
duce higher-quality formulations and executable code, they
remain fundamentally generation-focused. They tend to treat
results from earlier stages as inherently reliable, lacking ex-
plicit mechanisms to examine key modeling results before they
are used in later stages.
B. Prompt-Based Methods for Optimization Modeling
A second major direction guides inference-time optimiza-
tion modeling via task decomposition, multi-agent coordina-
tion, and structured search. Given that single-step generation
often fails on complex problem structures [23], one prominent
line of work decomposes the modeling workflow into spe-
cialized roles. For instance, frameworks like Chain-of-Experts
[15], OptiMUS [24], OptimAI [16], and OR-LLM-Agent [17]
coordinate distinct agents or personas to separately handle
mathematical formulation, code generation, and execution
repair. By modularizing the workflow, these methods allow
models to focus on one specific part of the modeling task at
a time.
A complementary line of work enforces structural con-
sistency through search trajectories and semantic grounding.
OptiTree [25] organizes the generation process via hierarchical
tree search, decomposing complex problems into simpler sub-
problems to synthesize a global modeling strategy. Alongside


--- Page 3 ---
3
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF REPRESENTATIVE OPTIMIZATION MODELING METHODS.
TRIVAL PROPOSES A DEDICATED TRI-VALIDATION FRAMEWORK
COVERING ALL CORE MODELING STAGES.
Method
SU
F
CG
Validation Scope
ORLM [11]
✓
✓
–
LLMOPT [7]
✓
✓
–
SIRL [13]
✓
✓
–
AutoFormulation [8]
✓
✓
✓
Formulation stage only
OptiMUS [24]
✓
✓
✓
–
OR-LLM-Agent [17]
✓
✓
–
OptiTree [25]
✓
✓
✓
–
OptiVer [33]
✓
✓
✓
Final-model only
TriVAL (ours)
✓
✓
✓
Tri-Validation
SU: Semantic Understanding; F: Formulation; CG: Code Generation.
tree search, retrieving relevant modeling knowledge via in-
context learning has shown promise for Constraint Program-
ming [26]. To further ground the generation process, SAC-Opt
[27] focuses on structural alignment, reconstructing semantic
anchors from the generated code and correcting mismatched
components against the original problem description.
While these structural and multi-agent approaches make
reasoning more reliable, their feedback loops are still con-
centrated at the code stage, typically through execution and
debugging after code generation. Because they rarely impose
explicit validation gates on early modeling results (such as the
initial semantic extraction or the mathematical formulation),
early misinterpretations can still freely propagate into the final
code structure.
C. Evaluation of Generated Outputs and Explicit Optimization
Validation
Recognizing the limitations of pure generation, recent
machine learning literature increasingly leverages LLMs as
evaluators to critique and refine outputs [28]–[32]. Within
optimization modeling, recent work has explored validation-
guided search and testing. For instance, AutoFormulation
[8] incorporates correctness scoring to explore and screen
candidate formulations. Other works focus on post-generation
verification: OptiVer [33] checks final models via dual-side
verification of structure and solutions, while an agent-based
approach formalizes model checking using generated tests and
mutations [34].
Despite these advances, existing optimization verifiers are
typically applied only at specific points of the modeling
process or after a complete model has already been produced.
Because they do not systematically gate the intermediate
transitions connecting natural language, mathematical formu-
lations, and code, they struggle to prevent early semantic
misunderstandings from cascading into complex formulation
errors.
D. Our Positioning
As shown in Table I, prior work covers the three broad
stages of optimization modeling to different extents, while ex-
plicit validation is absent in most methods or introduced only
partially. TriVAL differs fundamentally: it elevates validation
from a supporting component to the central mechanism of the
framework. Rather than introducing checks only at selected
stages of the modeling process, TriVAL introduces explicit
validation at each of the three stages: semantic understand-
ing, formulation, and code generation. By governing whether
intermediate modeling results should be accepted, revised, or
prevented from affecting later stages, this design contains error
propagation at each stage, keeping the final generated code
faithful to the original problem.
III. METHODOLOGY: TRIVAL
A. Overview: A Tri-Validation Framework for Automatic Op-
timization Modeling
TriVAL organizes automatic optimization modeling around
explicit validation at three stages: semantic specification,
mathematical formulation, and code generation. These stages
produce the semantic specification S, the mathematical for-
mulation M, and the generated code C, respectively. An error
at any stage can carry forward and cause the final result to
deviate from the original problem.
To address this risk, TriVAL introduces three validation
gates, each targeting one stage of the modeling process.
Semantic validation evaluates whether S faithfully captures
the original problem. Formulation validation examines whether
M correctly formalizes the specification. Code validation as-
sesses whether C faithfully translates M and produces correct
solutions.
Across all three stages, TriVAL follows a unified construct-
validate-revise loop. The framework first constructs the current
stage result, then evaluates it against stage-specific criteria,
and revises it when needed before the modeling process
moves forward. In this way, validation is embedded throughout
the modeling process and acts as the central mechanism for
containing error propagation.
To improve candidate quality before validation, TriVAL
adopts stage-specific construction mechanisms: semantic ex-
traction and ambiguity resolution for S, multi-expert formu-
lation exploration for M, and a ReAct-based code agent with
code self-correction for C. These mechanisms improve the
quality of the results entering validation, making the overall
process more reliable.
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall architecture of TriVAL, and Al-
gorithm 1 summarizes the complete construct-validate-revise
procedure. The following subsections describe the three valida-
tion stages in detail. Section IV further presents a case study
demonstrating how TriVAL identifies and corrects modeling
errors in practice.
B. Semantic Validation for Problem Understanding
Semantic validation is the first validation gate in TriVAL,
evaluating whether the problem has been understood faithfully
at the semantic level before mathematical formulation begins.
This stage is critical because the semantic specification S
serves as the foundation on which all subsequent modeling de-
pends: formulation inherits its starting point from S, and code
generation in turn builds upon the formulation. A specification


--- Page 4 ---
4
Problem 
Description 
Semantic
Understanding
Semantic Validator
Semantic Validation
Semantic Specification 
Formulation Validator
Formulation Validation
Code Validator
Code Validation
Problem Answer
solver = CreateSolver()
x, y = DefineVariables(…)
solver.AddConstraints(…)
solver.Objective
status = solver.Solve()
Solver Code  
Formulation 
Mathematical
Formulation
Code
Generation
extract fact and
resolve ambiguity 
construct formulation
with multiple experts
generate code with 
self-correction
Reformulation
Accept
Clarification
Validation
Feedback
Accept
Code Repair
Formulation Criteria
Code Criteria
Validation
Feedback
Accept
Validation
Feedback
Quality of variable design
Soundness of formulated constraints
Alignment of optimization objective
Demands: {A: 10, B: 20}
"Shortest"? (Distance or Time)
Minimize Distance
Faithfulness of extracted facts
Relevance of identified ambiguities
Consistency of adopted resolutions
Semantic Criteria
Readiness for execution
Faithfulness to the formulation
Attribution of code defects
Fig. 1.
Overview of TriVAL. The framework organizes automatic optimization modeling around three validation gates for the semantic specification S,
mathematical formulation M, and generated code C. At each stage, construction, validation, and revision are performed before the process moves to the next
stage.
Extract Semantic Fact 
Resolve Ambiguity
inconsistent
resolutions
Facts 
 : given 5
city coordinates ... 
Ambiguities  
: 
minimize time or
distance? ...
Resolution 
 :
minimize distance
Semantic Validator
missing or 
incorrect facts
pass
Fig. 2. Semantic validation targets the semantic specification S = (F, A, R).
S is constructed through semantic fact extraction and ambiguity resolution,
then validated for factual faithfulness, ambiguity relevance, and resolution
consistency.
that omits essential problem facts, introduces unsupported
interpretations, or leaves formulation-relevant ambiguities un-
resolved can cause subsequent modeling to proceed from a
mistaken understanding of the original problem, even if later
stages remain internally consistent.
The specification S under validation is a triple
S = (F, A, R),
(1)
where F captures semantic facts extracted from the prob-
lem description d, including given conditions, constraint
requirements, and the optimization objective; A identifies
formulation-relevant ambiguities, i.e., parts of the description
that admit multiple plausible interpretations and may affect
modeling decisions (such as variable domains, parameter
definitions, or the scope of constraints); and R records the
interpretations and conventions adopted for subsequent mod-
eling. Together, they capture the problem’s given information,
ambiguities, and adopted interpretations. These ambiguities
often affect the mathematical formulation directly, such as
variable domains or the scope of constraints. Without resolving
them, the formulation stage may adopt incorrect variable
definitions or constraint scopes, introducing errors that are
difficult to detect later.
TriVAL
constructs
S
through
a
two-step
extraction-
resolution process (Fig. 2). A semantic fact extractor first
extracts F from the problem description and identifies candi-
date ambiguities A. An ambiguity resolver then determines the
adopted interpretation for each ambiguity in A based on the
problem context, the extracted facts, and standard optimization
modeling conventions, producing the resolution set R. When
no formulation-relevant ambiguity is identified, the extracted
facts proceed directly to validation. This specification provides
the semantic basis for all subsequent modeling.
The semantic validator examines S along three dimensions:
factual faithfulness, ambiguity relevance, and resolution con-
sistency. For F, it evaluates whether the extracted facts are
complete, correct, and free of unsupported additions. For A,
it gauges whether the listed ambiguities are genuinely relevant
to formulation and sufficiently consequential to warrant resolu-
tion. For R, it determines whether the adopted resolutions are
consistent with both the original problem description and the
extracted facts. These three dimensions jointly assess whether
the current specification captures the semantic content of the
original problem with sufficient faithfulness for formulation to
proceed.
If the validator identifies defects, it returns revise, and
TriVAL revises S according to the validation feedback and
re-evaluates it. Missing or incorrect facts lead to revision
of F; missing, irrelevant, or misidentified ambiguities lead
to revision of A; and when the adopted interpretation is
weakly supported or inconsistent with the problem description,
TriVAL revises R accordingly. This construct-validate-revise


--- Page 5 ---
5
Algorithm 1 TriVAL: The construct-validate-revise procedure
1: Input: problem description d
2: Budgets: semantic validation rounds TS, formulation validation rounds
TM, code validation rounds TC, code self-correction rounds EC
3: Output: semantic specification S, mathematical formulation M, gener-
ated code C
4: Semantic Validation
5: S ←CONSTRUCTSEMANTICSPECIFICATION(d)
6: for tS = 1 to TS do
7:
(rS, δS) ←VALIDATESEMANTICSPECIFICATION(d, S)
8:
if rS = accept then
9:
break
10:
else if rS = revise then
11:
S ←REVISESEMANTICSPECIFICATION(S, δS)
12:
end if
13: end for
14: Formulation Validation
15: B ←CONSTRUCTFORMULATIONCANDIDATES(S)
16: M ←SELECTFORMULATION(B, S)
17: for tM = 1 to TM do
18:
(rM, δM) ←VALIDATEFORMULATION(d, S, M)
19:
if rM = accept then
20:
break
21:
else if rM = partial_revise then
22:
M ←REVISEFORMULATION(S, M, δM)
23:
else if rM = reformulate then
24:
B ←CONSTRUCTFORMULATIONCANDIDATES(S, δM)
25:
M ←SELECTFORMULATION(B, S)
26:
end if
27: end for
28: Code Validation
29: C ←GENERATESOLVERCODE(d, M)
30: for tC = 1 to TC do
31:
for e = 1 to EC do
32:
(ηC, ϕC) ←EXECUTECODE(C)
33:
if ηC = executable then
34:
break
35:
end if
36:
C ←SELFCORRECTCODEFROMEXECUTION(C, ϕC)
37:
end for
38:
if ηC ̸= executable then
39:
break
40:
end if
41:
(rC, δC) ←VALIDATESOLVERCODE(d, M, C, ϕC)
42:
if rC = accept then
43:
return (S, M, C)
44:
else if rC = code_revise then
45:
C ←REVISESOLVERCODE(C, δC)
46:
else if rC = formulation_revise then
47:
M ←PARTIALREVISEFORMULATION(S, M, δC)
48:
C ←GENERATESOLVERCODE(d, M)
49:
end if
50: end for
51: return (S, M, C)
loop continues until the specification is accepted or the seman-
tic validation round limit is reached, after which the current
specification proceeds to the formulation stage.
C. Formulation Validation for Mathematical Modeling
With the semantic specification S in place, the modeling
process proceeds to mathematical formulation. Formulation
validation is the second validation gate, examining whether
the problem has been correctly expressed as a mathematical
formulation. Because M will be directly translated into code,
any deviation from the specification propagates to subsequent
stages. Expression-level defects may prevent the model from
being solved correctly or produce abnormal solver behavior.
Modeling-level deviations are more consequential: they can
Formulation Validator
Refinement
Explore 
 with multiple experts
α β
γ
x y
z
min
max
2
3
1
4
3
select the best formulation
partial_revise 
"＞ should be 
 …"
reformulate
pass
"unreasonable
constraints ..."
Fig. 3.
Formulation validation targets the mathematical formulation M =
(P, V, C, O). Candidate formulations are constructed through multi-expert
exploration, and the selected candidate is validated for variable-design quality,
constraint soundness, and objective alignment.
cause the variables to misrepresent the intended decisions,
the constraints to misstate the problem requirements, or the
objective to no longer match the original goal, regardless of
whether code generation itself is error-free.
The mathematical formulation is defined as
M = (P, V, C, O),
(2)
where P specifies the known parameters and constants in the
model; V defines the decision variables that abstract the core
choices in the optimization problem; C encodes the constraints
that feasible solutions must satisfy; and O expresses the op-
timization objective to be minimized or maximized. Together,
these four components constitute the complete mathematical
representation of the problem and define the optimization
model to be implemented.
To construct M, TriVAL employs multi-expert formulation
exploration. This design reflects that the same optimization
problem can be approached from different modeling per-
spectives. Different perspectives lead to different choices of
decision variables, which in turn produce different expressions
of constraints and objectives, yielding formulations that are all
mathematically valid yet vary substantially in compactness,
solving difficulty, and ease of code generation. For example, a
routing problem may be formulated through an ordering-based
representation or through an edge-based graph representation.
Both may be correct, yet they can differ substantially in
variable design, constraint organization, and ease of code
generation. TriVAL uses multiple experts to explore these
alternatives explicitly, so that validation can operate on a more
diverse and higher-quality candidate set.


--- Page 6 ---
6
As illustrated in Fig. 3, TriVAL explores candidate for-
mulations through four experts. Each expert takes the same
semantic specification S as input and independently produces
a complete formulation candidate. The four experts approach
the problem from different modeling perspectives:
• Parameter-and-index expert: focuses on the organization
of known quantities, emphasizing parameters, constants,
and their index structure to provide a clear basis for later
variable definition and constraint expression.
• Decision-variable expert: focuses on decision represen-
tation, favoring variable designs that capture the core
decisions compactly and sufficiently.
• Constraint expert: focuses on requirement expression,
emphasizing how constraints should be organized and
scoped to express the problem requirements completely
and accurately.
• Objective expert: focuses on optimization-goal expres-
sion, favoring formulations whose objective is direct
and well aligned with the variable design and constraint
system.
This design allows TriVAL to explore different formulations
of the same problem while keeping every candidate complete.
The exploration process yields a candidate set
B = M1, M2, . . . , Mk.
(3)
From this candidate set, an LLM-based selector chooses the
formulation that offers the best combination of sound variable
design, concise representation, standard formulation conven-
tions, and correctness with respect to S, and uses it as the
formulation to be validated.
The
formulation
validator
examines
M
along
three
component-level dimensions:
ValM(d, S, M) =
 Qual(V ), Sound(C), Align(O)

,
(4)
which correspond to the quality of variable design, the
soundness of constraint formulation, and the alignment of
the optimization objective. The validator first checks variable
design (V ): decision variables should capture the core choices
compactly and sufficiently, with domains, bounds, and types
consistent with problem semantics. It then examines constraint
soundness (C), focusing on completeness, correct scope, and
accurate expression of problem requirements under the current
variable design. The final component-level check concerns
objective alignment (O): the objective function should match
the intended optimization goal in both direction and expression
and remain coordinated with the variables and constraints.
Beyond these component-level dimensions, the validator also
examines whether the formulation as a whole is coherent.
Variables, constraints, and objectives are tightly coupled:
variable design shapes how constraints and objectives are
expressed, while constraint organization affects whether the
overall formulation remains clear and well coordinated.
If the validator identifies defects, TriVAL determines the re-
vision mode according to the nature of the defect. Expression-
level defects trigger partial_revise. These cases indicate
that the overall formulation choice remains appropriate and
that the main problem lies in local expressions, such as
Code Validator
Code Agent
Solver
pass
Revise
Formulation
formulation_revise
Solver Code 
& Results
code_revise
error
feedback
Fig. 4.
Code validation targets the generated code C. The code agent
generates code, and runtime errors are fixed through code self-correction. The
resulting code is then validated for consistency with the formulation using the
observed execution result. Detected defects are attributed to either the code
or the formulation.
a missing constraint term, an improper variable bound, an
incorrect scope condition, or a local deviation in the objective
expression. Such defects can usually be corrected directly
without changing the overall modeling design. Modeling-
level defects trigger reformulate. These cases indicate
that the defect lies in the overall formulation choice, such
as an unsuitable decision abstraction, a constraint system that
depends on an unsuitable variable design, or an objective
that is misaligned with problem intent. In such cases, local
patching is usually insufficient because variables, constraints,
and objectives are tightly coupled, so changing one part can
affect the rest of the formulation. TriVAL therefore returns
to multi-expert formulation exploration and reconstructs can-
didate formulations under the same semantic specification,
guided by the validation feedback. This step also allows the
framework to revisit alternative modeling perspectives and
potentially find a stronger formulation. This construct-validate-
revise loop continues until the formulation is accepted or the
formulation validation round limit is reached, after which the
formulation proceeds to code generation.
D. Code Validation for Executable Translation
The formulation M now enters the final stage: code gener-
ation. Code validation is the third validation gate in TriVAL,
assessing whether the formulation M has been correctly
translated into code C. Two distinct error sources arise at
this stage: solver-interface and code-expression errors, such as
invalid variable types, incorrect constraint-construction calls,
or syntax errors; and deviations from the formulation, where
the code no longer accurately reflects the variables, constraints,
and objective defined in M. To address both sources, the
code stage proceeds in two phases. Execution-feedback code
self-correction first fixes runtime errors through execution
feedback. Code validation then assesses whether the resulting
code remains faithful to M.


--- Page 7 ---
7
To construct C, TriVAL introduces a ReAct-based code
agent [35] that constructs code iteratively by alternating rea-
soning and tool use. The agent is equipped with three code-
interaction tools for reading the current code state, writing
initial code, and making partial edits to existing code. These
tools let the agent refine code statefully rather than regenerate
the full program each time. To improve adaptation to solver
interfaces, TriVAL injects basic solver-interface syntax rules,
common error patterns, and task guidance into the agent
prompt as prior knowledge for code generation.
TriVAL pairs the code agent with a code self-correction
loop: each time the code agent completes generation, an
independent execution environment runs the code. If execution
fails, the environment returns execution feedback, including
runtime errors, interface-call errors, and solver-status infor-
mation. This feedback is sent back to the code agent and used
to guide the next round of partial revision. This self-correction
loop targets runtime and interface errors, iteratively fixing
them through the returned feedback. The loop continues until
the code runs without errors or the repair budget is exhausted
[36], returning an execution status ηC together with execution
feedback ϕC. Code self-correction resolves runtime errors but
does not assess whether the resulting code remains faithful to
M. Code validation addresses this gap: even code that runs
without errors may still return infeasibility or an abnormal
solver status, and even code that produces a solution may still
deviate from the formulation, yielding a solved problem that
no longer matches M.
The code-stage validation is defined as
ValC(d, M, C, ϕC) →(rC, δC),
(5)
where ϕC denotes the observed execution result and solver
feedback, rC is the validation result, and δC carries the vali-
dation feedback, including error attribution and a description
of the defect.
The validator inspects the executable code together with
the observed execution result ϕC, assessing faithfulness to
M. It checks that variable types, domains, and indices remain
consistent with M, that constraints are added completely and
correctly under the intended scope, and that the objective
function remains aligned in direction and expression. This
faithfulness check also supports error attribution. If the code
deviates from the formulation, the defect is attributed to
the code, since code generation is responsible for translating
mathematical expressions into executable solver code. If the
code is consistent with M, the defect is attributed to the
formulation. Certain formulation-level errors, such as incor-
rect constraint scope or missing coupling conditions, become
visible only through actual execution when the solver result
remains abnormal. If the defect is attributed to the code (e.g.,
an interface-call error, a missing constraint term, an incorrect
variable definition, or a deviation in objective expression),
the validation result is code_revise, and the code agent
revises the current generated code accordingly. If the defect
is attributed to the formulation (e.g., a formulation defect
exposed through infeasibility or an abnormal solver status), the
validation result is formulation_revise, the formulation
is partially revised, and the code is regenerated from the
revised formulation. This construct-validate-revise loop con-
tinues until the code is accepted or the code validation round
limit is reached, completing the TriVAL modeling process and
producing the final results (S, M, C).
IV. EXPERIMENTS
This section evaluates TriVAL and NL4COP from four
perspectives. We first introduce NL4COP and the experimental
setup. We then assess the overall effectiveness of TriVAL and
examine how its advantage changes with problem complexity
across benchmarks and within NL4COP. Next, we study the
value of the complete validation framework through validator
ablations, error analysis, and transfer experiments on an ex-
isting optimization-modeling framework. Finally, we analyze
how the three-stage modeling design and stage-specific mech-
anisms contribute to TriVAL’s effectiveness, and evaluate the
cost of validation.
A. Experimental Setup
Benchmarks. Existing benchmarks for automatic optimiza-
tion modeling focus predominantly on LP and MILP problems
with relatively simple structures [37], while combinatorial
optimization remains systematically underrepresented. These
problems involve complex constraint interactions and discrete
decisions, making them particularly demanding to model. To
fill this gap, we introduce NL4COP, a benchmark that provides
broad coverage of combinatorial problem types, graduated dif-
ficulty within each problem type, verified reference solutions,
and strong discriminative power for distinguishing modeling
methods.
NL4COP comprises 150 instances spanning 50 combina-
torial problem types across seven major families: routing,
packing and cutting, scheduling, location and allocation, graph
and network optimization, knapsack and selection, and hybrid
problems. These 50 types are selected to systematically cover
the principal modeling structures in combinatorial optimiza-
tion, from path and flow decisions to resource coupling,
assignment, sequencing, and set selection.
Each problem type contains three instances at distinct dif-
ficulty levels (simple, medium, and hard), enabling controlled
comparison of modeling performance as difficulty increases
within the same problem type. The three levels differ in
description length, constraint complexity, and data scale, plac-
ing progressively higher demands on long-context semantic
understanding and mathematical formalization quality.
All instances are designed and constructed by PhD-level
operations research experts, each grounded in a realistic OR
scenario. The problem data is verified for feasibility via
solver execution, and every instance is fully specified in
natural language with reference code and a reference optimal
solution. Two experts independently cross-check all cases for
consistency among the problem description, reference code,
and reference answer.
Compared with existing benchmarks, NL4COP features
more detailed problem descriptions and more intricate rule
interactions, substantially increasing both description length
and modeling complexity. We compare NL4COP with existing


--- Page 8 ---
8
TABLE II
OPTIMIZATION MODELING BENCHMARKS COMPARED BY INSTANCE
COUNT, AVERAGE DESCRIPTION LENGTH, AND MODELING COMPLEXITY.
NL4COP RANKS FIRST IN BOTH DESCRIPTION LENGTH AND MODELING
COMPLEXITY.
Benchmark
Instances Avg. Length (chars) Complexity
ComplexOR [15]
18
1273
4.0
OptiBench [21]
403
621
5.1
NL4Opt [39]
205
530
5.1
NL4LP [24]
178
533
5.2
Mamo [40]
852
1225
6.4
OptMath [12]
129
3083
7.1
IndustryOR [11]
99
1046
7.9
NL4COP (ours)
150
3249
9.4
ComplexOR
OptiBench
NL4Opt
NL4LP
Mamo
OptMath
IndustryOR
NL4COP
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Complexity
Violin: Distribution density
Box: IQR with median
Mean
Fig. 5.
Distribution of modeling complexity across benchmarks. NL4COP
instances cluster at the high-complexity end, with substantially greater mod-
eling difficulty than existing benchmarks.
benchmarks along these two dimensions, following the defi-
nition and computation of modeling complexity in prior work
[5]. As shown in Table II and Fig. 5, NL4COP substantially
exceeds existing benchmarks in both dimensions. Accordingly,
constructing correct models for NL4COP requires more care-
ful discrete abstraction, constraint scoping, and coordination
across interacting constraints [38].
In addition to NL4COP, the main experiments include
Mamocomplex
[40], OptMath [12], and IndustryOR [11].
Mamocomplex is the complex subset of the Mamo benchmark,
consisting of challenging LP and MILP instances. OptMath
spans a broader range of optimization problem families and
includes longer descriptions with greater modeling difficulty.
IndustryOR focuses on optimization-modeling tasks drawn
from real industrial settings. These benchmarks, together with
NL4COP, span established LP/MILP settings to more chal-
lenging combinatorial problems, enabling evaluation across
varying modeling difficulty.
Baselines. We compare TriVAL against two classes of
prior methods. One class consists of learning-based meth-
ods, including ORLM (ORLM-LLaMA-3-8B) [11], LLMOPT
(LLMOPT-Qwen2.5-14B) [7], and SIRL (SIRL-Gurobi32B)
[13], which improve optimization modeling through training
data, structured representations, and solver-verifiable learning
signals. The other consists of prompt- and agent-based meth-
ods, including AutoFormulation [8], OR-LLM-Agent [17],
and OptiTree [25], which improve inference-time modeling
through task decomposition, search, planning, external feed-
back, and multi-agent coordination.
Evaluation Metric. Following prior work [7], [8], [11],
[13], [25], we adopt solving accuracy as the primary metric.
No general-purpose automatic test of structural equivalence
currently exists for optimization modeling, so solving accuracy
remains the standard evaluation criterion. For each instance,
we execute the generated code, obtain the predicted objective
value ypred, and compare it with the reference objective value
ylabel. Following the SIRL evaluation protocol [13], an instance
is counted as correct when
|ypred −ylabel|
|ylabel| + 1
< 10−6.
(6)
We also report process-level indicators and error-type analyses
as supplementary evidence. For the small number of instances
where the decision-variable type is not explicitly specified,
we evaluate both the integral and the continuous settings. If
either setting matches the reference objective value, we count
the instance as correct. This rule is applied uniformly across
all methods.
Protocol. The main experiments use DeepSeek-V3.2 [41]
and GPT-5.1 [42] as base models. For prompt- and agent-
based methods, TriVAL and all baselines are evaluated on the
same base model to ensure a fair comparison. For learning-
based methods, we evaluate the authors’ released models under
their best reported settings. For all prompt- and agent-based
methods evaluated by us, we repeat each experiment five times.
Unless otherwise specified, we report the best solving accuracy
over the five runs. We use OR-Tools [20] and CVXPY [18]
as solvers to cover the optimization problem types in all
benchmarks. In TriVAL, each stage allows up to five validation
iterations, after which the current result proceeds to the next
stage. The code self-correction stage allows up to 20 rounds of
execution feedback, with a timeout of 100 s per run. Unless a
module is explicitly removed in an ablation, all other settings
are kept fixed across variants.
B. Main Results
Table III reports the solving accuracy of TriVAL and
competing
methods
on
NL4COP
and
three
established
optimization-modeling
benchmarks.
TriVAL
achieves
the
strongest overall performance across all benchmarks and both
base models, with particularly large gains on IndustryOR
and NL4COP. The advantage is largest on IndustryOR and
NL4COP because longer descriptions and greater modeling
difficulty make modeling more error-prone, and methods
without explicit validation allow these errors to propagate
unchecked, whereas TriVAL’s staged validation catches them
early.
Fig. 6 traces this trend across benchmarks. As complexity
increases, all methods decline, but TriVAL degrades much
more slowly: under DeepSeek-V3.2, TriVAL drops only 2.7
points from Mamocomplex to NL4COP, whereas OR-LLM-
Agent drops 36.6 and OptiTree drops 28.2 (Table III).
NL4COP thus provides strong discriminative power among
methods: on simpler benchmarks, most approaches perform


--- Page 9 ---
9
TABLE III
ACCURACY (%) ACROSS BENCHMARKS. TRIVAL ACHIEVES THE STRONGEST OVERALL PERFORMANCE, WITH THE LARGEST GAINS ON THE MOST
CHALLENGING BENCHMARKS.
Model
Method
Benchmark Accuracy (%)
Overall (%)
Mamocomplex
OptMath
IndustryOR
NL4COP
Learning-based Methods
ORLM
48.6
14.1
34.3
11.3
29.1
LLMOPT
50.0
21.9
38.4
10.7
31.9
SIRL
65.2
71.1
52.5
28.0
54.9
Prompt-based Methods
GPT-5.1
AutoFormulation
74.3
46.9
52.5
25.3
52.1
OR-LLM-Agent
91.0
85.2
78.8
68.0
81.8
OptiTree
80.5
83.6
75.8
56.0
74.1
TriVAL
90.5
87.5
86.9
81.3
86.9
DeepSeek-V3.2
AutoFormulation
74.8
40.6
63.6
14.7
50.1
OR-LLM-Agent
88.6
85.9
77.8
52.0
76.8
OptiTree
82.9
74.2
67.7
54.7
71.2
TriVAL
90.0
87.5
89.9
87.3
88.8
Best results are in bold and second-best results are underlined.
Mamo (6.4)
OptMath (7.1)
IndustryOR (7.9)
NL4COP (9.4)
Benchmarks (Complexity in Parentheses)
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Solution-level Accuracy (%)
90.0
87.5
89.9
87.3
88.6
85.9
77.8
54.7
LLMOPT
ORLM
OptiTree
SIRL
AutoFormulation
OR-LLM-Agent
TriVAL
Fig. 6. Solving accuracy versus benchmark complexity under DeepSeek-V3.2.
As benchmark difficulty increases, all methods decline but TriVAL degrades
the slowest, widening the gap to competing methods.
adequately and differences remain small, whereas NL4COP’s
greater complexity amplifies these differences, clearly separat-
ing methods with and without explicit validation.
Table IV breaks down the NL4COP results by difficulty
level. Under both base models, the gap between TriVAL and
the baselines widens from simple to hard splits, consistent
with the cross-benchmark trend observed above. This within-
benchmark result further shows that TriVAL is more robust
on harder instances, and that NL4COP’s graduated difficulty
reveals this difference.
C. Effectiveness of the Validation Framework
1) Validator Ablation: To examine the role of each val-
idation stage, we keep the construction process unchanged
TABLE IV
SOLVING ACCURACY ACROSS THE SIMPLE, MEDIUM, AND HARD SPLITS
OF NL4COP (%). THE GAP BETWEEN TRIVAL AND THE BASELINES
WIDENS AS DIFFICULTY INCREASES.
Model
Method
Difficulty Splits
Overall
Simple Medium Hard
GPT-5.1
OR-LLM-Agent
72.0
72.0
60.0
68.0
OptiTree
52.0
56.0
60.0
56.0
TriVAL
88.0
90.0
66.0
81.3
DeepSeek-V3.2
OR-LLM-Agent
56.0
56.0
44.0
52.0
OptiTree
60.0
58.0
46.0
54.7
TriVAL
94.0
92.0
76.0
87.3
and remove the semantic, formulation, and code validators
individually or jointly.
Table V reports the ablation results on IndustryOR. Explicit
validation improves accuracy by at least 11.1 percentage
points (pp) and up to 13.1 pp, showing that it is essential
to TriVAL’s performance. Among the three, the formulation
validator contributes the most, improving accuracy by 4.0–8.1
pp, as it guards the critical interface where semantic under-
standing is translated into concrete mathematical expressions;
errors at this stage directly corrupt code generation and are
difficult to recover from in later stages. The code validator
improves accuracy by 2.0–6.1 pp by addressing more local
implementation defects such as solver-interface mismatches,
while the semantic validator contributes 1.0–4.0 pp by catching
early misinterpretations that would otherwise cascade through
both formulation and code. Together, these results support
the core design of TriVAL: the three validators target distinct
failure modes across the modeling pipeline, and each addresses
errors that the others do not catch.


--- Page 10 ---
10
TABLE V
VALIDATION ABLATION ON INDUSTRYOR. ALL THREE VALIDATORS
CONTRIBUTE TO THE OVERALL ACCURACY.
Variant
Accuracy (%)
∆(pp)
Full Method
89.9
—
w/o Semantic Validation
85.9–88.9
-1.0 – -4.0
w/o Formulation Validation
81.8–85.9
-4.0 – -8.1
w/o Code Validation
83.8–87.9
-2.0 – -6.1
w/o All Validation
76.8–78.8
-11.1 – -13.1
Accuracy (%): min–max over five runs. ∆: drop from Full Method in
percentage points (pp).
TABLE VI
VALIDATION ABLATION ON NL4COP. THE EFFECT OF EACH VALIDATOR
IS LARGER THAN ON INDUSTRYOR, REFLECTING THE GREATER
MODELING DIFFICULTY OF THIS BENCHMARK.
Variant
Accuracy (%)
∆(pp)
Full Method
87.3
—
w/o Semantic Validation
82.0–86.0
-1.3 – -5.3
w/o Formulation Validation
73.3–76.0
-11.3 – -14.0
w/o Code Validation
78.7–84.0
-3.3 – -8.7
w/o All Validation
66.0–69.3
-18.0 – -21.3
Accuracy (%): min–max over five runs. ∆: drop from Full Method in
percentage points (pp).
We further examine the same ablation on NL4COP, where
the greater modeling difficulty makes errors more likely to
arise. The effect of validation is substantially larger: the
complete framework improves accuracy by at least 18.0 pp and
up to 21.3 pp, with the formulation validator alone contributing
11.3–14.0 pp (Table VI). Every individual ablation produces a
larger degradation than on IndustryOR, showing that validation
becomes more valuable as modeling difficulty increases. This
growing gap also highlights NL4COP’s discriminative power:
the benchmark’s complex decision logic and greater modeling
difficulty amplify the difference between methods with and
without validation, making the contribution of each validator
clearly observable.
2) Reduction of Variable and Constraint Errors: Having es-
tablished that validation improves accuracy, we now ask what
types of errors it actually fixes. Table VII classifies failed cases
into three categories. Variable-design errors include wrong
variable domains, missing decision variables, and incorrect
index scopes. Constraint-expression errors include missing
constraints, wrong scopes, and incorrect coupling relations.
Code-generation errors involve solver-interface mismatches
and other translation-level mistakes. The key observation is
that removing validation disproportionately increases errors
in the first two categories. On NL4COP, constraint errors
more than double from 12 to 30 and variable errors double
from 6 to 12, showing that TriVAL’s validators mainly reduce
errors in variable design and constraint formulation. These are
precisely the errors that undermine faithfulness to the original
problem: wrong variable abstractions alter the decision space,
and flawed constraint formulations distort the feasible region,
regardless of whether the subsequent code executes correctly.
TABLE VII
ERROR DISTRIBUTION ON FAILED INSTANCES WITH AND WITHOUT
VALIDATION. REMOVING VALIDATION MAINLY INCREASES
VARIABLE-DESIGN AND CONSTRAINT-EXPRESSION ERRORS RATHER THAN
CODE-GENERATION ERRORS.
Benchmark
Variant
Total
failed
Error Types
Code
Variable
Constraint
IndustryOR
Full Method
10
1
1
8
w/o All Validation
21
1
3
17
NL4COP
Full Method
20
2
6
12
w/o All Validation
46
4
12
30
TABLE VIII
EFFECT OF ADDING VALIDATION TO OR-LLM-AGENT. VALIDATION
IMPROVES ACCURACY ON BOTH BENCHMARKS, WITH A SUBSTANTIALLY
LARGER GAIN ON NL4COP.
Benchmark
OR-LLM-Agent
+ Validation
Gain
IndustryOR
77.8
83.2 (82.8–83.8)
+5.4 (5.0–6.0)
NL4COP
52.0
70.2 (68.7–72.0)
+18.2 (16.7–20.0)
OR-LLM-Agent: original mean accuracy. + Validation: mean (min–max)
over five runs after inserting formulation-side and code-side validation.
By catching these defects early, the three validators directly
protect the key modeling stages, helping the solver optimize
the intended problem.
3) Applying Validation to an Existing Framework: The
preceding experiments show that explicit validation improves
modeling accuracy within TriVAL. We now ask whether the
same mechanism can benefit another optimization-modeling
framework. To test this, we add explicit validation into OR-
LLM-Agent [17], a representative multi-stage framework that
performs optimization modeling through mathematical mod-
eling, code generation, and debugging. We keep its original
modeling pipeline unchanged and insert formulation-side val-
idation after the mathematical modeling stage and code-side
validation after the debugging loop produces executable code.
Detected formulation-side defects trigger natural-language
feedback to the mathematical-modeling stage; code-side de-
fects trigger feedback to the code-generation stage, while
runtime errors are still handled by the original debugging loop.
The added validators reuse the same prompts as in TriVAL,
with each validator allowed up to five iterations.
After adding these validation steps, accuracy improves from
77.8% to 83.2% on IndustryOR and from 52.0% to 70.2%
on NL4COP. Formulation-side validation consistently detects
more errors than code-side validation, flagging 37.4% vs.
19.2% of instances on IndustryOR and 42.7% vs. 22.7%
on NL4COP, indicating that many modeling defects arise
during the mathematical formulation stage. On NL4COP, both
validators trigger revision more frequently than on Indus-
tryOR, and the accuracy gain is correspondingly larger, further
reinforcing that validation grows more valuable as problem
difficulty increases. These results demonstrate that explicit
validation can also improve a representative existing multi-
stage framework.


--- Page 11 ---
11
TABLE IX
ABLATION OF MODELING DESIGN CHOICES ON INDUSTRYOR AND NL4COP. BOTH THE THREE-STAGE STRUCTURE AND THE STAGE-SPECIFIC
MECHANISMS CONTRIBUTE TO FINAL ACCURACY, WITH THE LARGEST DROPS FROM REMOVING SEMANTIC UNDERSTANDING OR CODE
SELF-CORRECTION.
Variant
Semantic
Understanding
Formulation
Code
Generation
Multi-Expert
Formulation
Code Self-
Correction
IndustryOR
∆
NL4COP
∆
Three-Stage Structure
Full Method
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
89.9
—
87.3
—
w/o Semantic Understanding
×
✓
✓
✓
✓
80.8
-9.1
78.7
-8.6
w/o Formulation Stage
✓
×
✓
—
✓
83.8
-6.1
78.0
-9.3
Code-Only
×
×
✓
—
✓
82.8
-7.1
78.0
-9.3
Stage-Specific Mechanisms
w/o Multi-Expert
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
83.8
-6.1
78.7
-8.6
w/o Code Self-Correction
✓
✓
✓
✓
×
79.8
-10.1
80.0
-7.3
Accuracy (%); ∆: drop from Full Method; —: not applicable.
Across these experiments, explicit validation consistently
improves modeling accuracy, becomes more effective as prob-
lem difficulty increases, and also improves a representative
existing framework. We next analyze the internal design
choices that contribute to TriVAL’s effectiveness.
D. Analysis of TriVAL’s Design
1) Contribution of Modeling Design and Mechanisms:
The preceding section establishes that explicit validation is
a key driver of TriVAL’s performance. We now turn to the
broader framework: how the three-stage modeling structure
and the stage-specific mechanisms contribute to the overall
effectiveness. To isolate each component’s role, we keep
the validator configuration fixed and evaluate the following
variants: without semantic understanding, without formula-
tion, without both stages (code-only), without multi-expert
formulation, and without code self-correction. All variants are
evaluated on IndustryOR and NL4COP.
Both the three-stage structure and the stage-specific mecha-
nisms contribute to overall effectiveness (Table IX). Removing
semantic understanding or formulation causes accuracy drops
of 6.1–9.1 pp on IndustryOR and 8.6–9.3 pp on NL4COP.
The three-stage structure decomposes the modeling process
into explicit stages for semantic understanding and mathe-
matical construction, allowing defects in variable definitions,
constraint scope, and objective structure to be identified and
revised before code generation.
The stage-specific mechanisms also contribute substantially.
Removing the multi-expert mechanism costs 6.1–8.6 pp, while
removing code self-correction costs 7.3–10.1 pp. The multi-
expert mechanism generates candidate formulations from di-
verse expert perspectives, increasing the diversity and quality
of formulations that enter validation. Code self-correction
iteratively refines generated code by using execution feedback
to diagnose and fix errors such as syntax violations, incorrect
solver API calls, and infeasible model constructions.
2) Synergy Between Modeling Quality and Validation: The
previous analysis shows that both the modeling design and the
validation framework contribute to accuracy. We now examine
TABLE X
FORMULATION QUALITY AND VALIDATION EFFICIENCY. THE
MULTI-EXPERT MECHANISM RAISES PASS@1 AND REDUCES BOTH
VALIDATION ITERATIONS AND EXECUTION ROUNDS.
Bench.
Variant
Pass@1
(%) ↑
Valid.
Iters ↓
Exec.
Rounds ↓
IndustryOR
Full Method
51.0
2.9
1.9
w/o Multi-Expert
27.3
4.5
1.9
NL4COP
Full Method
46.0
3.1
2.9
w/o Multi-Expert
30.7
4.8
4.1
how they reinforce each other. Better modeling construction
reduces errors at the source, gives validation formulations that
are already closer to acceptance, and makes subsequent repair
more focused. We use the multi-expert formulation mechanism
as an example (Table X).
This interaction is reflected in how formulation quality
reshapes the role of validation. Better formulation construction
raises formulation Pass@1 from 27.3% to 51.0% on Indus-
tryOR and from 30.7% to 46.0% on NL4COP. Validation
then more often operates on formulations that are already
close to acceptance and can focus on screening and targeted
revision. It also reduces average validation iterations from 4.5
to 2.9 and from 4.8 to 3.1. On NL4COP, it further reduces
code execution rounds from 4.1 to 2.9, indicating that better
formulation construction reduces formulation errors that carry
into code translation and execution.
Fig. 7 illustrates the same mechanism at the instance level.
In the initial formulation M1, the capacity constraint is applied
to end-of-month inventory rather than to the inventory state
after purchasing. The resulting code C1 faithfully translates
this incorrect formulation and therefore produces an infea-
sible model. In this setting, execution feedback exposes the
symptom but provides limited guidance about the source of
the error: infeasibility alone does not determine whether the
defect comes from variable timing, constraint scope, or another
formulation decision. At the formulation stage, however, the
defect is still visible and amenable to targeted revision before


--- Page 12 ---
12
,  , 
, 
, 
, 
, 
, 
Code
Generation
solver status:
INFEASIBLE
Execution results
A store plans its monthly purchasing and sales for the first
quarter. Warehouse capacity is 
, with 
 in initial inventory.
Purchases occur at the beginning of each month. Determine
monthly purchases and sales to maximize total profit.
Natural Language Description
Without Tri-Validation Framework
A flawed formulation yields 
executable but infeasible code.
Code
Generation
Execution results
With Tri-Validation Framework
Optimal solution found!
Total profit: 4100.00
Formulation
Validator
detect error 
Mathematical
Formulation
revise based on
feedback
validate compliance
with formulation criteria
Formulation Validator catches
errors before they affect code.
Semantic Facts 
 
Ambiguities 
 & Resolutions 
 
Objective: maximize total profit
Constraints:
• stock within 
• no negative purchases or sales
• end stock = start + purchases - sales
Capacity check time? (month-end or always)
Sells limit? (stock or demand) 
Remaining stock value? (zero or salvage)
Semantic Specification 
Parameters:
during time, capacity,
initial inventory,
purchase price, selling price
→   always
→   stock
→   zero
Parameters:
Objective:
Variables:
Constraints:
Formulation 
Fig. 7. Case study: formulation-side validation identifies an incorrect capacity constraint in M1 at a stage where the defect remains interpretable, enabling a
targeted revision that restores feasibility.
TABLE XI
TOKEN COST AND ERROR RATE WITH AND WITHOUT VALIDATION. THE
ADDITIONAL TOKENS SPENT ON VALIDATION REDUCE THE ERROR RATE
BY MORE THAN HALF ON BOTH BENCHMARKS.
Benchmark
Tokens
(Full / w/o)
Token
Saving
(%)
Error (%)
(Full / w/o)
Error
Increase
(×)
IndustryOR
54.9k / 29.2k
46.8
10.1 / 21.2
2.1
NL4COP
62.8k / 41.6k
33.8
12.7 / 30.7
2.4
Tokens and errors are reported as Full / w/o Validation values.
it is translated into code and reflected in execution results.
3) Cost of Validation: Validation incurs additional LLM
calls. Table XI shows that removing all validation saves
46.8% of tokens on IndustryOR and 33.8% on NL4COP, but
more than doubles the error rate on both benchmarks. On
NL4COP, the modeling process itself is already more token-
intensive because longer descriptions and greater modeling
complexity demand more reasoning and more careful con-
struction, even without validation. These additional tokens
are used to evaluate intermediate modeling results and repair
detected errors across the semantic, formulation, and code
stages. For challenging optimization modeling tasks, reducing
modeling errors and maintaining reliable, accurate modeling
carry greater practical value than minimizing token usage
alone.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work presents TriVAL, a tri-validation framework
for automatic optimization modeling, and NL4COP, a new
benchmark with 50 problem types and 150 instances that
provides a more challenging and discriminative evaluation
than existing benchmarks. TriVAL introduces explicit vali-
dation at three stages of the modeling pipeline (semantic
specification, mathematical formulation, and generated code),
evaluating each result before errors propagate across stages.
Experiments on both established benchmarks and NL4COP
show that staged validation consistently improves modeling
accuracy, with the largest gains on the most challenging
problems. Validation of intermediate results is the key driver
of these improvements, and the same validation mechanism
also improves a representative existing optimization-modeling
framework. These results position the tri-validation approach
as an effective design principle for automatic optimization
modeling and NL4COP as a challenging benchmark that
clearly distinguishes the modeling capabilities of different
optimization-modeling methods.
Future work will focus first on strengthening validation un-
der more challenging problem settings. As problem complexity
grows, semantic ambiguity, complex constraint interactions,
and long-range dependencies make modeling errors harder to
identify reliably. Since TriVAL relies on LLM-based valida-
tors, subtle constraint violations and ambiguous formulations
may still challenge their assessments. A natural next step is to
incorporate richer problem-aware signals, finer-grained cross-
representation consistency checks, and more precise evaluation
criteria to improve validation quality.
Beyond the combinatorial problems studied here, extending
TriVAL to multi-objective, stochastic, robust, and dynamic
optimization settings opens a broader research direction for
both modeling and validation. Improving validation efficiency
while maintaining strong performance is also an important
practical goal. On the benchmark side, expanding NL4COP
to cover these broader problem classes would provide a more
comprehensive testbed for future research.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Nagurney, “Optimization of supply chain networks with inclusion
of labor: Applications to covid-19 pandemic disruptions,” International
Journal of Production Economics, vol. 235, p. 108080, 2021.
[2]
´A. S. Xavier, F. Qiu, and S. Ahmed, “Learning to solve large-scale
security-constrained unit commitment problems,” INFORMS Journal on
Computing, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 739–756, 2021.
[3] C. M. Schenekemberg, C. T. Scarpin, J. E. Pecora Jr, T. A. Guimar˜aes,
and L. C. Coelho, “The two-echelon production-routing problem,”
European journal of operational research, vol. 288, no. 2, pp. 436–449,
2021.
[4] H. P. Williams, Model building in mathematical programming, 5th ed.
John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
[5] Z. Xiao et al., “A survey of optimization modeling meets llms: progress
and future directions,” in Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, ser. IJCAI ’25, 2025.


--- Page 13 ---
13
[6] Y. Wang and K. Li, “Large language models in operations research:
Methods, applications, and challenges,” 2025.
[7] C. JIANG et al., “LLMOPT: Learning to define and solve general
optimization problems from scratch,” in The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[8] N. Astorga, T. Liu, Y. Xiao, and M. Van Der Schaar, “Autoformulation
of mathematical optimization models using llms,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2025, pp. 1864–1886.
[9] M. Mostajabdaveh, T. T. Yu, R. Ramamonjison, G. Carenini, Z. Zhou,
and Y. Zhang, “Optimization modeling and verification from problem
specifications using a multi-agent multi-stage llm framework,” INFOR:
Information Systems and Operational Research, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 599–
617, 2024.
[10] S. Wasserkrug et al., “Enhancing decision making through the integra-
tion of large language models and operations research optimization,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 39,
no. 27, 2025, pp. 28 643–28 650.
[11] C. Huang et al., “Orlm: A customizable framework in training large
models for automated optimization modeling,” Operations Research,
vol. 73, no. 6, pp. 2986–3009, 2025.
[12] H. Lu, Z. Xie, Y. Wu, C. Ren, Y. Chen, and Z. Wen, “Optmath:
A scalable bidirectional data synthesis framework for optimization
modeling,” in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR,
2025, pp. 40 769–40 802.
[13] Y. Chen, J. Xia, S. Shao, D. Ge, and Y. Ye, “Solver-informed RL:
Grounding large language models for authentic optimization modeling,”
in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 2025.
[14] Y. Wang, Z. Wu, J. Yao, and J. Su, “Tdag: A multi-agent framework
based on dynamic task decomposition and agent generation,” Neural
Networks, vol. 185, p. 107200, 2025.
[15] Z. Xiao et al., “Chain-of-experts: When LLMs meet complex opera-
tions research problems,” in The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
[16] R. Thind, Y. Sun, L. Liang, and H. Yang, “Optimai: Optimization from
natural language using llm-powered ai agents,” 2026.
[17] B. Zhang, P. Luo, G. Yang, B.-H. Soong, and C. Yuen, “Or-llm-agent:
Automating modeling and solving of operations research optimization
problems with reasoning llm,” 2025.
[18] S. Diamond and S. Boyd, “CVXPY: A Python-embedded modeling
language for convex optimization,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 17, no. 83,
pp. 1–5, Jan. 2016.
[19] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual,
2025, version 13.0. Accessed: Mar. 2, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.gurobi.com/projects/optimizer/en/current/
[20] L. Perron and V. Furnon, OR-Tools, Google, 2024, version 9.10,
released May 7, 2024. Accessed: Mar. 2, 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://developers.google.com/optimization/
[21] Z. Yang et al., “Optibench meets resocratic: Measure and improve LLMs
for optimization modeling,” in The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2025.
[22] X. Zhang et al., “Optimind: Teaching llms to think like optimization
experts,” 2026.
[23] D. Tsouros, H. Verhaeghe, S. Kadıo˘glu, and T. Guns, “Holy grail 2.0:
From natural language to constraint models,” 2023.
[24] A. Ahmaditeshnizi, W. Gao, and M. Udell, “Optimus: Scalable opti-
mization modeling with (mi) lp solvers and large language models,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2024, pp.
577–596.
[25] H. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Cai, X. Han, Y. Kuang, and J. HAO, “Optitree:
Hierarchical thoughts generation with tree search for LLM optimization
modeling,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems, 2025.
[26] K. Michailidis, D. Tsouros, and T. Guns, “Constraint Modelling with
LLMs Using In-Context Learning,” in 30th International Conference
on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP 2024), ser.
Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), P. Shaw, Ed.,
vol. 307.
Dagstuhl, Germany: Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ur
Informatik, 2024, pp. 20:1–20:27.
[27] Y. Zhang et al., “Sac-opt: Semantic anchors for iterative correction in
optimization modeling,” 2026.
[28] A. Madaan et al., “Self-refine: Iterative refinement with self-feedback,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, A. Oh, T. Nau-
mann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, Eds., vol. 36.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 46 534–46 594.
[29] H. Lightman et al., “Let’s verify step by step,” in The Twelfth Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[30] X. Chen, M. Lin, N. Sch¨arli, and D. Zhou, “Teaching large language
models to self-debug,” in The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
[31] Z. Gou et al., “CRITIC: Large language models can self-correct with
tool-interactive critiquing,” in The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
[32] Y. Wang, W. Wu, J. Wang, and Q. Wang, “From flat logs to causal
graphs: Hierarchical failure attribution for llm-based multi-agent sys-
tems,” 2026.
[33] H. Liu et al., “Optiver: Unleashing the power of LLMs for optimization
modeling via dual-side verification,” 2026.
[34] A. Zadorojniy, S. Wasserkrug, and E. Farchi, “An agent-based frame-
work for the automatic validation of mathematical optimization models,”
2026.
[35] S. Yao et al., “React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations, 2023.
[36] H. Tang et al., “Code repair with llms gives an exploration-exploitation
tradeoff,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
pp. 117 954–117 996, 2024.
[37] K. Michailidis, D. Tsouros, and T. Guns, “Cp-bench: Evaluating large
language models for constraint modelling,” 2025.
[38] Y. Liu, C. Zhou, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, X. Lin, and X. Wang, “Hard
constraints meet soft generation: Guaranteed feasibility for llm-based
combinatorial optimization,” 2026.
[39] R. Ramamonjison et al., “Nl4opt competition: Formulating optimization
problems based on their natural language descriptions,” in NeurIPS 2022
competition track.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 189–203.
[40] X. Huang, Q. Shen, Y. Hu, A. Gao, and B. Wang, “Llms for mathe-
matical modeling: Towards bridging the gap between natural and math-
ematical languages,” in Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: NAACL 2025, 2025, pp. 2678–2710.
[41] DeepSeek-AI et al., “Deepseek-v3.2: Pushing the frontier of open large
language models,” 2025.
[42] OpenAI, “GPT-5.1: A smarter, more conversational ChatGPT,” OpenAI
Official Website, Nov. 2025, accessed: Mar. 2, 2026. [Online].
Available: https://openai.com/index/gpt-5-1/
