--- Page 1 ---
1
Watts vs. Bytes: Turning Data Centers into Grid Assets via
Storage–Compute Co-Optimization
Shaohui Liu, Member, IEEE, Sungho Shin, Member, IEEE, Deepjyoti Deka, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Enabling continued data-center growth under increas-
ing grid stress motivates closer coordination between flexible
computing demand and co-located battery energy storage systems
(BESS) to improve site operations and provide grid services.
This paper develops a robust co-optimization framework for
day-ahead operation of data centers with co-located BESS
under utility-imposed interconnection limits on peak load and
ramping. The model jointly considers deadline-constrained com-
puting workloads, managed through workload scheduling and
dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS), together with
degradation-aware BESS dispatch to enable cost optimization
and participation in ancillary-service markets. Case studies
based on real-world market and workload data show that the
proposed framework yields feasible day-ahead schedules across
a range of operating conditions, with substantially larger benefits
when interconnection constraints become binding. Under baseline
conditions, BESS value is derived from both ancillary-service
participation and improved workload and energy management.
Under stressed peak-load and ramping limits, however, the daily
value of BESS increases by a factor of two or more, driven
primarily by BESS actions to reduce the potential incompletion in
the schedulable workload while complying with interconnection
constraints. Under tight peak-load caps, workload composition
also matters where a higher share of non-schedulable jobs can
increase operating cost by more than 25% relative to more
flexible workload mixes. Additionally, DVFS studies further show
that processor-level control is a material flexibility lever under
tight load limits. These results demonstrate that coordinated
compute-storage flexibility can materially expand the operational
headroom and grid value of data centers, especially under
increasingly scarce grid capacity.
Index Terms—Data centers, battery energy storage systems,
demand flexibility, robust optimization, ancillary markets
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid expansion of AI and cloud computing is turning
data centers into one of the fastest-growing classes of large
electrical loads in the United States. Recent planning studies in
North American regional transmission operators identify data
centers and other large flexible loads as major drivers of peak-
demand growth, reliability stress, and interconnection delays
[1]–[3]. These delays are closely related to interconnection
constraints, as recent NERC guidance and emerging flexible-
interconnection proposals identify load caps, ramp-rate limits,
demand-response obligations [4], [5] as possible solutions.
The potential of workload control at datacenters to alleviate
grid stress and enable a quicker grid connection has gained
recent attention [6]–[8]. This is in contrast to classical data
center power management where the focus has primarily been
on efficiency, provisioning, and server-level control rather
This research is funded by MIT Energy Initiative Future Energy System
Center. All authors are with MIT. email: {shaohuil,sushin,deepj87}@mit.edu.
than explicit power system participation [9], [10]. Modern
data center workloads contain a heterogeneous mix of fixed
services and schedulable workloads, including AI training,
batch computing, and storage migration, some of which can
be flexibly scheduled within release-deadline windows de-
pending on the operator’s need. This temporal flexibility can
be further expanded through dynamic voltage and frequency
scaling (DVFS) [11], [12], whereby the computing fleet adjusts
processor frequency and voltage to modulate effective service
rate and power consumption in real time.
At the same time, electricity wholesale markets increasingly
value fast asset flexibility through participation in reserve and
ramping products [13], [14], which procure standby capacity
to maintain reliability under short-term imbalances, and fast
upward/downward response to mitigate steep net-load changes.
Such market participation improves the economic case for
grid-connected battery storage [15]–[17], but storage alone re-
mains costly, energy-limited, and cycle-constrained. Although
a BESS can charge and discharge rapidly, it does not create
energy or eliminate the need to manage the underlying com-
puting demand. By contrast, workload scheduling and DVFS
can reshape the gross compute-load trajectory over release-
deadline windows, but their flexibility is coupled to quality of
service requirements. Coordinating these two resources there-
fore creates a potentially superadditive flexibility portfolio,
where compute-load flexibility can reduce the energy burden
on the battery and preserve state of charge and battery life for
the hours when fast bidirectional response is most valuable.
Additionally, the BESS can buffer short-term imbalances and
deliver the fine-grained response that workload control alone
cannot. This promise motivates the following key question:
Can flexible computing loads and co-located battery
energy storage systems (BESS) be effectively coordi-
nated to transform data centers from passive loads
into active grid-interactive flexibility resources that
provide grid services without undermining quality of
service (QoS) of computing loads?
In this paper, we answer this question affirmatively and
propose a robust co-optimization framework to quantify the
benefits from joint operations using real-world market and data
center load data.
Related work: Recent literature has started to connect data-
center operations with grid services, but important modeling
gaps remain. Geographically coordinated load shifting and
carbon-aware workload management are studied in [18]–
[21], yet those works emphasize network-wide or multi-site
coordination rather than the detailed co-optimization of a
arXiv:2605.16190v1  [eess.SY]  15 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
single interconnection-constrained site. On the storage side,
[22] shows that battery flexibility can create significant value
through coordinated participation across electricity market
products, which motivate us to consider the coupled operation
of storage with flexible computing loads behind a constrained
interconnection. The dynamic coupling of data-center load and
BESS for frequency regulation is explored in [23], while [24],
[25] highlights the broader opportunity for data centers to
provide ancillary services. The robust virtual capacity curve
(VCC) formulation for day-ahead planning in [26] is closest
in spirit to our setting. Building on that perspective, we show
that a richer flexibility set can be harnessed when work-
load scheduling is coordinated simultaneously with DVFS
control and co-located BESS dispatch under interconnection
and market-participation constraints. More broadly, existing
power-system flexibility models provide useful high-level ab-
stractions [27], [28], but they do not directly capture the
coupled decisions among workload scheduling, DVFS, battery
cycling, and uncertain ancillary-service deployment.
Our approach: Workload scheduling, DVFS control, and
BESS utilization each carry distinct costs and constraints in
terms of consumer service quality, performance headroom, and
cycle life, respectively. As a result, exploiting their synergies
requires joint optimization rather than treating either resource
in isolation. We model the data center operation problem
as a joint optimization problem that co-optimizes computing
and storage flexibility while meeting all operational and grid
constraints. This formulation gives the operator a richer fea-
sible set to balance competing costs based on the philosophy
that the two flexibility resources can be complementary or
partially substitutable depending on operating conditions. The
need for such a framework is further motivated by emerging
flexible interconnection concepts for large loads with operator
enforced limits [7]. Recent North American Electric Reliability
Corporation (NERC) guidance likewise highlights uncertainty
in how large loads may participate in peak-shaving, demand-
response, and other price-responsive programs, and indicate
that existing planning and operating practices are not yet
adequate for these facilities [4]. These considerations naturally
lead to a day-ahead decision problem in which workload
schedules, DVFS settings, battery dispatch, and market posi-
tions must be chosen before the true load and ancillary-service
deployments are realized, which in turn motivates the robust
optimization framework adopted here. This paper addresses
these practical needs by developing a comprehensive robust
co-optimization framework for data centers with co-located
BESS under utility-imposed grid constraints, validated through
extensive case studies with real load and electricity market
data. The main case studies explicitly evaluate DVFS operating
sets together with workload scheduling and storage dispatch,
reflecting the three coupled control levers available to the data-
center operator.
Contributions: The main contributions of this paper are as
follows:
• We develop a robust co-optimization framework for day-
ahead data-center operation that jointly models control of
fixed and schedulable IT load through workload scheduling
and DVFS control, and dispatch of co-located BESS for
cost minimization and participation in reserve, and flexible-
ramping markets, under utility-imposed load and ramping
limits. Crucially we explicitly penalizing workload service
degradation and battery degradation in our model. We then
derive reformulations of our model for both continuous
and discrete DVFS settings, yielding tractable linear and
mixed-integer linear optimization models that preserve the
physical interpretation of workload execution and processor-
level control.
• Extensive case studies with real market and load data
quantify both the average-case and stressed-regime value of
the proposed robust co-optimization, and clarify the relative
roles of computing flexibility and BESS. Under baseline
operation of a 100 MW data center, a 36 MWh/12 MW
BESS improves the 31-day mean daily operating cost by
about $3.5k/day, or 2.0% of the absolute no-battery op-
erating cost, while a 108 MWh/36 MW BESS improves
it by about $8.6k/day. In this setting, the value of co-
located BESS is realized through both market participation
and enabling workload flexibility rather than deep cycling.
Discrete-DVFS results show that moving from no DVFS
to a 9-level ±20% operating set improves the mean daily
operating cost by about $8.0k/day and raises the mean
completion rate from 97.3% to 100%. Under tighter inter-
connection conditions, finite-difference sensitivities of this
operating cost show substantially higher marginal values:
relaxing the peak-load limit from 95 to 100 MW yields
about $1.79k/MW-day, while relaxing the ramp limit from
5 to 10 MW/h yields about $11.6k/(MW/h)-day. The same
36 MWh/12 MW BESS adds about $7.5k/day at the 95 MW
peak-load binding point. Workload composition is also im-
portant when peak-load constraints bind: at a 90 MW load
cap, increasing the fixed-load share from 60% to 95% raises
operating cost by more than 25% and more than doubles the
shadow price of peak-load capacity. By contrast, ramp-limit
sensitivities remain largely unchanged across workload com-
positions for the hourly load profiles studied. These results
indicate that coordinated flexibility is especially valuable
under stressed interconnection conditions, while peak-load
scarcity is strongly shaped by workload composition and
ramping headroom can be highly economically scarce. The
commercial BESS sizing study further shows that the lower-
cost 4-hour battery captures most of its attainable net-value
gain by about 1.0 cy/day, whereas the economics of the
power-denser 2-hour battery are more sensitive to cycling
allowance and capital recovery assumptions.
Organization: The rest of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the joint data-center and BESS formulation.
Section III develops the reformulations of the scheduling
model. Section IV reports the main case studies, including rep-
resentative dispatch, battery sizing, interconnection sensitivity,
and discrete-DVFS operating-set sensitivity, and Section V
concludes the paper. Additional case-study details, ablation
results, supplementary formulations, and nomenclature are
provided in Appendices A–D.


--- Page 3 ---
3
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We formulate the day-ahead operation problem for a data
center with co-located BESS over the planning horizon T =
{1, . . . , T}, with ∆t = 1 hour as the length of each time step.
The operator chooses a single day-ahead schedule that includes
scheduling and DVFS settings for the computing load, and
BESS charging/discharging schedule. Additionally, the BESS
is enabled to commit capacity to reserve markets [13], as well
as up/down flexible-ramping products [14]. To incorporate
uncertainty in the day-ahead schedule, we consider a finite
scenario set S = {1, . . . , |S|}, where each scenario s cap-
tures a realization of ancillary-service deployment and non-
schedulable compute loads. We first introduce the grid-facing
system model and then couple it with the detailed data-center
and BESS feasibility models. A high-level overview of the
proposed framework is illustrated in Fig. 1. Note that, since
our model operates at an hourly resolution, it does not capture
fast fluctuations within each interval, which are assumed
to be handled by separate lower-level control mechanisms.
Consequently, explicit modeling of workload dynamics at
faster timescales, as well as BESS participation in frequency
regulation and local control actions, is beyond the scope of
this work.
A. Grid-facing system operations
Let Pt,s denote the total data-center power demand at time
t for scenario s, after combining fixed-load scenarios and
schedulable workloads. Let P B
α,t and P B
β,t denote the base
charging and discharging power of the co-located BESS,
respectively. For all t ∈T , the net power withdrawn from
the grid in scenario s is
Dt,s = P B
α,t −P B
β,t + Pt,s.
(1)
The interconnection agreement imposes both a peak-load limit
¯D and a ramp-rate limit ¯∆at every t ∈T :
−¯∆≤Dt,s −Dt−1,s ≤¯∆,
(2a)
Dt,s ≤¯D.
(2b)
Market Revenue of BESS: Let P B,R
t
and P B,↑
t
, P B,↓
t
denote
the reserve, upward/downward flexible-ramping capacities of-
fered by the BESS at time t. The associated day-ahead capacity
payments (RRES, RF RP ) are given by
RRes =
X
t∈T
λRes
t
P B,R
t
∆t
(3a)
RF RP =
X
t∈T
 λF RP,↑
t
P B,↑
t
+ λF RP,↓
t
P B,↓
t

∆t.
(3b)
with the defined time-step ∆t. Here λRes
t
, λF RP,↑
t
, and
λF RP,↓
t
are the market-clearing prices for reserve and flexible-
ramping capacity.
Energy Costs: For each scenario s ∈S, the realized energy
settlement CE
s is given by
CE
s =
X
t∈T
λE
t ∆t
h
Dt,s −βRes
t,s P B,R
t
+ βF RP,↑
t,s
P B,↑
t
−βF RP,↓
t,s
P B,↓
t
i
,
(4)
where λE
t is the energy price and βRes
t,s , βF RP,↑
t,s
, and βF RP,↓
t,s
are scenario-dependent ancillary-service deployment factors.
Under our sign convention, Dt,s > 0 denotes grid withdrawal,
reserve deployment and downward flexible ramping reduce
withdrawal through discharge, and upward flexible ramping
increases withdrawal through charging. Note that RRes and
RF RP are locked in by the day-ahead award, whereas CE
s
depends on the real-time deployment scenario.
In addition to energy costs, we also consider a weighted
workload-quality
cost
Cjob
that
penalizes
delay,
non-
completion, and DVFS deviation across the set of schedulable
jobs. For BESS, we model a scenario-dependent degradation
cost CBESS
s
that captures battery wear under deployment
scenario s. The specific forms of Cjob and CBESS
s
are
discussed in Section II-B and II-C, respectively.
With these grid-facing costs in place, we state the complete
day-ahead robust co-optimization problem up front, using
forward references to the compute-load and BESS models
introduced in the following subsections.
max min
s∈S

RRes + RF RP −CE
s −λcCjob −λdCBESS
s

(5a)
s.t.
grid-interface constraints (1) −(2),
(5b)
energy cost and market payments (3) −(4),
(5c)
compute-load cost and constraints (8) −(9),
(5d)
BESS cost and constraints (11) −(12).
(5e)
Here, λc relates service-quality cost to market revenues,
while λd weights the BESS degradation cost. The compute
block includes workload-scheduling, DVFS, scenario-indexed
fixed-load, and internal-capacity constraints; the BESS block
includes charging/discharging logic, scenario-indexed energy
and state-of-charge feasibility under ancillary-service deploy-
ment, and warranty-aware throughput limits. The following
subsections define these two blocks explicitly.
B.
Modeling compute load flexibility
At the data-center level, compute load (Pt,s in (1)) refers
to the electricity demand associated with servers executing
computing jobs, as well as the associated facility loads such
as cooling and other auxiliary services. We consider two
types of computing jobs that contribute to the compute load:
scenario specific fixed or non-schedulable jobs, and a set of
schedulable jobs with deadlines. The flexibility of the total
compute load is harnessed by two control layers. The first is a
system-level DVFS control that impacts both fixed (i.e. non-
schedulable) and schedulable compute jobs. Let at denote the
system-wide DVFS power-intensity level at time t, and let ao
denote its reference value. Under DVFS, the active computing
fleet adjusts processor frequency and voltage so that both


--- Page 4 ---
4
Grid and
markets
Interconnection
limits
Scenario
set  
Ancillary-service
deployment and
energy settlement
Robust day-ahead coordinator
One schedule shared across all scenarios
Worst-case net value:
+ Revenue
RRes, RFRP
- Energy
CE
s
- QoS
Cjob
- Wear
CBESS
s
Flexible compute demand
Fixed IT load, schedulable jobs,
and DVFS coordination
Co-located BESS
Dispatch, state of charge,
and reserve / ramp offers
Co-located data center site
Energy  
E
t
Reserve  
Res
t
Flex-ramp  
FRP
t
Dt
D
| Dt|
Worst-case
realization
Fixed Po
Jobs  wj, t
DVFS  at
PB
, t, PB
, t
EB
t , PB, R/
/
t
schedule
set-points
Pt
PB
, t
PB
, t
Grid Dt,
Dt
prices
s
Fig. 1. Overview of the robust day-ahead co-optimization framework for a data center with co-located BESS. The coordinator jointly schedules flexible compute
load and battery operation using market prices and uncertainty scenarios, while enforcing grid-facing load and ramp limits at the point of interconnection.
effective service rate and power intensity vary with at [11].
The second is job-level scheduling, which determines when
each schedulable job is executed within its release-deadline
window [26]. We model control for either compute job type
in detail now.
Fixed jobs load power: Let ˆP 0
t,s [kW] denote the forecasted
power consumption of fixed jobs at time t in scenario s, at
the reference setting at = ao. We assume that for fixed jobs,
a fraction φ ∈(0, 1) of the load scales linearly with the
DVFS level.1 The forecasted fixed load under scaling at can
be therefore written as
P fix
t,s(at) =
 1 −φ
 ˆP 0
t,s + φ at
ao
ˆP 0
t,s.
(6)
To protect against fixed-load under-forecasting, we denote
P
fix,up
t,s
as a conservative upper envelope of the fixed-job load
in scenario s at the reference setting at = ao. We then define
the conservative fixed-load term used in the power-balance and
capacity constraints as
P
fix
t,s(at) := P
fix,up
t,s
+ φ at −ao
ao
ˆP 0
t,s.
(7)
Schedulable Jobs: Let J be the set of schedulable jobs
considered. Each job j ∈J has a release/start time sj,
deadline dj, a total work requirement Wj (e.g., CPU/GPU-
hours measured in energy), and a maximum execution rate
rmax
j
. Its scheduled execution rate at time t is given by
wj,t ≥0. Note that the job execution is also impacted by the
system-wide DVFS level at that scales the effective service
rate. We let ℓj ≥0 denote the unfinished portion of job j
beyond the planning horizon T . The list of schedulable jobs
1This is consistent with empirical measurements showing that processors
account for roughly 25% of total hyperscale server power [10]; the remainder
stems from memory, storage, networking, and cooling, which are largely
insensitive to voltage/frequency scaling.
considered in our case studies is Table I in Appendix A. The
resulting job-level scheduling constraints are given by
0 ≤wj,t ≤rmax
j
,
∀t
(8a)
wj,t = 0,
∀t < sj,
(8b)
Wj −ℓj ≤
X
t≤dj
at
ao
· wj,t · ∆t +
X
dj<t≤T
at
ao
· wj,t · ∆t ≤Wj,
(8c)
Here, constraints (8a)–(8c) allow each job to be throttled and
shifted within its own rate and timing limits, thereby reshaping
the aggregate workload over time. Any work completed after
dj is tracked explicitly, and any unmet portion of job j is
absorbed by ℓj.
Aggregate workload and power: Let ¯P DC denote the internal
server hardware power limit for the computing fleet. This limit
is distinct from the grid-side interconnection power limit ¯D
in (2b).2 Combining the conservative fixed-load term in (7)
with the DVFS-scaled schedulable-job power, we obtain the
workload-quality cost and scenario-specific compute-power
constraints as
Cjob := c3
X
j∈J
X
t>dj,t∈T
κj(t −dj) at
ao
wj,t · ∆t
+ c2
X
j∈J
κjℓj · ∆t + c1
X
t∈T
|at −ao|
▶(cost)
(9a)
Pt,s = P
fix
t,s(at) + at
ao
X
j∈J
wj,t,
(9b)
Pt,s ≤¯P DC,
(9c)
a ≤at ≤a.
(9d)
Here, Cjob in (9a) denotes the workload-quality cost appearing
in the robust objective (5a). It consists of three terms: the
2 ¯P DC constrains the total server-side compute power, whereas ¯D constrains
the net grid withdrawal after BESS charging or discharging.


--- Page 5 ---
5
DVFS-deviation penalty with coefficient c1, the deadline-
tardiness penalty with coefficient c3 and job-specific latency
weight κj, and the unfinished-work penalty with coefficient
c2. Constraint (9b) then maps these workload decisions to
scenario-dependent compute power by combining the conser-
vative fixed-load term and the DVFS-scaled schedulable-job
power. Constraint (9c) enforces the internal server hardware
limit ¯P DC for each scenario, while (9d) restricts the admissible
DVFS operating range. For later interpretation of capacity
scarcity, we define the residual internal capacity available to
schedulable jobs after reserving the conservative fixed load as
Flexible Headroomt,s(at) := ¯P DC −P
fix
t,s(at).
(10)
At the nominal DVFS setting at = ao, this quantity is the base
flexible headroom. It is not an additional constraint; rather, it
is the interpretable residual-capacity quantity underlying the
hardware limit (9c) and the headroom sensitivity studies. This
construction is similar in spirit to the robust capacity-screening
idea in [26].
Remark 1 (Service-quality hierarchy). The coefficients are
chosen to encode the priority order c2 > c3 ≫c1 after
accounting for the units and typical magnitudes of the cor-
responding terms. This hierarchy treats non-completion as
the least desirable outcome, permits deadline violation only
when needed, and allows DVFS adjustment as the lowest-
cost flexibility lever. The non-zero DVFS term incorporates
degradation in energy inefficiency and reliability as well
as impact on fixed workload completions due to voltage–
frequency deviations from the nominal DVFS setting [10].
Thus, the model implements a soft service-level hierarchy: it
prefers completing jobs within their deadlines, then completing
them with delay, and uses non-completion only as a last resort
under tight grid or market conditions.
C. Modeling co-located BESS Operations
We consider a realistic co-located battery energy storage
system (BESS) model with charging/discharging inefficiencies
and degradation costs associated with operations. Let EB
s,t
denote the stored energy at time t and CB the installed energy
capacity per scenario s. As defined in Section II-A, at each
time t, the BESS has charging (P B
α,t) and discharging (P B
β,t)
power, reserve offer (P B,R
t
), and upward (P B,↑
t
) and down-
ward (P B,↓
t
) flexible-ramping offers. The power injections by
the BESS must satisfy intertemporal energy balance, state-
of-charge and power-capacity limits. We apply the following
constraints for the BESS.
EB
s,t = EB
s,t−1 +
h
(P B
α,t + βF RP,↑
t,s
· P B,↑
t
) · ηB
α
−(P B
β,t + βF RP,↓
t,s
· P B,↓
t
+ βRes
t,s P B,R
t
)/ηB
β
i
· ∆t,
(11a)
0 ≤αB
t + βB
t ≤1,
αB
t , βB
t ∈{0, 1},
(11b)
0 ≤P B
α,t + P B,↑
t
≤αB
t P B,max
α
,
(11c)
0 ≤P B
β,t + P B,R
t
+ P B,↓
t
≤βB
t P B,max
β
,
(11d)
SOCmin ≤EB
s,t/CB ≤SOCmax,
(11e)
Eth
s ≤2 · CB · (N cyc
max + ℓs)
(11f)
Eth
s =
X
t∈T
∆t ·

P B
α,t + βF RP,↑
t,s
P B,↑
t
+ P B
β,t + βRes
t,s P B,R
t
+ βF RP,↓
t,s
P B,↓
t

.
(11g)
Here, binary variables αB
t
and βB
t
indicate charging and
discharging states, respectively, while ηB
α and ηB
β denote the
charging and discharging efficiencies. P B,max
α
and P B,max
β
denote the limits of charging and discharging rates, and
SOCmin, SOCmax are limits on the state of charge. (11a)
imposes energy balance. Note that it is scenario-indexed
to incorporate the realized ancillary-service deployment sce-
nario (βRes
t,s , βF RP,↑
t,s
, βF RP,↓
t,s
), defined in (4). Next, equations
(11b)–(11d) impose the standard charge/discharge exclusivity
and power and state of charge limits, similar in structure
to prior BESS scheduling models [29]. Additionally, an ex-
plicit cycle limits defined by manufacturer warranty [30] is
introduced in (11f) to balance economic performance with
operational longevity, measured by the scenario-specific total
energy throughput Eth
s .
Note that this implementation uses a scenario-dependent soft
constraint with slack variable ℓs, aimed to respect a preferred
daily cycle limit, N cyc
max (e.g., 0.5 cycles/day [31]). The factor
2CB in (11f) represents the energy throughput of one full
charge-discharge cycle.
The per-scenario BESS degradation cost CBESS
s
penalizes
excess cycling captured by ℓs ≥0 as follows:
CBESS
s
:= cdeg 2CBℓs

,
▶(cost)
(12)
where cdeg and CB represent the marginal degradation cost and
the battery energy capacity. This degradation cost, included in
the robust objective (5a), ensures that in the most aggressive
deployment scenario s, the BESS operation minimizes devi-
ations from warranty terms unless market revenues explicitly
justify the accelerated wear.
The grid-interface, compute-load, and BESS blocks above
complete the robust co-optimization problem in (5). This prob-
lem is a two-stage robust mixed-integer nonlinear program: the
first-stage decisions include workload scheduling, DVFS set-
tings, BESS base dispatch, and ancillary-service offers, while
the scenario index captures realized fixed load and ancillary-
service deployments. The BESS charge/discharge indicators
αB
t and βB
t introduce integer structure, but the grid-interface
and BESS constraints are otherwise affine. The remaining non-
linearity is the bilinear DVFS-scheduling product (at/ao)wj,t
in (8c) and (9b). In the next section we focus on reformulating
this workload block to eliminate nonlinearity, including the
practical case where at is restricted to discrete hardware DVFS
levels.
III. REFORMULATION OF SCHEDULING FOR DVFS LEVELS
We now describe two reformulations for the workload schedul-
ing logic in (9) to eliminate the bilinear terms.


--- Page 6 ---
6
A.
Reformulation via Effective Service Rates
The workload-dependent objective and all job-completion con-
straints depend on (at, wj,t) only through the scaled quantity
(at/ao)wj,t. This suggests introducing a new decision variable
vj,t = (at/ao)wj,t,
(13)
that measures the effective service rate and eliminating the
bilinear product from the optimization model. In this way, the
original nonlinear constraints in (8)-(9) can be re-written as
linear constraints, as outlined in (23) in Appendix C. Note
that this reformulation makes every compute constraint affine
in the decision variables (v, ℓ, a, ˆP). After solving, the original
job specific execution rates wj,t can be conveniently recovered
from vj,t and at via the linear relation described.
B. Discrete Operating Points in DVFS Hardware
While the reformulation in Section III simplifies the compute
load constraints, it keeps DVFS as a continuous control in
[a, a] as per (9d). The Advanced Configuration and Power
Interface (ACPI) specification for contemporary server pro-
cessors instead defines a finite set of performance states (P-
states), each mapping to a specific voltage–frequency pair
that a processor can operator at [10]. This physical constraint
motivates modeling the DVFS factor as a discrete variable
selected from a finite set of operating levels, as discussed next.
We denote the set of available DVFS operating levels as L =
{1, 2, . . . , L}. For each l ∈L, let a(l) ∈[a, a] denote the
corresponding (fixed) DVFS scaling factor. We assume that the
levels are sorted in non-decreasing order, a(1) ≤a(2) ≤· · · ≤
a(L), and that the reference operating point ao is included in
the set.
For each time period t ∈T , we introduce binary decision
variable zl,t to model which level is selected, and to determine
the corresponding DVFS factor.
zl,t ∈{0, 1},
∀l ∈L,
(14)
X
l∈L
zl,t = 1,
at =
X
l∈L
a(l) zl,t.
(15)
Disaggregated Execution Rates:
For each schedulable job j ∈J at time t ∈T , we introduce a
continuous variable w(l)
j,t to model the execution rate if DVFS
level l is selected. Following (8a), we constraint w(l)
j,t as
0 ≤w(l)
j,t ≤rmax
j
zl,t,
∀l ∈L.
(16)
Note that in (16), the indicator-type constraint enforces w(l)
j,t =
0 when level l is not active (zl,t = 0). The aggregate execution
rate is obtained by summing over levels as wj,t = P
l∈L w(l)
j,t.
The power consumed by job j at time t can be similarly
aggregated as
pj,t =
X
l∈L
a(l)
ao
w(l)
j,t.
(17)
Note that every term in (17) is linear as it is the product of a
known constant a(l) and a continuous variable w(l)
j,t.
For the scenario specific fixed load given in (7), the discrete-
DVFS dependence is constructed linearly using the binary
decision variables zl,t:
P
fix
t,s(at) = P
fix,up
t,s
+
X
l∈L
φ a(l) −ao
ao
ˆP 0
t,szl,t
(18)
Note that replacing the continuous treatment of at in (8)–(9)
with discrete DVFS levels does not alter the logical structure
of the release-time, deadline, or total-work constraints. Only
the terms involving at and wj,t needs to be modified using
(14)–(18). The reformulated compute load cost and constraints
under discrete DVFS are together listed below:
Cjob
disc := c3
X
j∈J
X
t∈T
t>dj
κj(t −dj)pj,t · ∆t
+ c2
X
j∈J
κjℓj · ∆t + c1
X
t∈T
|at −ao| · ∆t,
(19a)
zl,t ∈{0, 1},
X
l∈L
zl,t = 1,
(19b)
pj,t =
X
l∈L
a(l)
ao
w(l)
j,t,
(19c)
at =
X
l∈L
a(l)zl,t,
(19d)
0 ≤w(l)
j,t ≤rmax
j
zl,t,
(19e)
w(l)
j,t = 0,
∀t < sj,
(19f)
X
t≤dj
pj,t·∆t +
X
dj<t≤T
pj,t · ∆t ≥Wj −ℓj,
(19g)
X
t≤T
pj,t · ∆t ≤Wj,
(19h)
Pt,s = P
fix,up
t,s
+
X
l∈L
φ a(l) −ao
ao
ˆP 0
t,szl,t +
X
j∈J
pj,t,
(19i)
Pt,s ≤¯P DC.
(19j)
Note that the bound (9d) is redundant under (19b),(19d) where
known DVFS levels a(l) ∈[a, a] for all l ∈L.
IV. ALGORITHM AND IMPLEMENTATION
The
robust
co-optimization
problem
developed
in
Sec-
tions II-B–III-A is solved by constructing a deterministic
equivalent over the finite scenario set S. For a given oper-
ating day, the inputs comprise schedulable job set J , BESS
ratings, wholesale and ancillary-service prices, and scenarios.
Each scenario includes fixed compute-load forecasts
ˆP 0
t,s,
reserve deployment βRes
t,s
and up/down ramping deployments
βF RP,↑
t,s
/βF RP,↓
t,s
. The conservative upper envelope P
fix,up
t,s
is
precomputed for each fixed-load scenario, and (7) adjusts this
envelope according to the selected DVFS level. The result-
ing deterministic program jointly optimizes flexible workload
scheduling, DVFS frequency selection, battery dispatch, and


--- Page 7 ---
7
Algorithm 1 Co-Optimization of Data-Center Workload,
DVFS, and BESS
Require: Fixed-load forecast { ˆP 0
t }t∈T , job set J , BESS parameters
(CB, P B,max
α
, P B,max
β
, ηα, ηβ), market prices (λE
t , λRES
t
, λF RP
t
),
scenario set S.
Ensure: Optimal schedule (a∗
t , w∗
j,t, P B,∗
t
, Rworst,∗).
1: Compute P fix
t (ao) ←maxs∈S
ˆP 0
s,t + ϵ · ¯P DC .
2: if discrete DVFS then
3:
Generate the P-state level set L = {a(1), . . . , a(L)} with ao ∈L;
formulate the exact MILP via (19).
4: else
5:
Formulate the exact LP via the v-reformulation (23).
6: end if
7: Solve Problem 5; return the optimal first-stage decisions and worst-case
revenue Rworst,∗.
market-participation decisions; scenario-indexed constraints
enforce feasibility of interconnection constraints, server hard-
ware power limit, battery state-of-energy across all sampled
s ∈S.
The tractability and physical fidelity of the deterministic equiv-
alent depend on which integer decisions are retained. Under
continuous DVFS control, the reformulation in Section III-A
replaces every bilinear atwj,t term with the effective-service
variable vj,t. Combined with the epigraph linearization (24)
given in the appendix, the workload scheduling block be-
comes linear. This LP relaxation is useful as a computational
benchmark or when an operator can approximate processor
frequency as continuously adjustable. However, it can select
intermediate DVFS points that are not hardware-realizable.
The discrete formulation (19e)–(19i) instead introduces L|T |
binary variables zl,t and |J |L|T | disaggregated execution
variables w(l)
j,t, thereby enforcing one admissible P-state per
time period and preserving the intended interpretation of
DVFS as a hardware operating-set decision. Similarly, the
BESS mode binaries in (11b) enforce mutually exclusive
converter operation for charging and discharging, and pre-
vent the model from simultaneously using the same battery
power interface for incompatible charge-side and discharge-
side services. Therefore, the reported case studies retain both
the BESS mode binaries and the discrete-DVFS binaries. After
these integer choices are fixed, all remaining constraints are
affine in the continuous variables, including the scenario-
indexed BESS dynamics (11), energy settlement (4), and grid
interconnection constraints.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the overall procedure. All case stud-
ies reported in the sequel solve the resulting discrete-DVFS
MILP with Gurobi 13. The continuous effective-service-rate
formulation remains useful for diagnostic sensitivity analysis
and as a lower-complexity benchmark, but the MILP is the
fidelity-preserving model used for the numerical results.
V. CASE STUDIES
We evaluate the proposed framework on a realistic data center
setup with 100 MW load capacity, hourly Google compute
load trace data [8], CAISO flexible-ramping prices [32],
and PJM reserve prices [33]. The energy, reserve, and
flexible-ramping prices are hourly and therefore vary across
the day according to the empirical market profiles. Un-
less otherwise stated, the horizon is 24 hourly intervals,
the uncertainty set contains 50 in-sample ancillary-service
(βRes
t,s , βF RP,↑
t,s
, βF RP,↓
t,s
) and fixed load scenarios ˆP 0
s,t, the
ramp limit is 15 MW/h, and the base co-located battery
is rated at 36 MWh/12 MW. The representative dispatch
uses the 100 MW load-cap case, while the interconnection-
sensitivity study below sweeps around the base point ( ¯D, ¯∆) =
(105 MW, 15 MW/h). The total workload from schedulable
jobs is 340 MWh, with an hourly average over the scheduling
horizon of roughly 14 MWh, as detailed in Appendix A. The
workload-quality coefficients are set to c1 = 1000 for DVFS
deviation, c2 = 2000 for unfinished work, and c3 = 100 for
tardy execution, while the battery degradation coefficient is
cdeg = 45 $/MWh. All experiments in this section are solved
as MILPs in Gurobi 13 with discrete DVFS levels in [0.8, 1.2].
Remark 2 (Parameters in case study). The system scale,
market data, BESS operating logic, interconnection limits,
and uncertainty treatment are chosen to reflect practical day-
ahead operations. Some service-quality parameters, such as
c1, c2, c3, workload weights, and the aggregate job portfo-
lio are calibrated for representative cases rather than for
a specific production cluster. These parameters affect the
numerical scale of the objective and the tradeoff between
delay, non-completion, DVFS movement, and battery wear.
Accordingly, the absolute dollar values should be interpreted
as case-specific operating-value metrics, whereas the main
conclusions concern the mechanism, relative comparisons, and
marginal value of flexibility under different interconnection
and workload conditions.
A. Representative Daily Dispatch
We first examine a representative daily instance by solving
the robust day-ahead MILP in (5) with the discrete-DVFS
reformulation. To make the interaction between compute-load
flexibility and storage visible, this instance uses a mildly
stressed variant of the base setup: a 100 MW interconnection
load cap, the 15 MW/h ramp limit, a 36 MWh/12 MW BESS,
a 60% initial and terminal SOC requirement, DVFS-sensitive
fixed-load share φ = 0.35, and a schedulable workload around
360 MWh. The fixed load ranges from 81.0 to 85.1 MW, and
the upper-bound fixed-load profile leaves 28 MW of average
flexible headroom.
The left panel of Fig. 2 compares the optimal schedules
with and without the co-located BESS. The optimized daily
operating values are negative because energy procurement and
workload-quality costs exceed market revenues, while larger
values are preferred. The BESS improves the operating value
from −$228,418 without BESS to −$223,530, corresponding
to a daily value added of $4,888. Both solutions complete the
schedulable workload without load, ramp, or hardware slack.
The distinction is therefore that the BESS enlarges the feasible
operating set behind the meter. In the BESS case, the internal
data-center load reaches beyond interconnection limits, while
the grid-facing net load remains below 95.62 MW because
BESS offsets selected high-load intervals. Note that since the


--- Page 8 ---
8
Fig. 2.
Representative daily dispatch for a 100 MW data-center case with a 36 MWh/12 MW co-located BESS under hard interconnection constraints.
The left panel shows the fixed load, internal data-center load with storage, and grid-facing net load with and without the co-located BESS. The right panel
shows the robust SOC trajectory and scenario spread, together with charge/discharge and ancillary-service power components. The battery allows the internal
data-center load to exceed the grid-facing load envelope in selected hours while maintaining feasible net-load and ramp trajectories, and it also changes the
DVFS schedule, indicating coordination between compute-load flexibility and storage flexibility.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Battery energy (MWh)
1000
0
1000
2000
Net value ($/day)
r = 7%
0
20
40
60
80
100
Battery energy (MWh)
2000
1000
0
1000
Net value ($/day)
r = 10%
2XL (2h)
M3 (4h)
ncyc = 0.5
ncyc = 1.0
ncyc = 1.5
ncyc = 2.0
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19
Number of battery units
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Value added ($/day)
Decomposition at ncyc = 1.0, r = 7%
VA±  (2XL)
VA±  (M3)
Non-AS (2XL)
AS (2XL)
Non-AS (M3)
AS (M3)
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19
Number of battery units
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
Value added ($/day)
Decomposition at ncyc = 1.0, r = 10%
Fig. 3.
Battery sizing results for the 100 MW data center with real PJM
load and market data. The 4-hour Megapack 3 achieves higher corrected
net value owing to its lower capital cost per kWh, while the power-denser
Megapack 2XL is more sensitive to cycling and discount-rate assumptions.
no-BESS case has no behind-the-meter buffer, its internal data-
center load and grid-facing net load coincide.
The right panel of Fig. 2 clarifies the source of this value. The
battery charges 12.3 MWh and discharges 11.1 MWh while
providing 31.5 MW-h of reserve, 107.5 MW-h of up-ramping
capacity, and 17.1 MW-h of down-ramping capacity. The
robust SOC trajectory starts and ends at 60%, remains within
the admissible SOC band in all sampled deployments, and
preserves headroom for ancillary service realization. At the
same time, the DVFS schedule differs from the no-BESS case
in three hours, with P
t |aBESS
t
−anoBESS
t
| = 0.40. Thus, the
representative dispatch illustrates the coordination mechanism:
workload scheduling and DVFS reshape the internal compute
demand, while the BESS supplies fast bidirectional flexibility
alongside ancillary deployments.
B. Battery Sensitivity Across Daily Instances
To assess storage sizing and cycling trade-offs for datacen-
ter and ancillary services beyond a single day, we solve
31 daily instances of the 100 MW data-center problem for
scalable commercial BESS fleets by aggregating n identical
battery units installations as a single equivalent BESS in
the optimization. We consider a shared no-battery baseline
(n = 0) and, for each commercial technology, fleet sizes
n = 1, . . . , 20, together with daily cycling limit
¯Ncyc ∈
{0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0} cy/day imposed via (11f). Note that each
daily instance in the 31 days uses a different 24-hour real
base-load trace, so both the level and intraday shape of the
fixed load vary from day to day. While the representative
daily dispatch in Section V-A considers a stylized benchmark
battery rated at 36 MWh/12 MW, the multiday sizing study
here compares two commercial Tesla Megapack products: the
2-hour Megapack 2XL, which offers higher power but lower
energy per unit (1.9 MW/3.9 MWh, $1.2 M, ηRT = 92%), and
the 4-hour Megapack 3, which offers lower power but higher
energy per unit at slightly lower cost (1.25 MW/5 MWh,
$1.0 M, ηRT = 91%). Both configurations have similar round-
trip efficiency ηRT. Our results represent solutions from a total
of (1+2×20)×4×31 = 5,084 robust optimization problems.
1) Value Decomposition: Let Z⋆
d(n) denote the optimal daily
operating value, i.e., the maximized value of (5a), with n
BESS units on day d, and Z⋆
d(0) the no-battery baseline (mean
−$176,278/day over the samples, with larger values being bet-
ter). The value added by storage is 1
D
PD
d=1

Z⋆
d(n)−Z⋆
d(0)

.
We can decompose this raw operating-value difference into
an ancillary-service (AS) component RAS = RRES + RFRP
and a non-AS residual VANA,raw. As in the representative
daily dispatch, each problem instance initializes the BESS at
e0=60% SOC without enforcing a terminal constraint, so the
final SOC eT may fall below e0, creating an artificial energy
subsidy. We therefore correct for this SOC-depletion artifact:
V dep(n) = max
 0, e0 −¯eT

n Ecap ηB
β ¯λe,
(20)
where ¯eT is the mean terminal SOC fraction and ¯λe the
average energy price. The corrected non-AS component is


--- Page 9 ---
9
VANA = VANA,raw −V dep, so the plotted AS and non-AS
bars sum to the corrected value added:
VA(n) = RAS + VANA = RRES + RFRP + VANA
= 1
D
D
X
d=1

Z⋆
d(n) −Z⋆
d(0)

−V dep
(21)
To identify the economically optimal fleet size, we subtract
annualized capital cost of BESS from the daily operating value
to get net value (NV):
NV(n) = VA(n) −n Cunit · CRF(r, N)
365
,
(22a)
CRF = r(1+r)N
(1+r)N−1,
(22b)
The capital recovery factor (CRF) converts the one-time per-
unit investment Cunit into an equivalent annual payment over
an N-year project life at discount rate r, and dividing by 365
yields the daily capital charge used in NV(n). Consequently,
a higher discount rate or shorter project life increases the
effective daily capital burden and makes large BESS fleets
less economically attractive.
2) Technology Comparison and Optimal Sizing: Figure 3
plots NV and value added (VA) as a function of installed
BESS energy capacity for both battery technologies under
each cycling limit at discount rates r=7% and r=10%, and
project lifetime N = 20 years. At ¯Ncyc=1.0 and r=7%, the 2-
hour Megapack 2XL peaks at 19 units (74.1 MWh/36.1 MW)
with corrected VA=$6,181/day and NV=$285/day, whereas
the 4-hour Megapack 3 reaches corrected VA=$7,756/day and
NV=$2,584/day at 20 units (100 MWh/25 MW). At r=10%,
the optimal 2XL fleet collapses to one unit (3.9 MWh/1.9 MW)
with NV=$45/day, while Megapack 3 remains at the upper
search boundary with NV=$1,320/day. This difference reflects
Megapack 3’s substantially lower energy-specific capital cost
($200/kWh versus $308/kWh for 2XL).
The corrected first-unit value at
¯Ncyc=1.0 is similar on
an energy basis, about $111/MWh-day for Megapack 2XL
and $109/MWh-day for Megapack 3. Thus, the technology
ranking is not determined by energy duration alone. Mega-
pack 2XL’s higher power-to-energy ratio (0.49 MW/MWh ver-
sus 0.25 MW/MWh) supports ancillary-service participation,
but Megapack 3’s lower capital cost yields higher net value
over the tested range. The decomposition in Fig. 3 shows that
AS revenue is substantial but not dominant at the ¯Ncyc=1.0,
r=7% optima: AS revenue contributes about $2.70k/day of the
2XL’s $6.18k/day corrected value added and about $3.23k/day
of the Megapack 3’s $7.76k/day corrected value added. The
remaining value comes from non-AS operational flexibility,
including reduced energy and scheduling costs enabled by
coordinated storage and compute-load control.
3) Cycling-Limit Sensitivity: Figure 4 shows the optimal in-
stalled BESS energy capacity, equivalently the optimal number
of commercial battery units, as a function of the cycling con-
straint. For Megapack 3, relaxing ¯Ncyc from 0.5 to 1.0 cy/day
captures most of the attainable net-value gain: at r=7%, NV
increases from about $1.77k/day to $2.58k/day and changes
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Cycling limit ncyc (cy/day)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Optimal energy (MWh)
2XL (r = 7%)
M3 (r = 7%)
2XL (r = 10%)
M3 (r = 10%)
Fig. 4.
Optimal installed BESS energy capacity versus cycling limit for
discount rates r=7% and r=10%. Megapack 3 remains at or near the search
boundary, while Megapack 2XL is more sensitive to cycling and discount-rate
assumptions because its higher power density is paired with higher energy-
specific capital cost.
little beyond 1.0 cy/day. Megapack 2XL is more sensitive.
At r=7%, its optimal installed capacity increases from one
unit (3.9 MWh) at 0.5 cy/day to 19 units (74.1 MWh) at
1.0 cy/day, while the maximum NV occurs at 1.5 cy/day
with 17 units (66.3 MWh) and about $616/day. At r=10%,
however, the optimal 2XL fleet remains one unit across all
cycling limits because the higher capital charge offsets the
incremental operating value of larger fleets. These results
indicate that an approximate one-cycle-per-day operating limit
is sufficient for most of the value of the lower-cost 4-hour
battery, whereas the economics of the higher-power 2-hour
battery depend more strongly on both cycling allowance and
capital recovery assumptions.
C. Interconnection Sensitivity and Marginal Value of Flexibil-
ity
We next quantify how the economic value of coordinated
flexibility depends on the available interconnection capacity
and on the composition of fixed versus schedulable load.
Starting from the base case ( ¯D, ¯∆) = (105 MW, 15 MW/h)
with a 36 MWh/12 MW BESS, we sweep both the peak-
load limit and the ramp-rate limit and solve the MILP (5)
across the 31 daily instances. In addition to the natural
base composition generated from the real-market case, which
has approximately 85% fixed load on average, we construct
counterfactual portfolios in which fixed jobs account for 60%,
80%, or 95% of total compute workload, with the remainder
treated as schedulable workloads. At each sweep point, the
finite-difference (FD) sensitivity of the MILP captures the
impact of directly relaxing the interconnection limits on the
average daily operating value. We also fix the MILP integer
variables at each ( ¯D, ¯∆) and re-solve the resulting LP to
obtain local shadow prices (dual variables) for the realized
discrete operating mode. To compare those LP duals with the
FD sensitivities, we aggregate the hourly duals within each
day, summing λload
t
over the horizon for the load-limit sweep
and λramp-up
t
+λramp-down
t
over the horizon for the ramp-limit
sweep. These duals are not reweighted after extraction because
the scenario probabilities already enter the LP objective. We
then average the daily aggregates across the 31 days. Fig. 5
reports the resulting daily operating values and marginal-value
measures.


--- Page 10 ---
10
90
100
110
120
Load limit D (MW)
400
350
300
250
200
150
Objective ($k/day)
(a) Peak-load capacity
Fixed fraction
Base (85%)
60%
80%
95%
FD marginal (bars)
LP dual (dashed)
20
40
60
Ramp limit  (MW/h)
240
230
220
210
200
190
180
170
Objective ($k/day)
(b) Ramp-rate capacity
Fixed fraction
Base (85%)
60%
80%
95%
FD marginal (bars)
LP dual (dashed)
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Daily marginal / LP 
 ($/MW-day)
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Daily marginal / LP 
 ($/(MW/h)-day)
Fig. 5.
Interconnection sensitivity under alternative load compositions over 31 daily instances. The solid curves and shaded bands denote the mean and
standard deviation of the MILP daily operating value, where higher values are better. Colors correspond to the natural base composition, with approximately
85% fixed load, and counterfactual fixed-load shares of 60%, 80%, and 95%. On the secondary axis, the semi-transparent bars show daily finite-difference
(FD) marginal values and the dashed curves show the mean daily aggregate LP duals for the same composition. (a) Composition matters mainly when the
peak-load limit is binding: the high-fixed-load 95% case exhibits the largest scarcity cost under tight limits, while marginal values nearly vanish once the
limit reaches about 105 MW. (b) Under the ramp-limit sweep, the operating-value and marginal-value curves are nearly composition-invariant, indicating that
ramp scarcity is driven primarily by the aggregate net-load trajectory rather than the flexible-load share. The dotted vertical line in each figure marks the base
case ( ¯D, ¯∆) = (105 MW, 15 MW/h).
0
20
40
load
t
 ($/MW)
(a) Load-cap shadow price
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
Hour of day
0
10
1
100
101
ramp
t
 ($/(MW/h))
(b) Ramp shadow prices
ramp-up
t
ramp-dn
t
Fig. 6. Hourly LP shadow prices for the base interconnection case over 31
daily instances. Panel (a) reports the hourly mean of λload
t
. Panel (b) reports
the hourly mean of λramp-up
t
and λramp-down
t
on a symmetric-log scale.
In Fig. 5(a), at the 95 MW load limit, the operating-value
spread across the three counterfactual compositions is only
about $2.0k/day. Once the load limit reaches 105 MW, the
operating value stabilizes near −$172k/day for all workload
compositions, and the corresponding LP duals are below about
$0.5k/MW-day. This indicates that the job composition has
little effect on the marginal value of additional load headroom
near and above the base operating point. Under the tight
90 MW load limit, the mean operating value ranges from
−$239.4k/day for the 60% fixed-load case to −$302.0k/day
for the 95% fixed-load case, while the daily aggregate LP
dual rises from about $20.0k/MW-day to about $49.3k/MW-
day. Compared to the operating value at the 105 MW limit, the
90 MW load limit leads to an increase in net operating cost by
almost 40% even for the most flexible workload composition.
More crucially, across workload compositions, increasing the
fixed-load share from 60% to 95% increases net operating cost
by more than 25% and more than doubles the shadow price
of the peak-load limit. The results reveal that workload com-
position matters mainly when the interconnection constraints
are binding, especially for the peak-load limit.
By contrast, Fig. 5(b) shows that the ramp-limit sensitivity
is nearly composition-invariant. While the cost increases by
almost 40% when the ramp limit is tightened to 5 MW/h from
15 MW/h, the mean spread is only about $4.3k/day across
the 60%, 80%, and 95% fixed-load cases. Similarly, the daily
aggregate LP duals remain almost identical at roughly $37.7k–
$38.0k/(MW/h)-day. Over the base-relevant 5–10 MW/h in-
terval, the FD marginal value stays near $11.6k/(MW/h)-day
for all three compositions. Hence, ramp scarcity for our case
study is driven primarily by the common aggregate net-load
transitions rather than by the share of fixed versus schedulable
demand.
The distribution of the realized hourly LP duals of constraints
(2) under the base composition of fixed and flexible loads
at interconnection limits ( ¯D, ¯∆) = (105 MW, 15 MW/h) is
shown in Fig. 6. The shadow price for the load limit (2b)
is concentrated in a small number of hours, with the largest
mean hourly value around 49 $/MW and substantial day-to-


--- Page 11 ---
11
80
90
100
110
Load limit D (MW)
2000
1500
1000
500
Objective ($k/day)
BESS
value
+$7.6k
(a) Peak-load capacity sweep
(ramp fixed at 10 MW/h)
BESS 36/12
No Battery
FD marginal (bars)
LP dual (dotted)
Binding point
5
10
15
20
25
30
Ramp limit  (MW/h)
400
350
300
250
200
Objective ($k/day)
BESS
value
+$7.6k
(b) Ramp-rate capacity sweep
(load fixed at 95 MW)
BESS 36/12
No Battery
FD marginal (bars)
LP dual (dotted)
Binding point
0
25000
50000
75000
100000
125000
150000
FD / LP 
load ($/MW-day)
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
FD / LP (
+
) ($/(MW/h)-day)
Fig. 7. Battery value under stressed interconnection limits over 31 daily instances. The 36 MWh/12 MW BESS has modest value under loose interconnection
limits, but its incremental value rises sharply when the peak-load or ramp-rate limit becomes binding.
day dispersion over the 31 daily scenarios. The shadow prices
for the ramp limits (2a) are more episodic. Fig. 6(b), where
the shadow prices are plotted on a logarithmic scale, indicates
that the dominant ramp scarcity events form a limited set.
Averaged across 31 days, the upward-ramp dual peaks around
47 $/MW/h near the beginning of the day, and hovers around
or below 1 $MH/h for the rest of the day. The downward-
ramp dual is much smaller and again concentrated around
transition hours. Thus targeted mitigation of a few transition-
hour excursions can provide more value than uniform ex-
pansion of the ramp limit across the day. This event-driven
ramp-scarcity pattern is consistent with the BESS sensitivity
results in Section V-B, where BESS is used primarily for
short-duration flexibility support rather than sustained energy
arbitrage.
1) Flexibility Value of BESS Under Interconnection Stress:
We further isolate the value of the BESS (36 MWh/12 MW)
by comparing the daily operating value for stressed intercon-
nection limits with base workload composition (fixed/flexible)
with and without storage. As shown in Fig. 7, under loose
peak-load limits above 105 MW, the BESS adds about $3.3–
$3.5k/day, with a comparable distribution between its base-
case ancillary-service and interconnection-flexibility values.
At the binding peak load of 95 MW identified from Fig. 5,
however, the incremental value rises to about $7.5k/day,
reflecting a gain of greater than 100%. This value further
increases to about $129k/day under severe load stress at
75 MW. Additionally, with the load limit fixed at 95 MW, the
BESS value remains between about $7.4k/day and $10.4k/-
day across ramp limits from 3 to 30 MW/h, while at the
10 MW/h binding point, it reduces the operating-value stan-
dard deviation from about $25.3k/day to $19.0k/day. Thus, co-
located BESS provides both revenue value in normal operation
and risk-reduction value when interconnection constraints be-
come binding. Note that the BESS earns only roughly $0.5–
$1.0k/day of ancillary-service revenue across these stressed
cases; the additional value under tight limits is primarily
operational via buffering peak net-load excursions, reducing
load-limit slack, and modestly improving job completion.
D. Discrete DVFS Operating Sets
We finally isolate the contribution of processor-level flexibility
by comparing no DVFS with four hardware-realizable DVFS
operating sets: 3 levels over a ±5% range, 5 levels over
±10%, 7 levels over ±15%, and 9 levels over ±20% around
the nominal frequency. Thus, the experiment varies both the
number of available operating points and the admissible DVFS
range under the tightened ( ¯D, ¯∆) = (100 MW, 15 MW/h)
load-limit configuration.
Fig. 8 shows that enabling DVFS improves average per-
formance relative to the no-DVFS baseline. The no-DVFS
case attains a mean operating value of −$181.0k±$13.9k,
whereas the 9-level case attains −$173.1k±$6.2k. The 5-, 7-,
and 9-level cases improve the operating value by $5.5k/day,
$6.9k/day, and $8.0k/day, respectively, indicating that a wider
DVFS range is valuable under tight interconnection conditions.
DVFS also increases the mean completion rate from 97.3%
without DVFS to 100% in the 9-level case.
To summarize, the case studies show three complementary
insights. First, the proposed co-optimization framework can
deliver fully feasible day-ahead schedules with strong worst-
case economic performance on realistic data. During normal
operations, BESS value is persistent across multiple days and
comes from comparable ancillary-service participation and
non-AS operational flexibility gains. The commercial sizing
results further show that power capability is valuable for
flexibility services, but capital cost and cycling allowance
can dominate the net-sizing decision. Second, processor-
level DVFS is an economically relevant control lever under
tight load limits, improving both daily operating value and
schedulable-workload completion when the available intercon-
nection headroom is scarce. Third, a more flexible workload
mix and BESS availability reduces the marginal impact of
peak-load and ramping limits, but that effect is concentrated in
the binding/scarce regime where net operating cost increases


--- Page 12 ---
12
3
(±5%)
5
(±10%)
7
(±15%)
9
(±20%)
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
Change vs No DVFS ($k)
(a) Revenue penalty decomposition
 Objective (net)
 Worst-case Rev
 DVFS Penalty
1
(None)
3
(±5%)
5
(±10%)
7
(±15%)
9
(±20%)
Number of DVFS levels
195
190
185
180
175
170
Objective ($k/day)
(b) Objective and DVFS utilization
Objective
mean(a)
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Mean DVFS factor a
Fig. 8.
Multiday discrete-DVFS case study under the 100 MW load-limit configuration. The cases compare no DVFS with 3-level ±5%, 5-level ±10%,
7-level ±15%, and 9-level ±20% operating sets. Overall, allowing DVFS improves the mean daily operating value and reduces day-to-day variability by
providing additional scheduling and interconnection flexibility.
by greater than 40%. In our case studies for stressed peak-
load limits, increasing the fraction of schedulable workloads
can reduce net operating cost by almost 20%, while the
daily value of BESS is doubled. In contrast, the value of
relaxing ramp constraints, while also significant in the binding
regime, remains largely unchanged across fixed/schedulable
load compositions for the hourly resolution considered here.
Consequently, for the studied data center profile, both peak-
load and ramp constraints can be economically important
when binding, but peak-load scarcity is more sensitive to
workload composition, whereas ramp scarcity is driven more
by common net-load transitions. Additional supplementary
ablation studies are provided in the appendix.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper developed a realistic robust co-optimization frame-
work for data centers with co-located BESS under intercon-
nection load and ramping limits. The model jointly represents
fixed and schedulable computing load, workload scheduling,
DVFS control, battery dispatch, ancillary-service participation,
and degradation-aware operation under uncertainty. We further
derived exact reformulations of the workload model, including
a hardware-faithful discrete-DVFS MILP and a continuous
effective-service-rate reformulation, enabling tractable solu-
tion of the coordinated scheduling problem without bilinear
compromises.
The case studies provide several complementary insights.
First, the proposed co-optimization framework consistently
delivers feasible day-ahead schedules with strong worst-case
economic performance using realistic load and market data.
Under baseline conditions, the value of co-located BESS is
persistent across multiple days and arises from both ancillary-
service participation and non-market operational flexibility,
including reduced energy and scheduling costs. Commercial
sizing results further show that technology choice depends not
only on power capability, but also on cycling limits and cap-
ital recovery assumptions, with the lower-cost 4-hour battery
achieving higher net value in the tested range. The discrete-
DVFS study further shows that wider hardware-realizable
operating sets provide measurable value by improving daily
operating value and restoring full schedulable-workload com-
pletion under a tight load cap. Second, the value of coordinated
flexibility becomes substantially larger when interconnection
constraints are tight. Additional schedulable workload flexi-
bility mainly improves resilience to binding peak-load caps,
where workload composition strongly affects scarcity costs.
By contrast, ramp constraints remain economically important
across workload compositions, indicating that ramp stress is
driven more by common net-load transitions than by the fixed-
versus-schedulable load mix. Co-located BESS is particularly
valuable in these stressed regimes because it buffers short-
duration peak and ramp excursions while preserving workload
completion. This leads to doubling of the average daily value
of BESS when compared to operations under non-stressed
limits. These findings support the value of treating computing
flexibility and storage flexibility as complementary resources
in data-center interconnection management and market par-
ticipation. Future work will extend the framework to include
explicit models of cooling load and corrections to day-ahead
schedules using model predictive control. Further, we will
integrate the proposed model and the resulting flexibility-value
insights into datacenter planning problems [34].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is supported by the MIT Energy Initiative Future
Energy System Center.
REFERENCES
[1] ERCOT,
“2025
ERCOT
system
planning
long-term
hourly
peak
demand
and
energy
forecast,”
Texas,
USA,
Apr.
2025,
available
at
https : / / www . ercot . com / files / docs / 2025 / 04 / 08 /
ERCOT-2025-Long-Term-Load-Forecast-Report.pdf.
[2] North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), “Long-term
reliability assessment,” NERC, Tech. Rep., 2023.


--- Page 13 ---
13
[3] T. Norris, T. Profeta, D. Patino-Echeverri, and A. Cowie-Haskell,
“Rethinking load growth: assessing the potential for integration of large
flexible loads in us power systems,” Nicholas Institute for Energy,
Environment & Sustainability, Tech. Rep., 2025.
[4] North American Electric Reliability Corporation, “Assessment of gaps
in existing practices, requirements, and reliability standards for emerg-
ing large loads,” Mar. 2026, nERC Large Loads Working Group
White Paper. Available at https://www.nerc.com/globalassets/our-work/
guidelines/reliability/white-paper---assessment-of-gaps.pdf.
[5] A.
A.
E.
S.
Operator,
“AESO
connection
requirements
for
transmission-connected
data
centres
(2025
aug
draft),”
Calgary, Canada, 2025, available at https : / / aesoengage . aeso . ca /
connection-requirements-for-transmission-connected-data-centres.
[6] R.
Hasegawa,
“Using
demand
response
to
reduce
data
center
power
consumption,”
Google
Cloud
Blog,
October
2023.
[On-
line]. Available: https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/infrastructure/
using-demand-response-to-reduce-data-center-power-consumption
[7] C. Brancucci, D. Cutler, and J. Jenkins, “Flexible data centers: A faster,
more affordable path to power,” Camus and encoord and Princeton
ZERO Lab, Technical Report, Dec. 2025.
[8] V. Sakalkar, V. Kontorinis, D. Landhuis, S. Li, D. D. Ronde,
T. Blooming, A. Ramesh, J. Kennedy, C. Malone, J. Clidaras, and
P. Ranganathan, “Data center power oversubscription with a medium
voltage power plane and priority-aware capping,” in Proceedings of
the Twenty-Fifth International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, New York, NY,
USA, 2020, p. 497–511. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/
10.1145/3373376.3378533
[9] X. Fan, W.-D. Weber, and L. A. Barroso, “Power provisioning for
a warehouse-sized computer,” ACM SIGARCH computer architecture
news, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 13–23, 2007.
[10] B. Guenter, N. Jain, and C. Williams, “Managing cost, performance,
and reliability tradeoffs for energy-aware server provisioning,” in 2011
Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1332–1340.
[11] L. Piga, I. Narayanan, A. Sundarrajan, M. Skach, Q. Deng, B. Maity,
M. Chakkaravarthy, A. Huang, A. Dhanotia, and P. Malani, “Expanding
datacenter capacity with dvfs boosting: A safe and scalable deployment
experience,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1, 2024, pp. 150–165.
[12] Y. Ding, T. Magnanti, and P. D. Martinez, “Distributionally robust games
for data center demand response coordination based on cpu utilization
and quality of service,” in 2025 IEEE Power & Energy Society General
Meeting (PESGM).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 1–5.
[13] N. Li, C. Uckun, E. M. Constantinescu, J. R. Birge, K. W. Hedman, and
A. Botterud, “Flexible operation of batteries in power system scheduling
with renewable energy,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Energy,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 685–696, 2015.
[14] M. Ghaljehei and M. Khorsand, “Day-ahead operational scheduling
with enhanced flexible ramping product: Design and analysis,” IEEE
transactions on power systems, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 1842–1856, 2021.
[15] Z. Wang, C. Shen, F. Liu, J. Wang, and X. Wu, “An adjustable chance-
constrained approach for flexible ramping capacity allocation,” IEEE
Transactions on Sustainable Energy, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1798–1811, 2018.
[16] W. Cole, V. Ramasamy, and M. Turan, “Cost projections for utility-scale
battery storage: 2025 update,” National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), Tech. Rep., 2025. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.nrel.gov/docs/fy25osti/93281.pdf
[17] D. Lauinger, D. Deka, and S. Shin, “The value of storage in electricity
distribution: The role of markets,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.12435,
2025.
[18] V. Dvorkin, “Agent coordination via contextual regression (agentconcur)
for data center flexibility,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 40,
no. 2, pp. 1832–1842, 2024.
[19] L. Lin and A. A. Chien, “Adapting datacenter capacity for greener
datacenters and grid,” in Proceedings of the 14th ACM International
Conference on Future Energy Systems, 2023, pp. 200–213.
[20] A. Radovanovi´c, R. Koningstein, I. Schneider, B. Chen, A. Duarte,
B. Roy, D. Xiao, M. Haridasan, P. Hung, N. Care et al., “Carbon-
aware computing for datacenters,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1270–1280, 2022.
[21] W. Zhang, L. A. Roald, A. A. Chien, J. R. Birge, and V. M. Zavala,
“Flexibility from networks of data centers: A market clearing formula-
tion with virtual links,” Electric Power Systems Research, vol. 189, p.
106723, 2020.
[22] J. Engels, “Integration of flexibility from battery storage in the electricity
market,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 3270–
3279, 2020.
[23] R. Guruprasad, P. Murali, D. Krishnaswamy, and S. Kalyanaraman,
“Coupling a small battery with a datacenter for frequency regulation,”
in 2017 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting.
IEEE, 2017,
pp. 1–5.
[24] A. Wierman, Z. Liu, I. Liu, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Opportunities and
challenges for data center demand response,” in International Green
Computing Conference.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–10.
[25] Y. Fu, X. Han, K. Baker, and W. Zuo, “Assessments of data centers for
provision of frequency regulation,” Applied Energy, vol. 277, p. 115621,
2020.
[26] S. Hall, F. Micheli, G. Belgioioso, A. Radovanovi´c, and F. Dörfler,
“Carbon-aware computing for data centers with probabilistic perfor-
mance guarantees,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 2025.
[27] J. Zhao, T. Zheng, and E. Litvinov, “A unified framework for defining
and measuring flexibility in power system,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Systems, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 339–347, 2016.
[28] S. Riaz and P. Mancarella, “Modelling and characterisation of flexibility
from distributed energy resources,” IEEE Transactions on Power Sys-
tems, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 38–50, 2022.
[29] J. Wang, H. Zhong, W. Tang, R. Rajagopal, Q. Xia, C. Kang, and
Y. Wang, “Optimal bidding strategy for microgrids in joint energy
and ancillary service markets considering flexible ramping products,”
Applied Energy, vol. 205, pp. 294–303, 2017.
[30] W. Zhong, K. Xie, Y. Liu, S. Xie, and L. Xie, “Chance constrained
scheduling and pricing for multi-service battery energy storage,” IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 5030–5042, 2021.
[31] P. J. Balducci, J. E. Alam, T. E. McDermott, V. Fotedar, X. Ma,
D. Wu, B. A. Bhatti, K. Mongird, B. P. Bhattarai, A. J. Crawford et al.,
“Nantucket island energy storage system assessment,” Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory (PNNL), Richland, WA (United States), Tech. Rep.,
2019.
[32] CAISO, “California ISO open access same-time information system
(OASIS),” https://oasis.caiso.com/mrioasis/logon.do, database, accessed
2025.
[33] PJM, “PJM data miner 2,” https://dataminer2.pjm.com/list, database,
accessed 2025.
[34] C. R. Knittel, J. R. L. Senga, and S. Wang, “Flexible data centers and
the grid: Lower costs, higher emissions?” National Bureau of Economic
Research, Tech. Rep., 2025.
[35] A. Verma, L. Pedrosa, M. Korupolu, D. Oppenheimer, E. Tune, and
J. Wilkes, “Large-scale cluster management at Google with Borg,” in
Proceedings of the Tenth European Conference on Computer Systems,
ser. EuroSys ’15.
ACM, 2015, pp. 1–17.
[36] E. Cortez, A. Bonde, A. Muzio, M. Russinovich, M. Fontoura, and
R. Bianchini, “Resource central: Understanding and predicting work-
loads for improved resource management in large cloud platforms,” in
Proceedings of the 26th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
ser. SOSP ’17.
ACM, 2017, pp. 153–167.
[37] Y. Cheng, A. Anwar, and X. Duan, “Analyzing Alibaba’s co-located
datacenter workloads,” in Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 292–297.


--- Page 14 ---
14
TABLE I
AGGREGATE SCHEDULABLE JOB PORTFOLIO USED IN THE REPRESENTATIVE 100 MW CASE STUDY. WORK Wj IS IN MWH-EQUIVALENT
COMPUTE-SERVICE UNITS, AND MAXIMUM RATE rmax
j
IS IN MW-EQUIVALENT COMPUTE-SERVICE UNITS.
Job class
Release sj
Deadline dj
Work Wj
Max rate rmax
j
Weight κj
batch_analytics_1
1
8
30.0
6.0
0.8
hpc_simulation
3
14
60.0
10.0
2.0
ml_training_large
6
20
70.0
9.0
2.5
data_backup
1
24
25.0
5.0
0.5
batch_analytics_2
12
20
30.0
7.0
1.0
ml_training_small
10
18
20.0
5.0
1.5
hpc_evening
16
24
40.0
10.0
1.8
data_processing
1
12
35.0
4.0
2.2
preemptable
1
24
30.0
5.0
0.1
APPENDIX A
SCHEDULABLE JOB PORTFOLIO
The case studies use the schedulable job portfolio reported
in Table I. The entries should be interpreted as aggregate
schedulable workload classes, not typical detailed individual
cluster jobs. This aggregation is appropriate for the present
day-ahead grid co-optimization problem because in the grid-
facing model we focus on hourly flexible energy, release-
deadline windows, maximum executable rates, and relative
priority weights, instead of task level identities. It is also
consistent with large production traces, where clusters run
very large numbers of heterogeneous jobs and applications that
are commonly grouped by latency sensitivity, service/batch
type, or delay tolerance [35]–[37]. Each aggregate job is
characterized by its release time sj, deadline dj, total work
requirement Wj, maximum executable rate rmax
j
, and tardiness
weight κj. The planning horizon contains 24 one-hour periods,
so sj denotes the first hour in which the aggregate job may be
scheduled and dj denotes the last hour by which it should be
completed. Work quantities are reported in MWh-equivalent
compute-service units over the one-hour discretization, and
rate limits are reported in MW-equivalent compute-service
units.
APPENDIX B
ADDITIONAL ABLATION RESULTS
To complement the main-text case studies, this appendix
reports additional multi-day ablation analyses, on impact of
flexible headroom for schedulable jobs on operations, and
out-of-sample robustness of of day-ahead decisions. Unless
otherwise noted, all reported values are means and standard
deviations over 31 daily instances.
A. Fixed-Load and Schedulable-Demand Scaling
Figure 9 contains two complementary sensitivity sweeps, and
each panel reports both the daily operating value (left axis) and
the job-completion rate (right axis). In Fig. 9(a), the fixed-load
trace is scaled from 0.70 to 1.20, which changes the flexible
headroom below the load limit (see (10)) from 53.3 MW
to 11.7 MW. When the headroom is ample (roughly 28–
53 MW), the completion rate remains at 100% and the mean
operating value decreases smoothly from −$127.3k±$4.0k to
−$173.1k±$6.2k as fixed-load energy cost increases. Once
the headroom falls below about 24 MW, however, performance
deteriorates rapidly: at 20.0 MW headroom the mean operating
value drops to −$227.8k±$53.7k with 89.7%±8.4% comple-
tion, and at 11.7 MW headroom it falls to −$582.3k±$226.5k
with 56.7% ± 16.0% completion.
Figure 9(b) instead holds the fixed-load trace at the base case
and scales the schedulable workload from 0.25× to 3.0×, with
per-job rate limits rmax
j
increased proportionally up to 2.0×
as in the implementation. Here the average flexible headroom
remains fixed at 28.3 MW over the scheduling horizon, so the
degradation isolates the effect of growing schedulable demand.
The system remains fully feasible through the base case, with
the mean operating value changing from −$154.2k±$5.4k
at 0.25× demand to −$173.1k±$6.2k at 1.0×. Beyond that
point, the fixed headroom becomes insufficient for the enlarged
job set: at 1.5× demand the mean operating value declines to
−$209.1k±$32.6k with 93.2% ± 5.2% completion, at 2.0×
demand it becomes −$384.7k±$101.8k with 77.9% ± 7.0%
completion, and at 3.0× demand it falls to −$1.20M±$205.5k
with 54.8%±5.4% completion. Taken together, the two panels
show that both fixed-load growth and schedulable-demand
growth can push the system past a sharp feasibility threshold;
the common driver is insufficient residual capacity available
to serve schedulable jobs. This is similar to results in Fig. 5
where the load and ramp limits were progressively tightened.
B. Out-of-Sample Robustness
This analysis evaluates the first-stage solution from each 50-
scenario trained solution on 500 new day-long scenarios of an-
cillary service (reserve and ramping) deployments, drawn from
the same uncertainty model. As summarized in Fig. 10, the in-
sample violation rates are zero on average for both the load
and ramp limits. Out of sample, the corresponding period/time-
instance level violation rates remain low at 0.96%±0.38% for
load and 0.63% ± 0.30% for ramp, both well below the 5%
tolerance used in the optimization. The mean maximum out-
of-sample exceedances are 4.12 MW for load and 5.13 MW/h
for ramp. Because a day-long scenario contains 24 hourly tests,
the probability that a scenario contains at least one violation
is naturally larger than the period-level rate; in our tests, these
scenario-level incidences are 20.4% for load and 13.7% for
ramp. These results indicate that the scenario-based robust
formulation generalizes well for the interconnection-feasibility
metrics that are enforced in the optimization model.


--- Page 15 ---
15
10
20
30
40
50
Headroom below load cap (MW)
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
Objective ($k/day)
(a) Base-load (fixed load) scaling
Objective
Job completion
1
2
3
Job demand scale factor
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
Objective ($k/day)
(b) Job (schedulable) demand scaling
Objective
Job completion
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Job completion (%)
50
60
70
80
90
100
Job completion (%)
Fig. 9. Multiday fixed-load and schedulable-demand ablation. In panel (a), scaling the fixed-load trace changes the residual headroom below the load cap; in
panel (b), scaling the schedulable workload leaves the fixed-load trace unchanged. In both panels, the blue curve denotes the mean daily operating value and
the red dashed curve denotes the mean job-completion rate, with shaded bands indicating ±1 standard deviation over 31 daily instances.
Load
Ramp
0
1
2
3
4
5
Violation rate (%)
(a) Period-level violation rates
Risk tolerance (5%)
In-sample (50)
Out-of-sample (500)
Load excess (MW)
Ramp excess (MW/h)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Violation magnitude
(b) Violation magnitude (among violators)
Mean
95th pctile
Maximum
Fig. 10.
Multiday out-of-sample robustness. The first-stage schedule from each 50-scenario training problem is evaluated on 500 fresh scenarios per day.
Panel (a) reports period-level load-limit and ramp-limit violation rates, which remain well below the imposed 5% tolerance. Panel (b) reports the magnitude
of out-of-sample violations conditional on violation occurrence. Error bars indicate mean ± standard deviation over 31 daily instances.
APPENDIX C
REFORMULATION FOR SERVICE RATE
This appendix details the continuous-DVFS reformulation
referenced in Section III-A. The variable vj,t represents DVFS-
adjusted service delivered to job j, which removes the bilinear
product between the DVFS factor and the scheduled execution
rate. This gives an LP representation for the continuous-DVFS
workload block; the case studies use the discrete-DVFS MILP
in (19). Substituting (13) into (8)-(9) yields
Cv,job :=
c3
X
j∈J
X
t∈T
t>dj
κj(t −dj)vj,t · ∆t
+ c2
X
j∈J
κjℓj · ∆t + c1
X
t∈T
|at −ao|
(23a)
s.t.
0 ≤vj,t ≤rmax
j
at
ao,
∀t,
(23b)
vj,t = 0,
∀t < sj,
(23c)
X
t≤dj
vj,t ∆t +
X
dj<t≤T
vj,t ∆t ≥Wj −ℓj,
(23d)
X
t≤T
vj,t ∆t ≤Wj,
(23e)
Pt,s = P
fix,up
t,s
+ φ at −ao
ao
ˆP 0
t,s +
X
j∈J
vj,t,
(23f)
Pt,s ≤¯P DC,
(23g)
a ≤at ≤a.
(23h)
Remark 3 (LP Representation). To convert (23) into linear
constraints, we can use the exact epigraph reformulation of the
absolute-value term. Specifically, introduce auxiliary variables
ut ≥0 and replace |at −ao| in (23a) by ut together with
ut ≥at −ao,
ut ≥ao −at,
∀t ∈T .
(24)
APPENDIX D
NOMENCLATURE
Tables II–IV summarize the principal notation used in the
formulation, reformulation, and case-study value calculations.
The type column is intentionally grouped into a small tax-
onomy: index, parameter, scenario data, decision variable,
auxiliary variable, and metric. Unless stated otherwise, power


--- Page 16 ---
16
TABLE II
NOMENCLATURE FOR INDICES, GRID-INTERFACE QUANTITIES, AND MARKET QUANTITIES.
Symbol
Type
Meaning
T = {1, . . . , T }, t
Index
Hourly scheduling horizon and time-period index.
∆t
Parameter
Length of one time interval; equal to one hour in the case studies.
S, s
Index
Finite uncertainty-scenario set and scenario index. Each scenario represents fixed-load and ancillary-service
deployment realizations.
J , j
Index
Set of schedulable jobs and job index.
L, l
Index
Set of admissible discrete DVFS operating levels and level index.
Pt,s
Auxiliary variable
Total scenario-dependent compute power of the data center before BESS interaction.
Dt,s
Auxiliary variable
Net grid withdrawal at the point of interconnection after BESS charge/discharge. Positive values denote grid
consumption.
¯
D
Parameter
Interconnection peak-load limit.
¯∆
Parameter
Interconnection ramp-rate limit imposed on Dt,s −Dt−1,s.
P B
α,t, P B
β,t
Decision variable
Base BESS charging and discharging power schedules.
P B,R
t
Decision variable
BESS reserve capacity offer.
P B,↑
t
, P B,↓
t
Decision variable
BESS upward and downward flexible-ramping capacity offers.
λE
t
Parameter
Energy price.
λRes
t
Parameter
Reserve capacity price.
λF RP,↑
t
, λF RP,↓
t
Parameter
Upward and downward flexible-ramping capacity prices.
βRes
t,s
Scenario data
Scenario-dependent reserve deployment factor.
βF RP,↑
t,s
, βF RP,↓
t,s
Scenario data
Scenario-dependent upward and downward flexible-ramping deployment factors.
RRes, RF RP
Auxiliary variable
Day-ahead reserve and flexible-ramping capacity revenues.
CE
s
Auxiliary variable
Scenario-dependent realized energy settlement cost.
λc, λd
Parameter
Weights that scale workload-quality and BESS degradation costs in the robust objective.
TABLE III
NOMENCLATURE FOR COMPUTE-LOAD, WORKLOAD-SCHEDULING, AND DVFS QUANTITIES.
Symbol
Type
Meaning
ˆ
P 0
t,s
Scenario data
Forecasted fixed-job power at the reference DVFS setting at = ao.
P fix
t,s(at)
Auxiliary variable
Forecasted fixed-job power after applying DVFS scaling.
P
fix,up
t,s
Scenario data
Conservative upper envelope of fixed-job power at at = ao.
P
fix
t,s(at)
Auxiliary variable
Conservative DVFS-adjusted fixed-job power used in capacity and power-balance constraints.
φ
Parameter
Fraction of fixed-job power assumed to be sensitive to DVFS scaling.
at
Decision variable
System-wide DVFS power-intensity factor at time t.
ao
Parameter
Reference DVFS operating point.
a, a
Parameter
Lower and upper admissible DVFS factors.
a(l)
Parameter
DVFS factor associated with discrete operating level l.
zl,t
Decision variable
Indicator equal to one if DVFS level l is selected at time t.
¯
P DC
Parameter
Internal server-side hardware power limit for the computing fleet.
Flexible Headroomt,s(at)
Auxiliary variable
Residual internal capacity for schedulable jobs after reserving conservative fixed load.
sj, dj
Parameter
Release time and deadline of schedulable job j.
Wj
Parameter
Total work requirement of schedulable job j.
rmax
j
Parameter
Maximum execution rate of schedulable job j.
wj,t
Decision variable
Scheduled execution rate of job j at time t before DVFS scaling.
vj,t
Decision variable
Effective service rate (at/ao)wj,t in the continuous reformulation.
w(l)
j,t
Decision variable
Disaggregated execution rate of job j assigned to discrete DVFS level l.
pj,t
Decision variable
DVFS-adjusted power or effective work contribution of job j in the discrete formulation.
ℓj
Decision variable
Unfinished work of schedulable job j over the planning horizon.
κj
Parameter
Job-specific weight for tardiness and non-completion penalties.
Cjob, Cjob
disc
Auxiliary variable
Workload-quality cost in the continuous and discrete DVFS formulations.
c1, c2, c3
Parameter
Penalty coefficients for DVFS deviation, unfinished work, and tardy execution, respectively.
quantities are in MW, energy quantities are in MWh, and time
is indexed in one-hour intervals.


--- Page 17 ---
17
TABLE IV
NOMENCLATURE FOR BESS OPERATION, DEGRADATION, AND VALUE CALCULATIONS.
Symbol
Type
Meaning
EB
s,t
Decision variable
Scenario-dependent stored energy of the BESS.
CB
Parameter
Installed BESS energy capacity used in the optimization model.
αB
t , βB
t
Decision variable
BESS charge-mode and discharge-mode indicators.
P B,max
α
, P B,max
β
Parameter
Maximum BESS charging and discharging power.
ηB
α, ηB
β
Parameter
BESS charging and discharging efficiencies.
SOCmin, SOCmax
Parameter
Minimum and maximum admissible state-of-charge fractions.
Eth
s
Auxiliary variable
Scenario-dependent total BESS energy throughput.
Ncyc
max
Parameter
Preferred cycle budget over the study horizon.
ℓs
Decision variable
Scenario-dependent excess cycling beyond the preferred cycle budget.
cdeg
Parameter
Marginal BESS degradation cost per unit of excess throughput.
CBESS
s
Auxiliary variable
Scenario-dependent BESS degradation penalty.
n
Index
Number of identical commercial BESS units in the sizing study.
Cunit
Parameter
Capital cost per commercial BESS unit.
r, N
Parameter
Discount rate and project lifetime used in the capital recovery factor.
CRF(r, N)
Parameter
Capital recovery factor converting investment cost into annualized cost.
Z⋆
d(n)
Metric
Optimized daily operating value on day d with n BESS units.
Ddays
Parameter
Number of daily instances used when averaging value-added quantities.
RAS
Auxiliary variable
Aggregate ancillary-service revenue, RRES + RFRP.
V dep(n)
Metric
SOC-depletion correction applied to storage value-added calculations.
¯eT , e0
Metric
Mean terminal SOC fraction and initial SOC fraction used in SOC-depletion correction.
¯λe
Metric
Average energy price used in SOC-depletion correction.
VA(n), VANA
Metric
Corrected total value added and corrected non-ancillary-service value component.
NV(n)
Metric
Net value after subtracting annualized BESS capital cost.
λload
t
, λramp-up
t
, λramp-down
t
Metric
Shadow prices of load, upward-ramp, and downward-ramp constraints after fixing MILP integer variables.
