--- Page 1 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch
Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Saksham Rathi
Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay
Mumbai, India
sakshamrathi@cse.iitb.ac.in
Preeti
Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay
Mumbai, India
preeti@cse.iitb.ac.in
Mythili Vutukuru
Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay
Mumbai, India
mythili@cse.iitb.ac.in
Abstract
Auto-regressive token generation in large language mod-
els is memory-bound because it requires “attending to” key
and value tensors (KV cache) of all previous tokens. Prior
work aims to improve the efficiency of this decode process by
batching multiple requests together, and maximizing batch
size subject to GPU memory constraints. The key obser-
vation of our work is that with prefix-sharing workloads,
smaller, prefix-homogeneous batches – where all requests
share a common prefix – can achieve higher decode through-
put than larger, heterogeneous batches, due to better spatial
and temporal locality during KV cache accesses. However,
prefix-aware schedulers in state-of-the-art inference engines
maximize prefix reuse within a batch only to reduce KV
cache memory footprint, but do not stop batch formation
at smaller homogeneous batches that could have performed
better. Further, we show that shared prefix detection in ex-
isting schedulers relies on radix-tree traversals, incurring
substantial CPU overhead that is often comparable to GPU
execution time. This paper presents Feather, a prefix-aware
scheduler that uses reinforcement learning (RL) to learn
the optimal tradeoff between batch size and prefix homo-
geneity. We also introduce Chunked Hash Tree (CHT), a
lightweight data structure that enables fast prefix detection
and efficient request selection for the RL scheduler, avoid-
ing expensive tree traversals. We integrate Feather into
vLLM and SGLang, and our evaluation shows that Feather
achieves 2–10× higher end-to-end throughput as compared
to existing schedulers, while doing no worse than the sta-
tus quo when the workload does not have enough prefix
sharing. Feather achieves these gains by reducing the total
number of KV cache accesses, surpassing the performance
of prefix-aware attention kernels that have the same goal.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) [12, 26, 36] are rapidly trans-
forming modern computing, powering applications such as
conversational assistants [10, 13], code generation [15], and
retrieval-augmented generation [18, 39]. As these models
transition from research to production, cloud AI engines [4,
14, 25] must improve serving latency and resource efficiency
for both online and offline inference. While prior work has
proposed scheduling strategies [1, 28, 45, 47], parallelization
(a) Prefill and Decode
(b) Radix Tree
Figure 1. LLM Inference Primitives
techniques [32, 37], memory management methods [17, 31,
42], quantization [9, 21], and kernel-level optimizations [27,
41], efficiently serving LLM workloads, especially under real-
istic high-throughput conditions, remains an open problem.
An LLM inference request goes through two phases: prefill
and decode. The prefill phase processes all prompt tokens in
parallel to produce the first output token, making it compute-
bound. The decode phase, by contrast, generates tokens
auto-regressively and is fundamentally memory-bound. Each
newly generated token attends to the keys and values of all
previous tokens, resulting in a sweep of the entire KV cache
for each decode iteration, as shown in Figure 1(a). As context
lengths grow, this memory traffic becomes the dominant
bottleneck. Popular LLM inference engines like vLLM [17]
adopt batching to improve GPU utilization during the decode
phase, scheduling multiple requests together in a batch using
policies like First Come First Serve (FCFS). More advanced
frameworks explore techniques such as interleaving [1], dis-
aggregation [47], and spatial co-scheduling [16, 22], along
with dynamically adjusting batch sizes based on runtime
constraints [28], to address this compute-memory mismatch.
Orthogonally, workloads such as few-shot prompting [8,
30], system prompts [33], and RAG [19] exhibit significant
prefix sharing across requests. Reusing KV caches for shared
prefixes eliminates redundant KV computation and reduces
memory footprint. Systems such as SGLang [44] and vLLM
[17] use radix trees (Figure 1(b)) or hashing-based struc-
tures to keep track of shared KV caches. While vLLM’s FCFS
would have scheduled requests in arrival order (𝑅1, 𝑅2, 𝑅3, 𝑅4),
SGLang performs a depth-first traversal of the radix tree and
schedules requests in the order 𝑅1, 𝑅3, 𝑅4, 𝑅2, which reduces
KV cache evictions. A complementary line of work [27, 38,
40, 41] exploits the shared prefix structure within the atten-
tion kernel itself by jointly computing attention for groups
of queries that share prefixes. Such prefix-aware attention
1
arXiv:2605.06046v1  [cs.LG]  7 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Figure 2. Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity
kernels avoid redundant loading of shared KV blocks for
each request separately, thereby reducing memory traffic.
Despite these advances, we identify two critical gaps in
current scheduling strategies for prefix-shared workloads.
First, prior work largely focuses on maximizing batch size
during the decode phase. However, we show via controlled
experiments that prefix homogeneity — the extent to which
all requests in a batch share a common prefix — has an
even stronger impact on performance. Further, we find that
the performance gains increase with the length of the pre-
fix shared across all the requests in a batch (§3.1). This is
because when a prefix is shared by all requests, there is sig-
nificant spatial and temporal locality in the memory accesses
of the KV cache located in the GPU DRAM, which leads to
both higher memory bandwidth utilization and reduced total
amount of data fetched from DRAM. As a result, moderately
small prefix-homogeneous batches can leverage these local-
ity benefits and perform better than larger heterogeneous
batches. For example, Figure 2 shows the throughput and
execution times of 800 requests, where 8 groups of 100 re-
quests each share a large prefix of 10K tokens between them.
Processing these requests in 8 prefix-homogeneous batches
of 100 requests each leads to nearly 2× higher throughput
than when using larger heterogeneous batches, though very
small homogeneous batches (32 batches of 25 requests each)
perform poorly as well due to sub-optimal compute utiliza-
tion. Existing prefix-aware schedulers have no mechanism
to recognize this tradeoff between batch size and prefix ho-
mogeneity (§3.2); e.g., in Figure 1(b), a DFS-traversal-based
scheduler will use 𝑅2 to maximize batch size, even if a smaller
batch (only 𝑅1, 𝑅3, 𝑅4) could have performed better due to
a longer common prefix. The second big gap with current
prefix-aware schedulers is that they incur prohibitive CPU
overheads in maintaining and traversing radix trees, which
can account for 50–90% of total latency (§3.3).
This paper introduces Feather1 (§4), a prefix-aware sched-
uler that improves throughput by efficiently finding an op-
timal balance between batch size and prefix homogeneity.
Feather is built on two components: (i) Chunked Hash Tree
(CHT), a lightweight data structure for fast prefix detection,
similar in spirit to vLLM’s block table [17]. Instead of per-
forming token-level radix tree traversals, CHT represents
1Please see §E for an explanation of this name.
each request as a vector of cumulative prefix hashes. To ef-
ficiently select a request that maximizes the length of the
prefix shared across the active batch, CHT maintains a min-
heap, updated lazily, and ordered by per-request missing
count—the number of prefix chunks not yet covered by the
batch. This enables the identification of the best candidate
in O(log𝑊) time among 𝑊waiting requests, a significant
improvement over DFS traversal [44]. (ii) RL-based batching
policy. Deciding when to stop adding requests to a batch
presents a trade-off: larger batches improve utilization but
dilute prefix homogeneity. We cast this as a reinforcement
learning problem in which the scheduler observes batch char-
acteristics (e.g., current size, shared prefix length), evaluates
the impact of adding another request to the batch, and stops
batch formation at a point that maximizes throughput. This
adaptive approach consistently outperforms static heuristics
across diverse workloads and hardware configurations. To-
gether, these two components enable Feather to construct
prefix-homogeneous batches efficiently, both improving sys-
tem throughput and reducing scheduling overhead.
We implement Feather on vLLM [17] and SGLang [44]
and evaluate it across diverse workloads and configurations
(§5). Our results show that Feather achieves 2-10× higher
end-to-end throughput over vLLM’s FCFS and other base-
lines for shared prefix lengths ranging from 1K to 10K tokens,
while also improving DRAM bandwidth utilization. Feather
is fully hardware-agnostic and yet performs better than re-
cent prefix-aware kernels that must be tuned to specific
hardware configurations. Our RL policy ensures that our
performance never falls below that of the baselines, even if
the workload does not allow for prefix-homogeneous batches,
and CHT reduces prefix-detection overhead by up to 1000×
compared to DFS-based approaches for long sequences.
In summary, this paper makes the following contribu-
tions: (i) We demonstrate the tradeoff between batch size
and prefix homogeneity in the decode phase performance of
LLM inference, and identify previously overlooked CPU over-
heads in prefix-aware scheduling. (ii) We design the Chunked
Hash Tree (CHT) data structure for low-overhead prefix de-
tection, and develop a reinforcement learning-based policy
for adaptive batch construction. (iii) We build Feather, a
prefix-aware scheduler integrated into vLLM and SGLang,
and demonstrate improvements in throughput and latency
on diverse workloads. We plan to open-source Feather by
contributing it to both frameworks’ repositories.
2
Background and Related Work
We now discuss the background and prior work on batching,
scheduling, and prefix-aware optimizations.
2.1
Background
LLM Inference and Attention. LLM inference proceeds
auto-regressively in two phases: prefill and decode. Their
2


--- Page 3 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
latencies are known as time to first token (TTFT) and time be-
tween tokens (TBT), respectively. Each decode step comprises
self-attention, Query-Key-Value-Output (QKVO) projections,
and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) layers. Self-attention cap-
tures global token dependencies as:
Attention(Q, K, V) = softmax
QK𝑇
√
𝑑

V
where 𝑑denotes the head dimension. During the decode
phase, the query Q of the current token attends to all prior
keys K and values V. These are cached in GPU memory as the
KV cache, eliminating redundant computation at the cost
of increased memory usage. The asymmetry between prefill
and decode, together with the growing memory footprint of
the KV cache, motivates much of the prior work.
GPU Execution Model. GPUs are hierarchically organized
for parallelism across hundreds of thousands of threads. The
basic compute unit is the Streaming Multiprocessor (SM), and
modern GPUs typically contain a few hundred SMs. Each SM
includes an L1 cache, shared memory, tensor cores for matrix
multiplication (GEMM), and execution units. SMs access
global memory through a shared L2 cache. This hierarchy,
from small, fast on-chip memory to large, high-latency global
memory, is critical for LLM serving, as KV cache access
patterns directly influence memory bandwidth utilization.
Like CPUs, GPUs use hardware prefetching and benefit from
regular, sequential memory access patterns [29].
2.2
Related Work
Batching and Scheduling. vLLM [17] adopts a first-come,
first-served (FCFS) scheduling policy as a practical baseline
for LLM serving. Sarathi-Serve [1] reduces prefill-decode
interference through chunked prefills and stall-free batching,
while DistServe [47] eliminates it by disaggregating the two
phases across GPUs. At the kernel level, POD-Attention [16]
overlaps prefill and decode on a single GPU via fused at-
tention with SM-aware scheduling, and Bullet [22] enables
fine-grained resource sharing through dynamic SM alloca-
tion. At the request level, BucketServe [45] groups requests
by sequence length to improve batching efficiency, and Pang
et al. [28] dynamically adapts the batch size to runtime con-
straints. Complementary to prior work, Feather operates at
the scheduler level and learns when to stop batch construction
based on prefix homogeneity, introducing a scheduling signal
not explicitly exploited in existing systems.
Prefix Sharing. Many real-world LLM workloads [8, 19, 30,
33] exhibit substantial prefix overlap, and enabling KV cache
reuse avoids redundant computation and reduces memory
footprint. However, realizing these benefits requires coordi-
nation between serving and memory management. SGLang
[44] formalizes prefix sharing via RadixAttention, which uses
a radix tree to hierarchically organize token sequences, and
enables KV reuse across shared prefixes. Similarly, vLLM [17]
implements prefix caching [34] using a Merkle-tree-inspired
Figure 3. An Example of a vLLM Merkle Tree
hashing scheme (Figure 3), where each KV block hash de-
pends on its tokens and preceding prefix hashes, enabling
reuse when hash sequences match. BatchLLM [46] targets
large offline workloads by grouping prefix-sharing requests
and reordering them to maximize KV reuse. BlendServe [43]
combines a resource-aware prefix tree with scheduling to
jointly optimize prefix reuse and compute–memory demand.
Feather adopts a lightweight design: it uses chunked hashing
over radix trees or full hash chains, reducing CPU overhead
and steering batch construction toward prefix-homogeneous
groups in online and offline settings.
Prefix-Aware Attention Kernels. Prior work [27, 38, 40,
41] also optimizes attention kernels by grouping queries with
shared prefixes to load KV blocks once and reuse them across
queries. These approaches, however, rely on GPU-specific
kernel designs. In contrast, Feather improves inputs to the
existing attention kernels by constructing prefix-homogeneous
batches upfront, making it hardware-agnostic and naturally
composable with kernel-level techniques.
3
Motivation
Through a set of controlled experiments (here and in §B),
we validate three hypotheses that underpin the design of
Feather: (i) prefix homogeneity, the extent to which all re-
quests in a batch share a common prefix, has a strong impact
on the decode throughput because it increases the locality of
KV cache accesses. Importantly, these gains can be achieved
without any modifications to existing attention kernels. (ii)
There is a trade-off between batch size and prefix homo-
geneity, where moderately sized homogeneous batches can
outperform large heterogeneous batches; and (iii) existing
prefix detection approaches incur substantial CPU overhead.
Experimental Setup. All experiments use the Llama 3 8B
[2] model and are run on an RTX 6000 Ada GPU [23] with
48 GB of GDDR6 memory and a 96 MB L2 cache. We use the
vLLM [17] inference engine with a default maximum batch
size of 500 unless stated otherwise. We first focus on decode
throughput, measured in output tokens per second. To iso-
late decode behavior, we perform a warm-up run so that the
prefix KV caches are resident in GPU memory. This ensures
that per-token compute remains constant within an experi-
ment and differences arise primarily from memory accesses
and batching. We also report end-to-end throughput, which
includes the time taken to prefill the queries. For this model,
a 10k-token request generates 1.2 GB of KV cache data across
all layers. Within each layer, vLLM uses its paged memory
management system and allocates the KV cache in blocks of
3


--- Page 4 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
(a) Throughput
(b) Bandwidth Utilization
Figure 4. Prefix Homogeneity - Two Prefix Groups
16 tokens contiguously in GPU memory, which is sufficient
for locality benefits to kick in. We sample requests from the
L-Eval [3] dataset and prune the size of each request as re-
quired by the experiment. We use the FlashAttention [11]
backend throughout all the experiments.
3.1
Significance of Prefix Homogeneity
We start by observing the impact of prefix homogeneity
on decode phase throughput. When all requests in a batch
share a common prefix, their attention operations traverse
the same KV cache regions concurrently. This yields two
beneficial effects: (i) spatial locality: Sequential access to
contiguous KV tensors enables the hardware prefetcher to
fetch upcoming cache lines from DRAM into L2; (ii) tempo-
ral locality: Cache lines fetched for one request are reused
by neighboring requests before eviction. Together, these ef-
fects increase L2 hit rates and DRAM utilization, improving
throughput. In contrast, heterogeneous prefixes interleave
KV accesses across disjoint regions, disrupting locality and
reducing effective memory bandwidth. We will now present
experiments that validate these claims.
Experiment 1: We consider two prefixes, 𝐴and 𝐵, each
10K tokens long. We form a batch of 500 requests, each using
the prefix 𝐴or 𝐵, followed by a unique suffix of length 20
tokens (§A.1). Each request generates 50 decode tokens. Let
𝑓∈[0, 1] denote the fraction of requests using prefix 𝐴.
When 𝑓is 0 or 1, the batch is homogeneous; otherwise, two
prefix groups coexist. We perform a warm-up run so that
KV caches for both prefixes are resident in GPU memory.
Figure 4(a) shows decode throughput as a function of 𝑓.
We see that the throughput is highest for fully homogeneous
batches. However, even a single request from the other prefix
group (e.g., 𝑓= 0.002) causes throughput to drop by nearly
2×. This demonstrates that decode throughput is highly sen-
sitive to even minimal prefix heterogeneity. To understand
this effect, we capture DRAM bandwidth utilization using
DCGMI [24]. We first plot the mean bandwidth utilization
for each 𝑓, and then we sum the utilization over the entire ex-
periment duration (i.e., compute the area under the memory
bandwidth curve) to approximate total memory accesses. As
shown in Figure 4(b), homogeneous batches achieve over 40%
higher bandwidth utilization than mixed-prefix batches due
to greater spatial locality, enabling more efficient hardware-
level prefetching into the GPU cache. Furthermore, greater
temporal locality in prefix-homogeneous batches reduces the
Figure 5. Fraction of
Prefix Shared
Figure 6. Number of Prefix Groups
total data fetched from DRAM. Because most SMs process
queries from the dominant prefix even when 𝑓= 0.002, we
attribute the performance gains primarily to improved L2
cache reuse rather than increased L1 cache locality.
Takeaway 1: Decode throughput is maximized when all
requests share a prefix; even a single divergent prefix disrupts
locality and sharply reduces effective bandwidth.
Experiment 2: Next, we evaluate the impact of the shared
prefix length on performance. For this, we construct a batch
of 100 requests, each 2K tokens long and sharing a com-
mon prefix of length 2𝐾× 𝑓tokens, where 𝑓∈[0, 1]. The
remaining 2𝐾× (1 −𝑓) tokens are unique across requests
(§A.2). The KV caches fit into GPU memory for all values
of 𝑓. Figure 5 shows that throughput increases smoothly
with 𝑓. It is lowest at 𝑓= 0 and improves steadily as sharing
increases, reaching over 60% higher throughput at 𝑓= 1. As
𝑓grows, a larger portion of the KV cache is shared across
requests; since decode repeatedly traverses the KV cache,
greater spatial and temporal locality improve throughput.
Takeaway 2: In prefix-homogeneous batches, decode through-
put increases smoothly with the length of the shared prefix.
Experiment 3: Next, we evaluate the effect of the number
of prefix groups on performance using an experiment with 𝑁
shared prefixes 𝑃1, 𝑃2, . . . , 𝑃𝑁, each of length 10𝐾tokens and
having same number of requests. Figure 6 shows throughput
and average batch size as 𝑁increases. As observed earlier,
throughput drops from 𝑁= 1 to 𝑁= 2 due to reduced tem-
poral and spatial locality arising from prefix heterogeneity.
However, from 𝑁= 2 to 𝑁= 20, throughput remains stable,
indicating that additional heterogeneity has a limited impact
once locality is disrupted. Finally, throughput drops sharply
from 𝑁= 20 to 𝑁= 100, as GPU memory can no longer
hold KV caches for all active prefixes. The impact is also
visible through the reduced average batch size for 𝑁= 50
and 𝑁= 100. Prior work [44, 46] mitigates the throughput
drop from 𝑁= 20 to 𝑁= 50 due to KV cache evictions by
maximizing prefix reuse and minimizing memory footprint
using depth-first traversal of radix trees. However, to the
best of our knowledge, no prior work has observed the drop
in performance from 𝑁= 1 to 𝑁= 2 prefix groups.
Takeaway 3: While prefix heterogeneity causes a drop in
throughput, the amount of heterogeneity has a marginal im-
pact on the loss of locality. However, very high heterogeneity
leads to minimal KV reuse and higher GPU memory evictions.
Experiment 4: Until now, all the experiments have con-
sidered requests that have a single level of prefix sharing. We
4


--- Page 5 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Figure 7. Radix Tree Sharing Patterns
Figure 8. Throughput vs. Batch Size
Figure 9. Batch Size vs. Homogeneity
now ask the question: what is the impact of more complicated
sharing patterns on performance? For this, we construct
radix trees with 1 to 4 levels of shared prefixes (§A.3). There
are two branches in each level, and requests are equally dis-
tributed across the leaves. The sequence length per request
is fixed at 4𝐿, and Figure 7 shows the decode throughput for
three values of 𝐿. As expected, a single level of radix tree
has the highest performance because of maximum locality.
Interestingly, radix trees with 2, 3, and 4 levels exhibit simi-
lar throughput across different values of 𝐿, despite differing
branching structures. Why so? During the initial segment of
length 𝐿, all configurations access the same KV region. How-
ever, once branching occurs, the batch becomes heteroge-
neous, locality degrades, and the marginal cost of additional
prefix groups is small, as established earlier in Figure 6.
Takeaway 4: Performance is driven mainly by the length
of the top-level prefix shared by all requests, while the number
of radix-tree levels and branches has a negligible impact.
3.2
Batch Size vs Prefix Homogeneity
So far, we have established that prefix homogeneity has a
significant impact on performance. But when the workload
does not have enough requests from a prefix group and
prefix-homogeneous batches are too small, the compute will
remain under-utilized, leading to a loss in throughput. There-
fore, there exists a trade-off between batch size and prefix
homogeneity. We now explore this trade-off.
Experiment 5: We study decode throughput vs. batch
size using two workloads: (i) heterogeneous, with requests
spread across 5 distinct 10K-token prefixes, and (ii) homo-
geneous, with all requests sharing one such prefix. Figure 8
shows throughput and tensor core utilization as a function
of batch size for both workloads. We see that throughput
plateaus at a point before the maximum batch size, and the
saturation throughput is higher in the homogeneous case due
to greater locality. Further, the batch size at which through-
put saturates is higher for the homogeneous workload be-
cause requests can access the same KV cache without using
additional memory bandwidth. Interestingly, the compute
utilization is almost exactly the same across both workloads.
Takeaway 5: Decode is memory bandwidth bound and in-
creasing batch size beyond a point does not necessarily improve
throughput. However, the point at which diminishing returns
begin depends on prefix homogeneity (and hardware config).
Policy
Exec (s)
Batch Time (s, %)
Throughput (toks/s)
vLLM FCFS
229.36
3e-6 (0.00%)
436.25
SGLANG DFS-W
177.78
92.15 (51.8%)
562.61
SGLANG LPM
149.27
46.62 (31.2%)
669.92
PAT (vLLM Block Table)
316.45
91.72 (29.0%)
316.63
vLLM RadixTree
139.33
62.95 (45.2%)
717.35
vLLM User IDs
105.43
0.03 (0.03%)
948.54
Table 1. Overhead of Dynamic Prefix Detection
Experiment 6: Given that batch size has a diminishing
impact on performance, we ask if moderately small homo-
geneous batches can outperform larger heterogeneous ones.
To answer this, we use eight prefix groups with 100 requests
each (800 total, each 10K tokens) and evaluate the follow-
ing batching strategies: (i) 1×800 (8 prefix groups/batch); (ii)
2×400 (4 prefix groups/batch); (iii) 4×200 (2 prefix groups/
batch); (iv) 8×100 (homogeneous); (v) 16×50 (homogeneous);
and (vi) 32×25 (homogeneous). We vary the decode length
from 1 to 100 tokens and measure the end-to-end throughput,
including both the prefill and decode phases for all batches.
Figure 9 shows this throughput across the different batching
strategies. For small decode lengths, throughput is domi-
nated by prefill, and large heterogeneous batches perform
the best due to higher tensor core utilization; splitting 1×800
into smaller batches slightly reduces throughput due to lower
compute efficiency, as locality benefits are not yet dominant.
As decode length increases, performance trends reverse: mul-
tiple decode iterations repeatedly sweep the KV cache and
reap greater benefits due to locality. Therefore, at longer
decode lengths, fully homogeneous batches (8×100) signifi-
cantly improve throughput despite smaller batch sizes. No-
tably, even 16×50 continues to outperform 1×800 at large
decode lengths, showing that locality gains can outweigh
reduced tensor core utilization. Only when batches become
too small (32×25) does throughput decline again, as reduced
arithmetic intensity and occupancy dominate.
Takeaway 6: Moderately small prefix-homogeneous batches
can achieve higher throughput than larger heterogeneous ones.
Gains increase with longer decode lengths as repeated KV
sweeps amplify locality; however, excessively small batches
underutilize compute and degrade performance.
3.3
Overhead of Dynamic Prefix Detection
Next, we study how state-of-the-art inference engines iden-
tify prefix sharing and the costs involved. Systems such as
5


--- Page 6 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
SGLang [44] and BatchLLM [46] do not explicitly form prefix-
homogeneous batches, but use radix trees to detect sharing,
and schedule requests to minimize KV recomputation.
Experiment 7: We construct a workload of 2K requests,
each with a 10K-token prefix, and compare scheduling CPU
time to total execution time. SGLang proposes two prefix-
aware policies that use its radix tree: Longest Prefix Match,
which prioritizes requests with the longest matching cached
prefixes, and DFS-Weight, which performs a depth-first tra-
versal and prioritizes branches with more active requests.
vLLM uses a much simpler hash-based block table, which
is used for grouping requests in the prefix-aware attention
kernel implementation of PAT [41]. We compare the over-
heads of this block table along with our own radix-tree-based
scheduler implemented on top of vLLM. We also compare
against an idealized policy where prefix group identifiers are
provided explicitly, eliminating dynamic prefix discovery.
Table 1 shows that SGLang’s LPM and DFS-Weight incur
scheduler overhead (measured as time taken by all functions
invoked during batch formation) comparable to GPU execu-
tion time, even though these policies improve performance
over vLLM’s FCFS. In contrast, when prefix group identifiers
are provided explicitly, CPU overhead drops significantly.
This gap arises from the structure of radix trees: they require
token-by-token comparisons during insertion, dynamic node
splitting on partial matches, and repeated tree traversals for
scheduling requests. With long prompts and high concur-
rency, these operations incur significant overhead. Similarly,
vLLM’s block table design is inefficient in this regard. How-
ever, these overheads are not sufficiently highlighted in prior
work [43, 46], which is mostly based on offline inference.
Takeaway 7: Existing approaches introduce significant
CPU overhead when detecting prefix sharing, which is some-
times even comparable to the GPU execution time.
4
Design and Implementation
Our experiments so far have demonstrated that the length of
the prefix shared across all active requests is an important
determinant of system performance. However, this metric
interacts with batch size in a complex way: larger batches
improve GPU utilization but often reduce shared prefix align-
ment. Further, detecting this shared prefix length incurs high
overhead in existing systems. We now describe the design of
Feather, an efficient scheduler that finds the right balance
between batch size and prefix homogeneity.
4.1
Overview
Feather is based on the following two key ideas.
Key Idea 1: Learn the Stopping Decision via RL (§4.3).
The trade-off between batch size and prefix homogeneity
raises a key question: when should the scheduler stop adding
requests? The answer depends on both hardware and work-
load, making fixed heuristics brittle. We model batch con-
struction as a sequential decision process and learn a stop-
ping policy via Reinforcement Learning. At each step, the
scheduler evaluates a candidate request using various state
features and decides whether it should be added to the batch
or if the batch should be dispatched to the GPU for execution.
Key Idea 2: Shared Prefix Detection via Chunked Hash
Tree (§4.2). Tree-based approaches incur significant over-
head (§3.3), and finding the best waiting request requires a
DFS traversal that is O(𝐸), where 𝐸is the number of edges in
the radix tree. In the worst case, this can go up to O(𝑊×𝑇),
where 𝑊is the number of waiting requests, and 𝑇is the
sequence length. We instead represent each request as a
sequence of hashes over fixed-size chunks and maintain a
working set of hashes for the active batch. This is similar
in spirit to Merkle-style hash chains, but it does not require
sequential hash computation, and each chunk can be pro-
cessed independently without prefix dependencies. Prefix
matching is thus reduced to a set-overlap problem: selecting
the request with the maximum overlap with the working
set. However, a naive implementation that scans all requests
and counts overlaps requires O(𝑊· 𝐶) work per decision,
where 𝐶is the number of chunks in a request, which re-
mains too expensive for frequent scheduling. We avoid this
by maintaining a missing count per request—the number of
chunks absent from the working set—which changes only
when the working set changes (i.e., upon request addition
or completion). Overlaps are thus updated incrementally,
reducing selection to finding the request with the smallest
missing count. To do so efficiently, we maintain a min-heap
over missing counts, pushing updates and using lazy deletion
to discard stale entries, yielding O(log𝑊) selection cost.
System Architecture. Figure 10 shows the overall schedul-
ing pipeline. We consider an inference server that continu-
ously receives requests, which are inserted into the waiting
queue of CHT. The scheduler builds batches incrementally
in a loop. It first finds the best candidate by retrieving the
waiting request with the highest overlap with the current
working set. Then the RL policy evaluates the current sys-
tem state and decides whether to Add the request or Stop.
If Add is chosen, the request is added to the scheduler batch,
and all the data structures, such as the working set and the
min-heap, are updated accordingly; otherwise, the batch is
dispatched to the GPU for an execution step. The decode
throughput measured after the GPU execution is used as a
reward for the RL policy. Completed requests are removed
from the active batch, and the working set is updated.
4.2
Chunked Hash Tree (CHT)
We now describe the operations of CHT (a more formal
treatment is in §C). We begin with how token sequences are
mapped to a compact representation in our system.
6


--- Page 7 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Figure 10. Feather Pipeline
Hash Vectors. Given a request as a token sequence, we
partition it into non-overlapping chunks of size 𝐾and build
a sequence of hashes, one for each chunk, where each hash
is cumulative over all tokens up to that chunk. For exam-
ple, in Figure 11(a), a request with tokens A-F and 𝐾= 2 is
represented as three incremental hashes: hash(A-B), hash(A-
D), and hash(A-F). Two requests will have the same hash at
level 𝑙iff they share the same first 𝑙𝐾tokens. Each request is
represented as an ordered hash vector. We use an incremen-
tal xxHash-64 state, ensuring each token is processed once,
yielding a total cost of O(𝑇), independent of the number of
chunk boundaries, where 𝑇is the sequence length.
Insertion. Insert is invoked when a new request arrives at
the scheduler. We first compute the cumulative prefix-hash
vector and store it in a map from request IDs to hash vectors
for faster reuse. We also maintain a reverse index that maps
each hash to the set of requests containing that hash. For
each hash in the hash vector, we insert the request into this
reverse index. The overall cost is dominated by the hash
computation phase, which runs in O(𝑇).
Working Set, Min-Heap and Shared Prefix Tip. To evalu-
ate how well a request matches the active batch, we maintain
a working set that contains (level, hash) tuples represent-
ing prefix hashes at that level covered by currently active
requests. For each request, we also maintain a missing count,
which is the number of levels for which this request’s hashes
are not present in the working set. We insert these missing
counts into a min-heap, which enables efficient retrieval of
the most suitable request for addition to the batch. Insert up-
dates both of these structures. Moreover, we do not perform
in-place updates and use lazy deletion to discard stale entries
in the heap. To relate to our key metric, which is the number
of chunks shared by all active requests, we also maintain a
shared prefix tip, storing the depth and hash of the deepest
node that is shared by all the active requests. Figure 11(b)
shows the Chunked Hash Tree after the request 𝑅1 is added
to the batch. The nodes marked in green denote the working
set. Since there is just a single request, the shared prefix tip
is at Level-3 of 𝑅1. The heap contains the missing counts of
the waiting requests along with stale entries.
Finding the Best Request. The goal of FindBest is to se-
lect the waiting request that best complements the active
batch, i.e., the one with the minimum missing count, so
that we maximize the depth of the shared prefix tip2. Since
2An astute reader might ask why we are choosing a request based on its
difference from the working set rather than its impact on the length of the
the min-heap is keyed by this count, the best candidate ap-
pears at the top after skipping stale entries. As shown in
Figure 11(c), 𝑅2 appears at the top of the min-heap and is
therefore selected as the best request. Note that adding 𝑅2
to the batch reduces the shared prefix tip by one level. Find-
Best runs in O(log𝑊), where 𝑊is the number of waiting
requests. For the selected request, we compute two metrics
that are inputs to the RL policy (§4.3), which needs to decide
whether adding the request to the current batch is beneficial
for the overall throughput. One of the metrics is the change
in the depth of the shared prefix tip, and the other is the
number of additional waiting requests that are present at
this new depth, which can all be added to the batch without
any further impact on the shared prefix tip in the future.
Adding a Request to the Active Batch. When a request
is promoted to the active batch, we update the working set
to include its prefixes and recompute the shared prefix tip.
We iterate over the hash vector backwards; for each level, if
the corresponding prefix hash isn’t present in the working
set, it is inserted, and all waiting requests sharing it have
their missing count decremented. For the shared prefix tip,
admitting a new request can only shorten the common prefix,
so we seek the deepest level where it agrees with the existing
tip hash. This corresponds to the least common ancestor of
all active request leaves in the hash trie. AddToBatch runs
in O(𝐶·𝑊ℎ· log𝑊) time, where 𝐶= ⌈𝑇/𝐾⌉is the number
of chunks for a request with 𝑇tokens, and𝑊ℎis the number
of waiting requests that share the same hash (𝑊ℎ≪𝑊).
Removing a Request from the Active Batch. Finish is
called when a request completes, and we remove it from
the active batch. It is the symmetric counterpart of AddTo-
Batch. We iterate over the hash vector from the start. A hash
unused by any active request is removed from the working
set, and all waiting requests containing it have their missing
count incremented. A request completion can only lengthen
the shared prefix tip since the remaining active requests may
agree on a longer common prefix. Starting from the tip’s
previous position, we scan forward, checking whether all
remaining active requests share the same hash at each level.
(We do this efficiently by maintaining reference counts of
each hash.) The extension stops at the first level of disagree-
ment or at the shortest active request. This scan is inexpen-
sive in practice, as the tip rarely advances more than a few
levels. Finish also runs in O(𝐶·𝑊ℎ·log𝑊) time. Figure 11(d)
shows the state after 𝑅1 completes: the tip extends to 𝑅2’s
final level, and waiting heap costs are updated accordingly.
Optimizations. We employ several optimizations to im-
prove efficiency. First, FindBest may be invoked multiple
shared prefix tip. A brief explanation is that we want to pick a request that
helps us revert back to a longer shared prefix tip sooner, and a request that
differs from the working set by the least number of chunks helps us achieve
this goal best. We refer the reader to Appendix C.9 for more details.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
(a) Insertion
(b) Adding to Batch
(c) Finding the Best Request
(d) Request Completion
Figure 11. Chunked Hash Tree Operations
times within a scheduling round without state changes, so
we cache its last result and reuse it until it is invalidated
by any mutation (e.g., AddToBatch and Finish). Second,
we use lazy heap updates: when a request’s missing count
changes, we push a new entry instead of updating it in place
and skip stale entries during FindBest. Third, we maintain
the shared prefix tip incrementally rather than recomputing
it. This drops the cost from O(𝐴·𝐶), where𝐴is the number of
active requests, and 𝐶is the number of chunks, to just O(𝐶)
in the worst case and typically terminates earlier. Finally, all
major data structures are pre-allocated at initialization to
eliminate rehashing and reallocation overhead.
4.3
Batching and Reinforcement Learning
The CHT efficiently identifies the next best request to add,
maximizing shared prefix length, but it does not determine
when to stop. While adding requests improves GPU utiliza-
tion, it can also shrink the shared prefix and degrade locality.
We frame this stop/continue decision as a learning problem
and present three policies: a heuristic, a contextual bandit,
and a Q-learning agent. The scheduler incrementally builds
a batch by selecting candidates via the CHT and deciding
whether to admit them or dispatch the batch.
State, Actions, and Reward. At each step of batch forma-
tion, the scheduler observes the state𝑠= (b, Δ, w) and takes
an action 𝑎∈{Add, Stop}. Here, 𝑏is the current batch size
(a proxy for GPU utilization), Δ is the loss in the shared prefix,
and 𝑤is the number of waiting requests sharing the prefix
up to the new depth, indicating whether the locality cost
of this addition will be compensated by future activations.
Both RL policies optimize the reward R = throughputdecode.
Maximizing this encourages large batches and short decode
times (better prefix locality). The state is discretized into
( ˆ𝑏, ˆΔ, ˆ𝑤), where 𝑏and 𝑤use exponential bins, and Δ uses
coarse thresholds. The resulting table is small, hashable, and
converges quickly under moderate load.
Heuristic Policy. As a baseline, we encode domain intuition
as simple rules balancing two goals: maximizing GPU utiliza-
tion (large batches) and preserving prefix locality (avoiding
large drops in the shared chain). The heuristic always ac-
cepts candidates with zero chunk loss (free additions). When
the batch is small, it tolerates higher loss to avoid underuti-
lization. Otherwise, it admits a candidate only if the chunk
loss is within a fixed threshold, with slightly relaxed toler-
ance when many waiting requests share the resulting prefix
(anticipating amortization). If none of these conditions hold,
it stops and dispatches the batch. This policy requires no
training and converges immediately, but its fixed thresholds
cannot adapt to workload or hardware changes.
Contextual Bandit. To avoid hand-tuned thresholds, we
use a contextual bandit with Upper Confidence Bound (UCB)
selection [5]. Each batch-construction step is treated as an in-
dependent decision: given the discretized state ˆ𝑠= ( ˆ𝑏, ˆΔ, ˆ𝑤),
the policy selects the action that maximizes
UCB(ˆ𝑠,𝑎) = 𝜇(ˆ𝑠,𝑎)
𝑛(ˆ𝑠,𝑎) + 𝑐
√︄
ln𝑆
𝑛(ˆ𝑠,𝑎) .
Here, 𝜇(ˆ𝑠,𝑎) is the cumulative reward, 𝑛(ˆ𝑠,𝑎) is the num-
ber of times action 𝑎was taken in ˆ𝑠, 𝑆is the total number
of decisions, and 𝑐is the exploration coefficient. The first
term favors high-reward actions, while the second promotes
exploration of under-sampled ones.
Q-Learning Policy. As an alternative to the previous pol-
icy, we can also model batch construction as an episodic
reinforcement learning problem, where each episode begins
when forming a new batch and ends upon Stop or when the
waiting queue is exhausted. The Q-table [35] stores values
𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) for each (discretized state, action) pair and is updated
after each episode using:
𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) ←𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) + 𝛼

𝑟+ 𝛾max
𝑎′ 𝑄(𝑠′,𝑎′) −𝑄(𝑠,𝑎)

.
Here, 𝑟is the observed throughput, 𝑠′ is the next state, 𝛼
the learning rate, and 𝛾the discount factor, which biases the
agent toward near-term throughput, consistent with real-
time inference. We follow an 𝜀-greedy exploration strategy:
at each step, a random action is selected with probability
𝜀, and the greedy action arg max𝑎𝑄(𝑠,𝑎) otherwise. During
training, 𝜀decays from 1.0 to 𝜀min, transitioning from full
exploration to near-deterministic behavior. Qualitatively, we
expect this policy to perform better in the long term when
actions influence future batch composition.
At each step, FindBest returns the lowest-cost candidate
along with (Δ,𝑤), forming the state 𝑠. The policy (heuristic,
bandit, or Q-learning) then selects Add or Stop. If Add, the
request is activated and appended to the batch; otherwise,
8


--- Page 9 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
the batch is dispatched. After execution, the observed de-
code throughput is used as the reward: the bandit updates
its statistics and the Q-learning agent applies the Bellman
update. This has also been shown in Figure 10.
4.4
Integration with vLLM and SGLang
We integrate our scheduler as a lightweight layer on top of
both vLLM [17] and SGLang [44]. The Chunked Hash Tree
(implemented in C++) along with shared prefix chain track-
ing and reinforcement learning policies operates entirely at
the scheduler level. We will upstream our changes to these
repositories upon acceptance of our publication.
5
Evaluation
We evaluate Feather across diverse models, GPU configura-
tions, and real-world datasets and scenarios. Our evaluation
answers the following questions: (i) Under what workloads
do smaller homogeneous batches outperform larger hetero-
geneous ones? (ii) How effective is Feather’s Chunked Hash
Tree compared to traditional radix-tree-based approaches?
(iii) How do different design components of Feather (RL,
CHT) interact to produce end-to-end performance gains?
5.1
Experimental Setup
Models and Hardware. We evaluate three model families
across multiple sizes: Qwen 0.5B, 1.5B, 8B [6], LLaMA 3
8B [2], and LongChat 13B [20]. Experiments are run on an
NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada GPU [23] with 48 GB GDDR6, 96 MB
L2, and the maximum batch size is fixed at 500, which fits
within the GPU memory for most settings. We additionally
evaluate on an A100-80GB GPU for comparisons involving
PAT [41], as it is specifically optimized for this hardware.
Workloads. Following prior work, request arrivals are mod-
eled as a Poisson process, with length pruning applied as
required by each experiment. L-Eval [3] is a benchmark of
human-labeled query–response pairs spanning tasks such
as summarization and question answering, with sequence
lengths ranging from 2.7K to 210.5K tokens. LongBench [7]
is a collection of long-context samples across six task cate-
gories: multi-document QA, summarization, and code com-
pletion, with context lengths between 4K and 10K tokens.
Baselines. We compare Feather against state-of-the-art
LLM serving systems, all with prefix caching enabled. vLLM
[17] uses its default FCFS scheduling policy. SGLang [44] is
evaluated under FCFS, LPM, and DFS-W to cover its design
space. We also evaluate DynamicBatching [28] and PAT [41],
both implemented on top of vLLM: DynamicBatching adjusts
batch sizes based on runtime memory utilization and latency
constraints, while PAT is a prefix-aware attention kernel that
reduces redundant KV cache accesses via query packing.
Metrics. We report three key metrics. Throughput (toks/s)
measures the output tokens generated per second, reflect-
ing serving capacity and GPU utilization. Time between to-
kens (TBT) measures the average interval between decoded
tokens, reflecting responsiveness, especially in interactive
settings. We also track the average batch size per forward
pass to relate scheduling decisions to these metrics.
5.2
End-to-End Comparison: Feather vs Baselines
We evaluate a workload where the default configuration has
5 prefix groups3, each 5K tokens long, with roughly equal
request distribution, a request rate of 100 req/s, and 200
output tokens per request. Such workload configurations
are common in prior work [27, 41] evaluating LLM serving
systems. We vary these parameters to examine how Feather
compares to the baselines. The token budget is 32K tokens.
For Feather’s RL policy, we find that bandit and Q-learning
approaches perform similarly across most settings; unless
stated otherwise, we report results using the bandit policy.
Varying Input Request Rate. Figure 12(a) shows through-
put (toks/s) as a function of the request rate. Across all poli-
cies, throughput increases with the request rate before satu-
rating. Feather (on vLLM) consistently outperforms all base-
lines at every request rate. At 100 req/s, Feather achieves
roughly 4× the throughput of vLLM (FCFS). Notably, this
advantage is not driven by larger batch sizes. As shown in
Figure 12(b), Feather in general maintains a smaller aver-
age batch size than vLLM (FCFS), and beyond the vertical
line shown in the plot, Feather’s RL policy decides to have
completely homogeneous batches. This reinforces a key in-
sight: smaller, homogeneous batches outperform larger, hetero-
geneous ones. The gradual growth in Feather’s batch size
with increasing request rate reflects its ability to efficiently
aggregate more requests from the same prefix group into
the active batch without sacrificing locality. SGLang poli-
cies consistently operate at smaller batch sizes than vLLM,
as vLLM avoids double-counting shared prefix tokens to-
ward the token budget, allowing more requests per batch.
Dynamic Batching performs similarly to vLLM (FCFS), as
all KV caches fit within GPU memory. Figure 12(c) shows
time between tokens (TBT). Feather (on vLLM) achieves
substantially lower TBT than all baselines except SGLang
(FCFS), whose smaller batch sizes yield faster per-token gen-
eration. While SGLang’s LPM and DFS-W policies also use
small batch sizes, their TBT remains significantly higher
than Feather due to non-trivial scheduling overhead during
batch construction. Feather implemented on SGLang also
shows similar qualitative trends and outperforms all other
SGLang policies. Unless otherwise stated, all subsequent
results refer to Feather implemented on vLLM.
3We also evaluate workloads without prefix sharing and show Feather
performs on par with FCFS (§D.7).
9


--- Page 10 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
(a) Throughput
(b) Average Batch Size
(c) Time between tokens (TBT)
Figure 12. Poisson Workload
(a) Throughput
(b) Average Batch Size
Figure 13. Varying Number of Prefix Groups
(a) Throughput
(b) Average Batch Size
Figure 14. Varying Number of Decode Tokens
Varying Number of Prefix Groups. Figures 13(a) and 13(b)
show throughput and average batch size as functions of the
number of prefix groups. Increasing the number of prefix
groups introduces greater request heterogeneity, reducing
KV cache locality. This leads to a sharp throughput drop
for vLLM (FCFS), even when increasing from 1 to 2 prefix
groups. As the number of groups increases further, FCFS
degrades rapidly: beyond 20 groups, the KV cache footprint
exceeds HBM capacity, causing a sharp reduction in batch
size and increased recomputation. Feather mitigates this by
grouping requests with shared prefixes, increasing KV cache
reuse and avoiding premature evictions. As a result, Feather
maintains a more stable batch size and throughput across
all prefix group configurations, significantly outperforming
all baselines. At 100 prefix groups, Feather achieves 10×
higher throughput than vLLM (FCFS). SGLang’s LPM and
DFS-W policies partially mitigate evictions, achieving higher
throughput than FCFS (SGLang) at larger group counts.
Varying Number of Decode Tokens. Figures 14(a) and
14(b) show throughput and average batch size as functions of
decode tokens per request. Each decode requires a full sweep
over the KV cache. The policies exhibit two regimes sepa-
rated by a crossover around 20 decode tokens. In the prefill-
dominated regime (1–20 tokens), all policies behave similarly:
throughput increases modestly, and batch sizes converge as
prefills limit the impact of locality-aware scheduling. Be-
yond 20 tokens, the policies diverge sharply. Feather scales
strongly with decode length, reaching ∼3800 toks/s at 200 to-
kens—over 3× higher than SGLang policies. This gain arises
from two factors. First, longer decode phases amplify locality
Figure 15. Varying Shared
Prefix Tokens
Figure 16. Varying Radix
Tree Sharing Levels
Figure 17. Feather vs PAT
Figure 18. CPU overhead
across repeated KV cache sweeps. Second, a greater number
of decode iterations allows the scheduler to accumulate more
same-prefix requests, forming larger, more homogeneous
batches. Together, these effects drive the steady increase in
Feather’s batch size and throughput. SGLang policies follow
the opposite trajectory in batch size. Because shared prefix
tokens count toward the token budget, each prefill consumes
∼5K tokens, while each decode step contributes only one
token. As the decode length increases, fewer prefills occur
per step, reducing the number of new requests for batching.
Varying Number of Shared Prefix Tokens. Figure 15
shows throughput across the length of the shared prefix.
As expected, longer prefixes increase prefill compute and
KV cache pressure, reducing throughput across policies.
Feather’s advantage grows with prefix length, driven by
higher locality gains as sequences lengthen.
Varying Models. Feather consistently achieves the high-
est throughput across models and outperforms baselines in
nearly all cases. Its relative throughput advantage increases
with model size, as larger models spend more time in atten-
tion, amplifying the benefits of KV-cache locality exploited
by Feather. All graphs are shown in §D.2. We also compare
Feather with other policies (§D.3) for the LongChat 13B
model, where we achieve up to 22× higher throughput com-
pared to vLLM’s FCFS for larger number of prefix groups.
Varying Radix Tree Levels. Figure 16 shows throughput
under different radix-tree sharing levels (seen in §3.1). All
experiments use a fixed total sequence length of 4000 tokens
per request. For baseline policies like vLLM’s FCFS, going
from 1 to 2 or more levels of the radix tree reduces the locality
in KV cache traversal and, hence, degrades throughput. In
10


--- Page 11 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
(a) Mean
(b) Sum
Figure 19. DRAM Bandwidth Utilization
(a) CPU Scheduler Overhead
(b) Throughput
Figure 20. Sensitivity to Chunk Size
contrast, Feather actively preserves prefix homogeneity
within batches, leading to stable throughput at all levels.
Comparison with PAT. Figure 17 compares throughput
across varying request rates for PAT, vLLM (FCFS), and
Feather on an A100-80GB GPU. PAT is specifically opti-
mized for this hardware through custom prefix-aware ker-
nels. Despite this, Feather consistently matches or outper-
forms PAT across all request rates, demonstrating strong
performance even on different hardware. This is particularly
notable because Feather operates purely at the scheduling
layer, without any kernel-level modifications. A naive in-
tegration of Feather and PAT performs quite similarly to
Feather over most regimes. As future work, we aim to more
tightly integrate Feather with prefix-aware attention ker-
nels, enabling deeper co-design between the scheduler and
kernel-level optimizations to further improve performance.
5.3
Micro-Benchmarks
Comparing Scheduler Compute Overhead across Dif-
ferent Policies. Figure 18 shows the CPU scheduling over-
head for each policy across different shared prefix lengths.
We include an Oracle policy where the caller supplies prefix
group identifiers with each request. This allows the scheduler
to batch same-prefix requests without any prefix matching
overhead, resulting in effectively zero scheduling cost while
preserving locality. We also show the GPU execution time
for this Oracle scheduling policy. All three realistic poli-
cies—Feather, LPM, and DFS-W— incur higher overhead as
the prefix length increases due to deeper radix-tree traversals
and larger key comparisons. However, their growth rates
diverge significantly. At 20K tokens, LPM and DFS-W incur
roughly 1,000× higher overhead than Feather. At larger
sequence lengths, their scheduling overhead exceeds the Or-
acle GPU execution time by up to 10×. This indicates that
CPU overhead alone can negate the benefits of cache-aware
batching. In contrast, Feather remains below 1% of GPU exe-
cution time across the entire range. We do a detailed analysis
of the overheads of LPM and DFS-W policies in §D.4.
Figure 21. CHT vs. Radix
Tree
Figure 22. Feather: with
and without RL
Mean DRAM Activity across Various Sequence Lengths.
Figure 19(a) shows mean DRAM bandwidth utilization, while
Figure 19(b) shows the total DRAM usage over the full infer-
ence duration (a proxy for total memory accessed) across poli-
cies and shared prefix lengths. Feather consistently achieves
the highest bandwidth utilization due to improved spatial
locality, leading to more effective prefetching. Furthermore,
more homogeneous batches also increase temporal locality,
which is reflected in lower total DRAM usage. SGLang’s DFS-
W and LPM exhibit lower mean DRAM utilization because of
CPU scheduler stalls. However, they also achieve lower nor-
malized total DRAM usage, as their prefix-aware scheduling
occasionally forms homogeneous batches, allowing them to
partially benefit from memory locality.
Effect of Chunk Size. Figures 20(a) and 20(b) show CPU
overhead and throughput across shared prefix lengths for dif-
ferent chunk sizes in Feather’s CHT. Increasing the chunk
size reduces CPU overhead by enabling coarser-grained
matching; a chunk size of 1 is equivalent to an exact radix
tree. Overhead rises with prefix length due to more hash com-
parisons, while throughput declines due to higher KV cache
memory pressure. At larger prefix lengths, the overhead
gap between chunk size 1 and larger sizes widens substan-
tially, yet throughput remains similar across all chunk sizes,
suggesting that the CPU scheduling cost, even at the finest
granularity, is not the primary bottleneck in our CHT. Over-
all, CHT is robust against chunk size selection, and even its
radix tree-equivalent configuration (chunk size 1) achieves
significantly better efficiency than a conventional radix tree.
5.4
Ablation Study
What if we Replace the Chunked Hash Tree with a
Radix Tree? Figure 21 compares throughput and TBT when
replacing CHT with a radix tree under the same RL policy.
Across all prefix lengths, the radix tree yields much lower
throughput. Despite homogeneous RL batching, higher CPU
overhead causes frequent GPU stalls. This appears as higher
TBT, indicating GPU idle time due to scheduling delays. CHT
avoids this by reducing scheduling overhead, enabling higher
GPU utilization and throughput.
What if We Remove RL?. Figure 22 compares throughput
with and without RL at low input rates. Without RL, CHT
still selects the best request, but batching never halts and
always maximizes batch size. At <5 req/s, removing RL has
little effect. Both fall back to FCFS, adding requests to keep
GPUs utilized. Beyond this, the behaviors diverge. With RL,
11


--- Page 12 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Feather detects homogeneous requests and stops batch-
ing at the right time, achieving higher throughput despite
smaller average batch sizes. At higher rates than shown in the
figure, large pools enable even non-RL to form ∼500-request
homogeneous batches, leading the two curves to converge.
These results show that Feather’s RL policy makes load-
aware decisions: it falls back to FCFS under low utilization
to avoid GPU starvation, and closes batch formation when
homogeneity is achievable, maximizing overall throughput.
Interested readers can see §D for additional results.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we showed that maximizing batch size alone
is not sufficient for efficient LLM serving during the decode
phase. Instead, we identified prefix homogeneity, the extent
of the prefix shared across all requests in a batch, as a more
important factor for improving memory locality and reduc-
ing redundant KV cache accesses. Higher batch sizes lead
to better GPU utilization but also reduce the length of the
prefix shared across all requests. Existing approaches ignore
this aspect and also rely on expensive prefix detection mech-
anisms that introduce significant CPU overhead. To address
these gaps, we proposed Feather, a lightweight prefix-aware
scheduler that balances this trade-off between batch size and
prefix homogeneity. It uses a Chunked Hash Tree (CHT)
for fast prefix detection and a reinforcement learning-based
batching policy that decides when to stop batch formation
based on the loss in prefix homogeneity due to the addition
of a new request. Our results show that Feather consistently
improves end-to-end throughput across diverse workloads
while keeping scheduling overhead low. As future work, we
plan to extend this approach to distributed and multi-GPU
settings. We are also looking into more adaptive and light-
weight learning policies that can improve robustness across
different workloads and deployment scenarios.
References
[1] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav S. Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran
Ramjee. 2024. Taming throughput-latency tradeoff in LLM inference
with sarathi-serve. In Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Conference
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Associa-
tion.
[2] AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 Model Card. (2024). https://github.com/meta-
llama/llama3/blob/main/MODEL_CARD.md
[3] Chenxin An, Shansan Gong, Ming Zhong, Xingjian Zhao, Mukai Li,
Jun Zhang, Lingpeng Kong, and Xipeng Qiu. 2024. L-Eval: Insti-
tuting Standardized Evaluation for Long Context Language Models.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for
Computational Linguistics. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.776
[4] Anthropic. 2024. Claude. https://claude.ai.
[5] Peter Auer, Nicolò Cesa-Bianchi, and Paul Fischer. 2002. Finite-time
Analysis of the Multiarmed Bandit Problem. Machine Learning (2002).
doi:10.1023/A:1013689704352
[6] Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng,
Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, Binyuan Hui, Luo Ji, Mei
Li, Junyang Lin, Runji Lin, Dayiheng Liu, Gao Liu, Chengqiang Lu,
Keming Lu, Jianxin Ma, Rui Men, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren,
Chuanqi Tan, Sinan Tan, Jianhong Tu, Peng Wang, Shijie Wang, Wei
Wang, Shengguang Wu, Benfeng Xu, Jin Xu, An Yang, Hao Yang,
Jian Yang, Shusheng Yang, Yang Yao, Bowen Yu, Hongyi Yuan, Zheng
Yuan, Jianwei Zhang, Xingxuan Zhang, Yichang Zhang, Zhenru Zhang,
Chang Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Xiaohuan Zhou, and Tianhang Zhu. 2023.
Qwen Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 (2023).
[7] Yushi Bai, Shangqing Tu, Jiajie Zhang, Hao Peng, Xiaozhi Wang,
Xin Lv, Shulin Cao, Jiazheng Xu, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang,
and Juanzi Li. 2025. LongBench v2: Towards Deeper Understanding
and Reasoning on Realistic Long-context Multitasks. In Proceedings
of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi:10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.183
[8] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language models are few-
shot learners. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc.
[9] Jerry Chee, Yaohui Cai, Volodymyr Kuleshov, and Christopher De Sa.
2023. QuIP: 2-bit quantization of large language models with guaran-
tees. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc.
[10] Sumit Kumar Dam, Choong Seon Hong, Yu Qiao, and Chaoning
Zhang. 2024.
A Complete Survey on LLM-based AI Chatbots.
arXiv:2406.16937 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.16937
[11] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher
Ré. 2022. FLASHATTENTION: fast and memory-efficient exact at-
tention with IO-awareness. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran Asso-
ciates Inc.
[12] DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao
Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang,
Chong Ruan, Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen, Dongjie Ji,
Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai, Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting
Chen, Guowei Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, Haocheng Wang,
Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin, Huazuo Gao, Hui Li,
Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang, Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei
Wang, Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie Qiu, Junlong
Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu, Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin
Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang
Zhao, Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang, Mingchuan
Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang, Mingming Li, Ning Tian,
Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang, Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao
Zhu, Qinyu Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge, Ruisong
Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen,
S. S. Li, Shanghao Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing
Wu, Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu Wang, Shuang
Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou, Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun,
Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun, W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei
An, Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu, Wentao Zhang,
X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang, Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan
Wang, Xiaojin Shen, Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen,
Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin
Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu, Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou,
Xinyu Yang, Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y. K. Li, Y. Q.
Wang, Y. X. Wei, Y. X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yanhong Xu, Yanhong Xu,
Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui
12


--- Page 13 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Wang, Yi Yu, Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong, Ying
He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yixuan Tan, Yiyang Ma,
Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo, Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan
Wang, Yue Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan Xiong,
Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxiang You, Yuxuan Liu,
Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z. Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu,
Zhean Xu, Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan Zhang,
Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhigang Yan, Zhihong Shao,
Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu, Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia
Zhu, Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi Gao, and Zizheng
Pan. 2025. DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report. arXiv:2412.19437 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437
[13] Xin Luna Dong, Seungwhan Moon, Yifan Ethan Xu, Kshitiz Malik, and
Zhou Yu. 2023. Towards Next-Generation Intelligent Assistants Lever-
aging LLM Techniques. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. Association
for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3580305.3599572
[14] Google. 2024. Gemini. https://gemini.google.com.
[15] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang,
Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, Kai Dang, Yang
Fan, Yichang Zhang, An Yang, Rui Men, Fei Huang, Bo Zheng, Yibo
Miao, Shanghaoran Quan, Yunlong Feng, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng
Ren, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2024. Qwen2.5-Coder Technical
Report. arXiv:2409.12186 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12186
[16] Aditya K. Kamath, Ramya Prabhu, Jayashree Mohan, Simon Pe-
ter, Ramachandran Ramjee, and Ashish Panwar. 2025.
POD-
Attention: Unlocking Full Prefill-Decode Overlap for Faster LLM In-
ference. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference
on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 2. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.
1145/3676641.3715996
[17] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serv-
ing with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles. Association for Computing Machinery.
doi:10.1145/3600006.3613165
[18] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau
Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. Curran As-
sociates, Inc. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/
file/6b493230205f780e1bc26945df7481e5-Paper.pdf
[19] Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir
Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau
Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020.
Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks.
In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc.
[20] Dacheng Li, Rulin Shao, Anze Xie, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, Xuezhe Ma, and Hao Zhang. 2023.
How Long Can Open-Source LLMs Truly Promise on Context Length?
https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-06-29-longchat
[21] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Guangxuan Xiao,
and Song Han. 2025. AWQ: Activation-aware Weight Quantization
for On-Device LLM Compression and Acceleration. (2025). doi:10.
1145/3714983.3714987
[22] Zejia Lin, Hongxin Xu, Guanyi Chen, Zhiguang Chen, Yutong Lu,
and Xianwei Zhang. 2026. Bullet: Boosting GPU Utilization for LLM
Serving via Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Orchestration. In Proceedings
of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support
for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2. As-
sociation for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3779212.3790135
[23] NVIDIA Corporation. 2024. NVIDIA RTX 6000 Ada Generation Datasheet.
https://resources.nvidia.com/en-us-briefcase-for-datasheets/proviz-
print-rtx6000-1?ncid=no-ncid Accessed: January 25, 2026.
[24] NVIDIA Corporation. 2026.
NVIDIA Data Center GPU Manager
(DCGM) Documentation. https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/dcgm/
latest/user-guide/.
[25] OpenAI. 2024. ChatGPT. https://chatgpt.com.
[26] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-
mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko
Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor
Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haiming
Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine,
Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff,
Oleg Boiko, Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman,
Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai, Rosie Camp-
bell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael,
Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen,
Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunx-
ing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch, Damien
Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve Dowling, Sheila Dunning,
Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti, Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus,
Niko Felix, Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford,
Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik Goel, Tarun Gogineni,
Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Graf-
stein, Scott Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane Gu,
Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris, Yuchen He, Mike
Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey,
Peter Hoeschele, Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin
Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain, Joanne Jang, Angela
Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn,
Heewoo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Kamali, Ingmar Kan-
itscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick,
Jong Wook Kim, Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirchner,
Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo, Łukasz Kondraciuk, An-
drew Kondrich, Aris Konstantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger,
Vishal Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan Leike, Jade Leung,
Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li, Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue, Anna Makanju,
Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca
Martin, Katie Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer McK-
inney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan, Jake McNeil, David Med-
ina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko,
Pamela Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel Mossing,
Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David Mély, Ashvin Nair, Rei-
ichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak, Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo,
Hyeonwoo Noh, Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex
Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambattista Parascandolo,
Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng,
Adam Perelman, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov, Hen-
rique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Pokorny, Michelle Pokrass,
Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Powell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth
Proehl, Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh, Cameron
Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach, Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted,
Henri Roussez, Nick Ryder, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani San-
turkar, Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John Schulman,
Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah
Shoker, Pranav Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens,
Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin Sokolowsky, Yang
Song, Natalie Staudacher, Felipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya
Sutskever, Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson, Phil Tillet,
Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng, Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley,
Jerry Tworek, Juan Felipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vi-
jayvergiya, Chelsea Voss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang, Alvin
13


--- Page 14 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei, CJ Weinmann, Akila
Welihinda, Peter Welinder, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff,
Dave Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah Wong, Lau-
ren Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu, Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu,
Sarah Yoo, Kevin Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers,
Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tianhao Zheng, Jun-
tang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Barret Zoph. 2024. GPT-4 Technical
Report. arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774
[27] Zaifeng Pan, Yitong Ding, Yue Guan, Zheng Wang, Zhongkai Yu,
Xulong Tang, Yida Wang, and Yufei Ding. 2025.
FastTree: Op-
timizing Attention Kernel and Runtime for Tree-Structured LLM
Inference. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems. ML-
Sys.
https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2025/file/
96894468eb44631a32d7ebd56f9892c7-Paper-Conference.pdf
[28] Bowen Pang, Kai Li, and Feifan Wang. 2025. Optimizing LLM Infer-
ence Throughput via Memory-aware and SLA-constrained Dynamic
Batching. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05248 (2025).
[29] Ivy Bo Peng, Roberto Gioiosa, Gokcen Kestor, Pietro Cicotti, Er-
win Laure, and Stefano Markidis. 2017. Exploring the Performance
Benefit of Hybrid Memory System on HPC Environments. In 2017
IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
Workshops (IPDPSW). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ipdpsw.2017.115
[30] Ethan Perez, Douwe Kiela, and Kyunghyun Cho. 2021.
True
Few-Shot Learning with Language Models. In Advances in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems.
Curran
Associates,
Inc.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2021/file/
5c04925674920eb58467fb52ce4ef728-Paper.pdf
[31] Ramya Prabhu, Ajay Nayak, Jayashree Mohan, Ramachandran Ramjee,
and Ashish Panwar. 2025. vAttention: Dynamic Memory Manage-
ment for Serving LLMs without PagedAttention. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1. Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3669940.3707256
[32] Qidong Su, Wei Zhao, Xin Li, Muralidhar Andoorveedu, Chenhao
Jiang, Zhanda Zhu, Kevin Song, Christina Giannoula, and Gennady
Pekhimenko. 2025. Seesaw: High-throughput LLM Inference via Model
Re-sharding. arXiv:2503.06433 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.
06433
[33] The Big Prompt Library Contributors. 2024. The Big Prompt Library:
A Collection of Prompts, System Prompts and LLM Instructions. https:
//github.com/0xeb/TheBigPromptLibrary. GitHub repository.
[34] vLLM Project Contributors. 2024. Automatic Prefix Caching. https://
docs.vllm.ai/en/stable/design/prefix_caching/. vLLM Documentation.
Accessed: 2026-03-10.
[35] Christopher J. C. H. Watkins and Peter Dayan. 1992. Q-Learning.
Machine Learning (1992). doi:10.1007/BF00992698
[36] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebas-
tian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald
Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang,
Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. 2022. Emergent Abilities of Large Lan-
guage Models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2022).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD Survey Certification.
[37] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu,
and Xin Jin. 2024. LoongServe: Efficiently Serving Long-Context Large
Language Models with Elastic Sequence Parallelism. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles.
Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.1145/3694715.3695948
[38] Jinwei Yao, Kaiqi Chen, Kexun Zhang, Jiaxuan You, Binhang
Yuan, Zeke Wang, and Tao Lin. 2024.
DeFT: Decoding with
Flash Tree-attention for Efficient Tree-structured LLM Inference.
In International Conference on Learning Representations.
https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:268819748
[39] Jiayi Yao, Hanchen Li, Yuhan Liu, Siddhant Ray, Yihua Cheng, Qizheng
Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shan Lu, and Junchen Jiang. 2025. CacheBlend:
Fast Large Language Model Serving for RAG with Cached Knowl-
edge Fusion. In Proceedings of the Twentieth European Conference
on Computer Systems. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.
1145/3689031.3696098
[40] Lu Ye, Ze Tao, Yong Huang, and Yang Li. 2024. ChunkAttention: Effi-
cient Self-Attention with Prefix-Aware KV Cache and Two-Phase Par-
tition. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). Association
for Computational Linguistics. doi:10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.623
[41] Jinjun Yi, Zhixin Zhao, Yitao Hu, Ke Yan, Weiwei Sun, Hao Wang,
Laiping Zhao, Yuhao Zhang, Wenxin Li, and Keqiu Li. 2026. PAT:
Accelerating LLM Decoding via Prefix-Aware Attention with Re-
source Efficient Multi-Tile Kernel. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2. Association for Com-
puting Machinery. doi:10.1145/3779212.3790200
[42] Chen Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shu Liu, Woosuk Kwon, Xiangxi Mo, Yufeng
Wang, Xiaoxuan Liu, Kaichao You, Zhuohan Li, Mingsheng Long,
Jidong Zhai, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2025. Jenga: Effec-
tive Memory Management for Serving LLM with Heterogeneity.
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.
1145/3731569.3764823
[43] Yilong Zhao, Shuo Yang, Kan Zhu, Lianmin Zheng, Baris Kasikci,
Yifan Qiao, Yang Zhou, Jiarong Xing, and Ion Stoica. 2026. Blend-
Serve: Optimizing Offline Inference with Resource-Aware Batch-
ing. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 2. Association for Computing Machinery. doi:10.
1145/3779212.3790133
[44] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff
Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Sto-
ica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024.
SGLang: efficient execution of structured language model programs.
In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates Inc.
[45] Wanyi Zheng, Minxian Xu, Shengye Song, and Kejiang Ye. 2025.
BucketServe: Bucket-Based Dynamic Batching for Smart and Ef-
ficient LLM Inference Serving.
arXiv:2507.17120 [cs.DC]
https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2507.17120
[46] Zhen Zheng, Xin Ji, Taosong Fang, Fanghao Zhou, Chuanjie Liu, and
Gang Peng. 2025. BatchLLM: Optimizing Large Batched LLM Inference
with Global Prefix Sharing and Throughput-oriented Token Batching.
arXiv:2412.03594 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03594
[47] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: disaggregat-
ing prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model
serving. In Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Conference on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation. USENIX Association.
A
Experimental Setup of §3.1
A.1
Two Large Prefixes - Heterogeneity
Figure 23 shows the visualization of the experiment corre-
sponding to takeaway 1 of §3. We have a total of 500 requests,
each using one of the prefixes 𝐴or 𝐵. These prefixes are 10K
tokens long, and each query has a unique 20 token-long suf-
fix. 𝑓∈[0, 1] denotes the fraction of requests using prefix 𝐴.
When 𝑓is either 0 or 1, the batch is homogeneous; otherwise,
two prefix groups coexist.
14


--- Page 15 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
A.2
Fractional Sharing
Figure 24 shows the visualization of the experiment corre-
sponding to takeaway 2 of §3. We have a total of 100 requests,
each with a length of 2K tokens. Each request shares a com-
mon prefix of length 2𝐾× 𝑓tokens, where 𝑓∈[0, 1], with
the remaining 2𝐾× (1 −𝑓) unique.
A.3
Radix Tree Sharing Patterns
Figure 25 shows the visualization corresponding to takeaway
4 in §3. We consider four different radix tree sharing pat-
terns. The sequence length in each case is fixed at 4𝐿. (i) In
Figure 25(a), the entire 4𝐿prefix is shared across all requests.
(ii) In Figure 25(b), the tree has two levels. The first level, of
length 𝐿, is shared by all requests, while the second level con-
sists of two branches, each of length 3𝐿. (iii) In Figure 25(c),
the tree has three levels with lengths 𝐿, 𝐿, and 2𝐿, and with
1, 2, and 4 branches at each level, respectively. (iv) In Fig-
ure 25(d), the tree has four levels, each of length 𝐿, with 1, 2,
4, and 8 branches at successive levels.
B
Additional Results from §3.1
Below, we present a set of experiments to strengthen our
observations from §3.1 regarding prefix homogeneity.
B.1
Effect of Total KV Cache Size
Figure 26 illustrates vLLM’s FCFS throughput alongside the
total KV cache memory footprint for prefix tokens in the
Qwen 0.5B model, evaluated across varying prefix lengths
and numbers of prefix groups. As expected, throughput de-
creases as the prefix sequence length increases. A more pro-
nounced drop is observed when the number of prefix groups
increases from 1 to 2, which can be attributed to a loss of
locality. Beyond this point, however, throughput remains
relatively stable. This suggests that increasing the number of
prefix groups further does not significantly degrade temporal
or spatial locality, indicating that most of the locality loss oc-
curs in the transition from a single group to multiple groups.
Moreover, this drop from 1 to 2 prefix groups is observable
only for larger shared prefix lengths where temporal and
spatial locality benefits kick in.
Another question to ask if the high throughput values
are correlated with the entire KV cache working set fitting
into one of the cache levels. L1 cache size is typically in KBs,
which is too small even for tens of tokens. Therefore, we
focus on the L2 cache, which is 96 MB in size for the GPU on
which these experiments were run. In the top-left region of
the heatmap, the entire KV cache fits within this size. How-
ever, no clear throughput degradation is observed once this
Figure 23. Two Large Prefixes
Figure 24. Fractional Sharing
(a)
1-level
(b) 2 levels
(c) 3 levels
(d) 4 levels
Figure 25. Radix Tree Sharing Levels
(a) Throughput
(b) KV Cache Memory
Figure 26. Throughput and KV Cache Size
(a) Visualization
(b) Throughput
Figure 27. Key Observations on Prefix Homogeneity
threshold is exceeded. This indicates that effective spatial
and temporal locality depend more on whether the subset of
KV blocks actively accessed by batched requests at a given
time (i.e. the dynamic working set) fits in the L2 cache. It
is intuitive that this dynamic working set is smaller in size
for prefix-homogeneous batches which explains the higher
throughput gains achieved for such batches. Moreover, even
for such a small model, the model weights are already large
enough to prevent the entire KV cache to reside in L2. There-
fore, performance gains due to prefix homogeneity primarily
stem from a smaller dynamic working set of the KV cache.
B.2
Key Observations on Prefix Homogeneity
We consider an additional experiment where each request
has a sequence length of 10𝐾tokens. As illustrated in Fig-
ure 27(a), a fraction 𝑓1 ∈[0, 1] of this sequence is shared as
a common prefix across all 500 requests in the batch. The
remaining 10𝐾(1 −𝑓1) tokens constitute the suffix of each
request. Within the batch, a fraction 𝑓2 ∈[0, 1] of requests
share an identical suffix, denoted as 𝐴. The remaining frac-
tion (1−𝑓2) has suffixes drawn from one of 50 distinct groups,
15


--- Page 16 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Variable
Explanation
𝑇
Sequence length in tokens
𝐶
Number of chunks in a sequence
𝐾
Chunk size
𝐻
Hash vector
𝑟
Request
𝑊
Number of waiting requests
𝑊ℎ
Average number of waiting requests sharing a hash
(𝑙∗,ℎ∗)
Shared prefix tip
ℎ𝑟
𝑙
Hash at level 𝑙of request 𝑟
working_set
Working set
waiting
Reverse index from hashes to waiting requests
waiting_heap
Min-heap
request_hashes
Map from request to its hash vector
miss
Map from request to its missing count
active
Set of requests present in the current batch
waiting_requests
Set of waiting requests
ref
Map from hash to number of active requests sharing
it
Table 2. Variables and Notations Used
𝐵1, . . . , 𝐵50. Figure 27(b) presents the throughput as we vary
𝑓1 and 𝑓2. Consistent with the observations in §3.1, increasing
𝑓1 improves throughput due to enhanced temporal and spa-
tial locality in KV cache accesses. Additionally, we observe a
sharp increase in throughput when 𝑓2 changes from 0.8 to
1. This occurs because at 𝑓2 = 1, the entire batch becomes
homogeneous, resulting in fully aligned KV cache traversal.
Throughput is significantly lower at smaller values of 𝑓1,
primarily because limited GPU memory leads to frequent
cache evictions. This is further supported by the increase in
throughput with rising 𝑓2 at low 𝑓1, as more requests share
the suffix 𝐴, reducing eviction frequency. However, once
the working set fits within GPU memory (around 𝑓1 = 0.8),
throughput remains nearly constant for all 𝑓2 < 1, indicating
that residual heterogeneity has minimal impact. Overall, this
experiment consolidates the key insights discussed in §3.1.
C
Operations of Chunked Hash Tree
This section provides pseudo-codes and details of various
algorithms used in the Chunked Hash Tree (§4.2).
C.1
Variables and Notations
Table 2 provides a list of all the variables and notations used
in the following pseudo-codes.
C.2
Prefix Hash Computation
The goal is to efficiently compute prefix-aligned hashes at
fixed chunk boundaries. Algorithm 1 computes the hash
vector for a token sequence using an incremental hashing
scheme (Figure 28). Instead of recomputing hashes for each
prefix independently, the algorithm maintains a streaming
hash state that is updated once per token. The algorithm
processes each token exactly once and performs constant-
time updates to the hash state. As a result, it runs in O(𝑇)
time and produces 𝐶= ⌈𝑇/𝐾⌉hash values, yielding O(𝐶)
output space. While Algorithm 1 processes tokens sequen-
tially, the prefix-hash vector can equivalently be computed
Figure 28. Hash Computation in Chunked Hash Tree
in parallel across chunks. The key property we want is that
all requests sharing the first 𝑐· 𝐾tokens produce an identi-
cal ℎ𝑐. This is achieved by partitioning the token sequence
into chunks 𝑆𝑐= (𝑡(𝑐−1)𝐾+1, . . . ,𝑡𝑐𝐾), hashing each chunk
independently in parallel, and then chaining the results via
ℎ𝑐= Hash(ℎ𝑐−1 ∥Hash(𝑆𝑐)), with ℎ0 set to a fixed initial-
ization constant (Algorithm 2). With parallel workers, the
dominant hashing phase runs in O(𝐾) per worker rather
than O(𝑇) sequentially, reducing overall wall-clock time to
O(𝐾+ 𝐶); the subsequent chaining pass costs only O(𝐶)
and is negligible in practice. This parallelization is most ben-
eficial when 𝐾is large, as each chunk contains more tokens
and therefore represents a heavier independent unit of work,
allowing parallel workers to amortize scheduling overhead
across a larger payload and yielding greater absolute speedup
over the sequential baseline. Both algorithms produce a
hash vector satisfying the prefix-consistency property—all
requests sharing the first 𝑐· 𝐾tokens yield the same ℎ𝑐, yet
the two vectors differ in their actual hash values, as Algo-
rithm 2 is a distinct formulation rather than a parallelized
execution of Algorithm 1.
C.3
Insertion
Algorithm 3 provides the pseudo-code for the Insert proce-
dure. Given a request with a token sequence, we compute
its cumulative prefix-hash vector using ComputeHashes
and store it in a dictionary that maps each request to its
hashes for easier reuse later (lines 1-2). For each level, we
retrieve the corresponding hash and check whether the tuple
is present in the working set; if not, the missing count is in-
cremented (lines 6-7). Simultaneously, the request is inserted
into the reverse index (line 9), which maps each hash to the
set of waiting requests containing it and supports efficient
Algorithm 1 ComputeHashes(S, K)
Require: Token sequence (𝑡1, . . . ,𝑡𝑇); chunk size 𝐾
Ensure: Cumulative prefix-hash vector 𝐻= (ℎ1, . . . ,ℎ𝐶)
1: 𝐻←[];
𝐶←⌈𝑇/𝐾⌉
2: Initialise incremental xxHash-64 state 𝑠
3: for 𝑖←1 to 𝑇do
4:
Feed 𝑡𝑖into 𝑠
5:
if 𝑖mod 𝐾= 0 or 𝑖= 𝑇then
6:
𝐻.Append(Digest(𝑠))
7:
end if
8: end for
9: return 𝐻
16


--- Page 17 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Algorithm 2 ComputeHashesParallel(S, K)
Require: Token sequence (𝑡1, . . . ,𝑡𝑇); chunk size 𝐾
Ensure: Cumulative prefix-hash vector 𝐻= (ℎ1, . . . ,ℎ𝐶)
1: 𝐶←⌈𝑇/𝐾⌉
2: ℎ0 ←InitConst
3: parallel for 𝑐←1 to 𝐶do
⊲Independent per-chunk
hashes
4:
𝑆𝑐←(𝑡(𝑐−1)𝐾+1, . . . ,𝑡min(𝑐𝐾,𝑇))
5:
ℓ𝑐←Hash(𝑆𝑐)
⊲Each chunk hashed
independently
6: end parallel for
7: for 𝑐←1 to 𝐶do
⊲Sequential prefix chaining
8:
ℎ𝑐←Hash(ℎ𝑐−1 ∥ℓ𝑐)
9: end for
10: return 𝐻= (ℎ1, . . . ,ℎ𝐶)
Algorithm 3 Insert(r, S)
Require: 𝑟; token sequence 𝑆; working_set; waiting;
waiting_heap
Ensure: 𝑟registered and ready for scheduling
1: 𝐻𝑟←ComputeHashes(𝑆, 𝐾)
2: request_hashes[𝑟] ←𝐻𝑟
3: 𝑚𝑟←0
4: for ℓ←1 to |𝐻𝑟| do
5:
ℎ←ℎ𝑟
ℓ
6:
if (ℓ,ℎ) ∉working_set then
7:
𝑚𝑟←𝑚𝑟+ 1
8:
end if
9:
waiting[ℎ] ←waiting[ℎ] ∪{𝑟}
10: end for
11: miss[𝑟] ←𝑚𝑟
12: waiting_heap.Push(𝑚𝑟, 𝑟)
lookup of prefix-sharing candidates. After processing all lev-
els, we store the miss count in a map and insert the tuple
of miss count and the request into the min-heap, which is
keyed by missing count, enabling efficient retrieval of the
most compatible request (lines 11-12). The design avoids
any updates to the working set or reference counts during
insertion, ensuring low overhead.
C.4
Finding the Best Request
The FindBest procedure selects the most compatible wait-
ing request by querying the min-heap while skipping stale
entries arising from lazy updates until a valid minimum is
found (lines 6-8). Once a candidate is identified, it is rein-
serted into the heap for future activations in case the RL
policy decides to add this request to the batch (line 9), and
three quantities are computed without modifying the system
state: the current tip depth, the prospective depth, and the
number of peers sharing the resulting prefix. The prospective
depth is obtained via a backward scan over the cumulative
Algorithm 4 FindBest()
Require: waiting_heap;
miss;
active;
tip
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗);
working_set; request_hashes
Ensure: (𝑟∗, ℓ∗
before, ℓ∗
after, peers) or ⊥
1: if waiting_requests = ∅then return ⊥
2: end if
3: if cache_valid then return cached_result
4: end if
5: while waiting_heap ≠∅do
6:
(𝑚,𝑟) ←waiting_heap.Pop()
7:
if 𝑟∈active or 𝑟∉miss or miss[𝑟] ≠𝑚then
continue
8:
end if
9:
𝑟∗←𝑟;
waiting_heap.Push(𝑚,𝑟∗)
⊲restore for
future calls
10:
ℓ∗
before ←ℓ∗
11:
ℓ∗
after ←ℓwhere ℓis the largest ℓ≤min(ℓ∗, |𝐻𝑟∗|)
s.t. (ℓ,ℎ𝑟∗
ℓ) ∈working_set
12:
peers ←|{𝑤∈waiting_requests : ℎ𝑤
ℓ∗
after = ℎ𝑟∗
ℓ∗
after }|
13:
Cache and return (𝑟∗, ℓ∗
before, ℓ∗
after, peers)
14: end while
15: return ⊥
hash vector, selecting the deepest level such that the corre-
sponding level-hash tuple exists in the working set, which
corresponds to the least common ancestor with the active
set under the current state. The peer count is computed by
counting waiting requests whose hash at that level matches
that of the candidate request. The result is cached and reused
until either the working set or the waiting queue changes,
avoiding redundant recomputation across repeated calls. If
no valid request is found, the procedure returns ⊥.
C.5
Adding a Request to the Active Batch
Given a request with its prefix-hash vector, the AddToBatch
procedure promotes it to the active set (line 1) and updates
the working set, reference counts, and other metadata in a
single backward pass over the prefix-hash vector. For each
level, if the reference count of the corresponding hash is zero
(no other active request shares it), the level-hash tuple is
inserted into the working set, and all corresponding wait-
ing requests have their miss counts decremented and are
reinserted into the waiting heap (lines 7-12). The reference
counts are incremented at all levels (line 14). In parallel, the
shared prefix tip is recomputed by tracking the deepest level
at which the level-hash tuple remains in the working set;
the first such match during the backward traversal deter-
mines the new tip (lines 15-17), while the loop continues to
ensure that all state updates are applied. If this is the first
active request, the tip is initialized directly to the end of its
prefix-hash vector.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Algorithm 5 AddToBatch(r)
Require: 𝐻𝑟; ref; working_set; waiting; miss; waiting_heap;
tip (ℓ∗,ℎ∗); active
Ensure: Updated ref, working_set, miss, (ℓ∗,ℎ∗)
1: active
←
active ∪{𝑟};
waiting_requests
←
waiting_requests \ {𝑟}
2: if |active| = 1 then
3:
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(|𝐻𝑟|, ℎ𝑟
|𝐻𝑟|);
return
4: end if
5: ℓtip ←min(ℓ∗, |𝐻𝑟|);
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(0, ⊥)
6: for ℓ←|𝐻𝑟| downto 1 do
7:
if ref[ℎ𝑟
ℓ] = 0 then
8:
working_set ←working_set ∪{(ℓ,ℎ𝑟
ℓ)}
9:
for 𝑤∈waiting[ℎ𝑟
ℓ], 𝑤∉active do
10:
miss[𝑤] −= 1;
11:
waiting_heap.Push(miss[𝑤],𝑤)
12:
end for
13:
end if
14:
ref[ℎ𝑟
ℓ] += 1
15:
if ℓ∗= 0 and ℓ≤ℓtip and (ℓ,ℎ𝑟
ℓ) ∈working_set
then
16:
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(ℓ, ℎ𝑟
ℓ)
⊲Least common ancestor
found; continue loop for remaining working set updates
17:
end if
18: end for
C.6
Removing a Request from the Active Batch
Given a completed request, the Finish procedure removes
it from the active set (line 1) and updates the working set,
reference counts, and other metadata. A forward pass over
the prefix-hash vector decrements the reference count at
each level (line 3); if it drops to zero, the level-hash tuple is
removed from the working set, and all the corresponding
waiting requests have their miss counts incremented and are
reinserted into the min-heap (lines 4-10). After updating the
working set, the shared prefix tip is recomputed by attempt-
ing to extend it forward: starting from the previous tip level,
we check successive levels up to the minimum length among
active requests and extend the tip whenever the reference
count at that level equals the number of active requests, in-
dicating agreement across all of them; the scan terminates at
the first disagreement (lines 19-26). If the active set becomes
empty, the tip is reset to (0, ⊥) (lines 12-14), and if only one
request remains, the tip is set to its full length (lines 15-18).
Finally, Remove is invoked to clean auxiliary structures such
as the reverse index and the stored hash vector (line 27).
C.7
Batch Formation
BuildBatch describes the entire pipeline, where we incre-
mentally construct a batch by repeatedly querying FindBest
to obtain the most compatible candidate, along with sum-
mary statistics, which are combined with the current batch
Algorithm 6 Finish(r)
Require: 𝐻𝑟; ref; working_set; waiting; miss; waiting_heap;
tip (ℓ∗,ℎ∗); active
Ensure: Updated ref, working_set, miss, (ℓ∗,ℎ∗)
1: active ←active \ {𝑟}
2: for ℓ←1 to |𝐻𝑟| do
3:
ref[ℎ𝑟
ℓ] −= 1
4:
if ref[ℎ𝑟
ℓ] = 0 then
5:
working_set ←working_set \ {(ℓ,ℎ𝑟
ℓ)}
6:
for 𝑤∈waiting[ℎ𝑟
ℓ], 𝑤∉active do
7:
miss[𝑤] += 1;
8:
waiting_heap.Push(miss[𝑤],𝑤)
9:
end for
10:
end if
11: end for
12: if active = ∅then
13:
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(0, ⊥);
return
14: end if
15: if |active| = 1 then
16:
let 𝑞be the sole element of active
17:
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(|𝐻𝑞|, ℎ𝑞
|𝐻𝑞|);
return
18: end if
19: while ℓ∗+ 1 ≤min𝑞∈active |𝐻𝑞| do
⊲try to extend tip
forward
20:
ℓ←ℓ∗+ 1
21:
if ref[ℎ𝑞0
ℓ] = |active| for arbitrary 𝑞0 ∈active then
⊲all active requests agree at level ℓ
22:
(ℓ∗,ℎ∗) ←(ℓ, ℎ𝑞0
ℓ)
23:
else
24:
break
25:
end if
26: end while
27: Remove(r)
⊲cleans reverse index and request hashes
size to form the RL state (lines 3-6). A policy (heuristic, ban-
dit, or Q-learning) maps this state to an action, either Add
or Stop (line 7); if Add is selected, the request is activated
via AddToBatch and appended to the batch; otherwise, the
loop terminates (lines 8-10). The procedure continues until
the waiting queue is exhausted or the policy decides to stop,
after which the constructed batch is executed for one decode
iteration to obtain the observed throughput (line 12). This
throughput serves as the reward signal used to update the
policy (line 13), with bandit methods updating their statistics
and Q-learning applying a Bellman update with parameters
𝛼and 𝛾, while heuristic policies incur no update.
C.8
Complexity Analysis
Table 3 summarizes the time complexity of each operation.
Tip maintenance in AddToBatch and Finish is subsumed
within their O(𝐶·𝑊ℎ·log𝑊) passes and adds no asymptotic
18


--- Page 19 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
Algorithm 7 BuildBatch()
Require: Waiting queue 𝑄; policy 𝜋(heuristic, bandit, or
Q-learning); discount 𝛾; learning rate 𝛼
Ensure: Batch 𝐵ready for one decode iteration
1: 𝐵←∅
2: while 𝑄≠∅do
3:
(𝑟∗,𝑐before,𝑐after,𝑤) ←FindBest()
4:
if 𝑟∗= ⊥then break
5:
end if
6:
𝑠←(|𝐵|, Δ = 𝑐before −𝑐after, 𝑤)
7:
𝑎←𝜋(𝑠) ⊲heuristic rule / UCB look-up / 𝜀-greedy
Q-table
8:
if 𝑎= Stop then break
9:
end if
10:
AddToBatch(𝑟∗);
𝐵←𝐵∪{𝑟∗}
11: end while
12: throughputdecode ←ExecuteBatch(𝐵)
13: Update 𝜋with observed reward throughputdecode
⊲
no-op for heuristic
14: return 𝐵
Operation
Complexity
Insert
O(𝑇+ 𝐶log𝑊)
AddToBatch
O(𝐶·𝑊ℎ· log𝑊)
Finish
O(𝐶·𝑊ℎ· log𝑊)
FindBest
O(log𝑊) amortized; O(1) cached
Remove
O(𝐶)
Table 3. Time complexity of CHT scheduler operations
cost. In practice, the dominant cost is miss-count propaga-
tion, which updates all affected waiting requests per working-
set change. Result caching avoids redundant FindBest tra-
versals between mutations, keeping scheduling overhead
low. We present the time taken by individual functions for a
particular experimental setup in §D.1.
C.9
Find Best Request - Alternative Heuristic
An intuitive alternative to using the missing count (which
is based on the difference with the working set) is to select
a waiting request that maximizes the depth of the current
shared prefix tip. However, this approach has a subtle flaw:
the tip is inherently bottlenecked by the most divergent ac-
tive request, limiting future extension. Consider a scenario
where Level 1 is shared by all requests, but Level 2 splits
into three branches: one for 𝑅1, one shared by 𝑅2 and 𝑅3, and
one for 𝑅4 (Figure 29). If the active batch contains 𝑅1 and 𝑅2,
the shared prefix tip is restricted to Level 1. Selecting based
only on this tip makes 𝑅3 and 𝑅4 appear equally viable. If
the scheduler admits 𝑅4, the tip remains at Level 1; when 𝑅1
finishes, the remaining requests (𝑅2 and 𝑅4) lie on divergent
branches, leaving the tip still stuck. Our Chunked Hash Tree
avoids this by evaluating candidates against the full working
set using the missing count 𝑚𝑟, rather than anchoring to the
bottlenecked tip. The working set tracks all prefix chunks
present in any active request. In the example, since 𝑅2 is ac-
tive, its Level 2 chunk is already in the working set. Thus, 𝑅3
requires fewer missing chunks than 𝑅4, i.e., 𝑚𝑅3 < 𝑚𝑅4. Se-
lecting 𝑅3 preserves future overlap: although the immediate
tip remains bottlenecked, once 𝑅1 finishes and is removed via
Finish, the remaining batch {𝑅2, 𝑅3} shares a deeper prefix,
and the tip extends to Level 2.
So, we have two ways to find the best waiting request to
be added to the batch. One is based on the difference from
the working set, and the other is based on the shared prefix
tip. Next, we try to formalize the metrics on which both of
these ways are based. Let 𝑊be the hashes in the current
working set, which can be defined as: ∪𝑟∈𝐴𝐻𝑟, where 𝐴is
the active set of requests and 𝐻𝑟is the set of hashes for
request 𝑟. CHT selects the request that has the minimum
miss-count, which can be defined as 𝑚𝑊(𝑟) = |𝐻𝑟\ 𝑊|.
The shared prefix tip is the deepest level shared by all the
requests of the active batch, which can be defined as max{ℓ:
∀𝑟∈𝐴, (ℓ,ℎ𝑟
ℓ) ∈𝑊}. The alternative heuristic selects the
request that leads to the maximum depth of the shared prefix
tip, which is equivalent to minimizing the number of hashes
missing from the working set at or above the current tip for
that request. Let 𝑚𝑆(𝑟) = |𝑆\ 𝐻𝑟|, where 𝑆is the set of all
hashes at or above the current tip level in the working set, i.e.,
𝑆= {ℎ: (ℓ,ℎ) ∈𝑊, ℓ≤ℓ∗}, where ℓ∗is the current tip level.
That is, 𝑚𝑆(𝑟) denotes the number of hash chunks present in
𝑆, but not present in the request 𝑟. Therefore, we explore the
alternative heuristic that minimizes 𝑚𝑆(𝑟) instead of 𝑚𝑊(𝑟).
Let us assume that all the requests have a length of 𝐶
chunks, and the best requests emitted from the two met-
rics are 𝑟𝑊and 𝑟𝑆, respectively. Let us also assume that
the shared prefix tip is at level ℓ∗. We aim to show that
𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) = 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆), that is, the working set metric causes
equal loss in the shared prefix tip, implying that 𝑟𝑊does
not lead to less depth in the shared prefix tip compared to
𝑟𝑆. Let us assume, to the contrary, that 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊).
Now, we compare 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) and 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) and aim to show
that 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) > 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆), which contradicts the fact that 𝑟𝑤
minimizes the metric 𝑚𝑊.
Since 𝑆represents the shared prefix of all active requests
up to depth ℓ∗, the working set 𝑊contains exactly one
unique hash per level for all levels ℓ≤ℓ∗, which consti-
tutes the set 𝑆. This property dictates that if any request 𝑥
misses a hash in 𝑆at some level 𝑘< ℓ∗, its prefix diverges
from the entire active batch at level 𝑘. Consequently, due to
the cumulative nature of the chunked hashes, 𝑥cannot share
any hashes with 𝑊at any level ≥𝑘. Specifically, if a request
does not fully match the shared tip (i.e.,𝑚𝑆(𝑥) > 0), it cannot
overlap with any deeper divergent branches in 𝑊. For such
a request, its overlap with the working set is exactly its over-
lap with the shared tip: |𝐻𝑥∩𝑊| = |𝐻𝑥∩𝑆| = ℓ∗−𝑚𝑆(𝑥).
19


--- Page 20 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
Figure 29. FindBest - Alternative Heuristic Example
Using our contrary assumption 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊), we eval-
uate the cost of both requests under the working set metric,
𝑚𝑊(𝑥) = 𝐶−|𝐻𝑥∩𝑊|. We consider two cases for 𝑟𝑆:
Case 1: 𝑟𝑆fully matches the shared prefix tip (𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) =
0). Since 𝑟𝑆matches 𝑆entirely, |𝐻𝑟𝑆∩𝑆| = ℓ∗. It may also
overlap with deeper branches in𝑊, meaning |𝐻𝑟𝑆∩𝑊| ≥ℓ∗.
Therefore, its cost is 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) ≤𝐶−ℓ∗. Because 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) >
𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) = 0, 𝑟𝑊diverges before the tip. As established, this
means |𝐻𝑟
𝑊∩𝑊| = ℓ∗−𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) < ℓ∗. Thus, 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) =
𝐶−|𝐻𝑟
𝑊∩𝑊| > 𝐶−ℓ∗. Combining these inequalities yields:
𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) (Figure 30(a)).
Case 2: 𝑟𝑆diverges before the shared prefix tip (𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) > 0).
Since 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) > 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) > 0, both requests diverge before
ℓ∗. Their overlap with the working set is strictly limited to
their overlap with 𝑆. Thus, |𝐻𝑟𝑆∩𝑊| = ℓ∗−𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) and
|𝐻𝑟
𝑊∩𝑊| = ℓ∗−𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊). Because 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊), it
logically follows that |𝐻𝑟𝑆∩𝑊| > |𝐻𝑟
𝑊∩𝑊|. Consequently:
𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) (Figure 30(b)).
In both cases, assuming 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) unavoidably
leads to 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) < 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊). However, this directly con-
tradicts our initial premise that 𝑟𝑊is the optimal request
chosen by the Chunked Hash Tree metric (which guaranties
𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) ≤𝑚𝑊(𝑞) for all waiting requests 𝑞). Therefore, our
assumption must be false, proving that 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) ≤𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆).
Because 𝑟𝑆is defined as the absolute minimum for 𝑚𝑆, it
must strictly hold that𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) = 𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆). This completes the
proof that optimizing for the working set metric is mathe-
matically guaranteed to be at least as optimal as the shared
prefix tip metric for preserving the immediate tip depth while
simultaneously exposing deeper amortization opportunities
in 𝑊\ 𝑆.
D
Additional Results of Feather
Below, we present additional evaluation results of Feather
that could not be included in the main body due to space
constraints.
D.1
Time Taken by Individual Functions of CHT
Table 4 profiles CHT operations over an inference work-
load of 5𝐾requests, each 5𝐾tokens long. Insert, AddTo-
Batch, and Finish are each invoked 5𝐾times, once per
request. FindBest, however, is called 26,405 times because
it is queried repeatedly during batch construction. The RL
policy may reject candidates and trigger fresh lookups, and
the scheduler may inspect the queue multiple times before
committing to a Stop. Insert dominates total time because
hash computation scans every token once, making it pro-
portional to prompt length. Finish is more expensive than
(a) Case 1
(b) Case 2
Figure 30. FindBest cases: 𝑟1 and 𝑟2 are both present in
the active batch, and hence the working set is the union
of all of their chunks. The shared prefix tip is at the third
level, and the set 𝑆of all shared prefix chunks are marked in
red. In the first case, 𝑟𝑆fully matches the shared prefix tip,
whereas 𝑟𝑊hangs from the middle. For this case, 𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) =
2,𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) = 1,𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) = 1,𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) = 0. In the second case,
both the requests 𝑟𝑆and 𝑟𝑊do not fully match the shared
prefix tip, however 𝑟𝑊hangs off from an earlier chunk. For
this case,𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑊) = 3,𝑚𝑊(𝑟𝑆) = 2,𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑊) = 2,𝑚𝑆(𝑟𝑆) = 1.
Therefore, for both the cases, 𝑚𝑊and 𝑚𝑆exhibit similar
behaviour.
Function
Number of Calls
Average Time (ns)
Total Time (ns)
Insert
5,000
153,714
768,570,573
AddToBatch
5,000
11,143
55,715,469
Finish
5,000
38,952
194,760,111
FindBest
26,405
6,641
175,372,986
Table 4. Time taken by individual functions of CHT
AddToBatch, despite their symmetric roles. This gap arises
from Finish’s additional forward tip-extension scan. After
updating the working set, it traverses forward, level by level,
to check if the shared prefix can be extended. In contrast,
AddToBatch performs an early-terminating backward LCA
scan, avoiding this overhead. FindBest is the cheapest per-
call operation due to result caching and lazy heap traversal.
D.2
Performance of Feather across Models
Figures 31(a), 31(b), 31(c) present throughput, average batch
size, and time between tokens (TBT) across models of vary-
ing sizes. The overall trend is consistent with expectations:
smaller models achieve higher throughput owing to lower
per-token compute costs. Feather outperforms all baselines
across all models. The sole exception is Qwen-1.5B, where
SGLang FCFS achieves marginally higher throughput; how-
ever, Feather compensates on the latency axis, exhibiting
substantially lower TBT for the same model. A key structural
observation is that Feather’s relative throughput advantage
over the baselines grows with model size. As model size in-
creases, a larger fraction of the total execution time is spent
on attention computation, which amplifies the benefits of
temporal and spatial KV-cache locality that Feather exploits.
This effect is visible in Figure 31(a): the gap between Feather
20


--- Page 21 ---
Requests of a Feather Must Flock Together: Batch Size vs. Prefix Homogeneity in LLM Inference
(a) Throughput
(b) Average running batch size
(c) Time between tokens (TBT)
Figure 31. Different Models
(a) Throughput
(b) Average Batch Size
(c) Time between tokens (TBT)
Figure 32. Varying number of prefix groups for LongChat 13B
and the next-best baseline widens from Qwen-0.5B to the
8B-scale models. The performance of SGLang’s LPM and
DFS-W schedulers degrades noticeably for smaller models.
Both policies rely on CPU-side tree traversal, whose over-
head scales with sequence length rather than model size;
as the model shrinks, GPU execution time decreases while
scheduler overhead remains roughly constant, causing the
CPU to become an increasing bottleneck. Feather avoids
this through its Chunked Hash Tree, which reduces per-step
scheduler complexity and keeps CPU overhead negligible rel-
ative to GPU execution time across all model scales. Finally,
Figure 31(c) highlights that vLLM’s FCFS and DB baselines
incur substantially higher TBT at larger model sizes, whereas
Feather keeps TBT low and stable.
D.3
Results across LongChat Model
Figure 32 presents throughput, average batch size, and time
between tokens (TBT) as the number of prefix groups varies
for the LongChat 13B model. Overall, vLLM’s FCFS and Dy-
namic Batching behave similarly across most configurations.
For FCFS, there is a sharp drop in throughput when moving
from 1 to 2 prefix groups, accompanied by an increase in
TBT. This is largely due to the loss of locality benefits. The
further decline from 2 to 5 prefix groups is driven by KV
cache evictions, which is also reflected in the steep reduction
in average batch size. Beyond this point, TBT stabilizes at
a lower value, primarily because the batches have become
much smaller. In contrast, Feather maintains stable and con-
sistent throughput across all settings. At 100 prefix groups, it
achieves up to 22× higher throughput than FCFS. By forming
prefix-homogeneous batches, Feather not only improves
scheduling efficiency but also significantly reduces KV cache
evictions through more effective immediate cache reuse.
D.4
Complexity Analysis of LPM and DFS-W
We provide a detailed complexity analysis of the two SGLang
cache-aware scheduling policies discussed in §5: Longest
Prefix Match (LPM) and Depth-First Search with Weight-
ing (DFS-W). Let 𝑊denote the number of requests in the
waiting queue and 𝑇the maximum prefix length. For each
request, LPM performs prefix matching on the global radix
tree, costing O(𝑇) per request, and then sorts the queue
by matched prefix length, adding O(𝑊log𝑊). The total
per-round cost is therefore O(𝑊· 𝑇+ 𝑊log𝑊). The re-
sult is overhead that scales multiplicatively with both queue
size and context length. LPM implicitly acknowledges this
by falling back to FCFS when 𝑊> 128 (which was dis-
abled in our experiments). DFS-W avoids per-request traver-
sal; instead, it performs a full traversal of the radix tree in
each scheduling round. Let 𝐵be the total number of radix
tree nodes. DFS-W first propagates subtree request counts
upward in O(𝐵), then re-traverses in a depth-first manner,
sorting children by weight at every level. The total cost is
O(𝑊+𝐵log 𝐵). The key problem is that 𝐵reflects the server’s
accumulated history, not the current workload. The radix
tree grows monotonically and is only pruned under memory
pressure, so DFS-W’s overhead increases over time, regard-
less of the current load. A server with a large accumulated
cache (𝐵≫𝑊) will incur high scheduling costs even during
quiet periods. In summary, a burst of long-context requests
penalizes LPM through the 𝑊· 𝑇term, while a large accu-
mulated cache penalizes DFS-W through the 𝐵log 𝐵term.
Either way, scheduling overhead can reach the same order of
magnitude as GPU execution time. This demonstrates that
identifying shared prefixes at runtime is fundamentally ex-
pensive and naive cache-aware scheduling can become the
dominant bottleneck.
21


--- Page 22 ---
Saksham Rathi, Preeti, and Mythili Vutukuru
(a) Throughput
(b) Average Batch Size
(c) Time between tokens (TBT)
Figure 33. Workload with No Prefix Sharing
Figure 34. Convergence of Bandit Policy
D.5
Convergence of Bandit Policy
We also evaluate how quickly Feather’s bandit-based pol-
icy converges to a stable and efficient batching configura-
tion. We construct a workload with five prefix groups, each
containing 5K tokens, and issue requests at a rate of 5 per
second. Figure 34 illustrates how the running batch size
evolves over time for Feather under its bandit-based policy.
At the beginning, the system enters an exploration phase,
during which Feather experiments with different configu-
rations and reaches relatively large batch sizes (around 500).
However, these batches are heterogeneous. After this phase
concludes (around 100 seconds), the system shifts to homoge-
neous batching, which yields higher throughput. As a result,
Feather converges to a significantly smaller batch size and
maintains it for the remainder of the experiment.
D.6
RL Policy across Varying Workload
We generate a workload consisting of five prefix groups,
each containing 5K tokens. The input request rate varies
over time—from 5 to 10 to 20 requests per second—and we
measure the average batch size as a function of time for
Feather using its Bandit policy (Figure 35). From 0 to 200
seconds, the request rate is 5, and the batch size remains rel-
atively low. Between 200 and 300 seconds, the rate increases
to 10, leading to a noticeable rise in batch size. Finally, from
300 to 350 seconds, the request rate reaches 20, and the batch
size peaks. (Fluctuations in the plot are due both to RL explo-
ration and the workload being Poisson.) These results show
that Feather dynamically adapts the batch size in response
to both prefix homogeneity (i.e., the number of requests
sharing the same prefix group) and the current workload
intensity.
D.7
Workloads with No Prefix Sharing
We next evaluate Feather and compare it against other
scheduling policies on a workload without prefix sharing;
that is, no two requests share a common prefix. Figure 33
reports throughput, average batch size, and time between
tokens (TBT) across a range of input rates. At higher input
Figure 35. Performance of Bandit across Varying Workload
(a) Tensor Core Utilization
(b) Average Batch Size
Figure 36. Input Workload
rates, vLLM-based policies begin to outperform SGLang poli-
cies, primarily due to their ability to form larger batches.
Notably, even in the absence of prefix sharing, Feather,
powered by its adaptive RL-based policy—matches the per-
formance of vLLM’s FCFS scheduler. In contrast, SGLang
policies achieve lower TBT, which can be attributed to their
smaller batch sizes.
D.8
Tensor Core Utilization across Policies
Figure 36 compares tensor core utilization and average batch
size across different request rates and scheduling policies.
Feather shows slightly lower utilization at low request rates
due to forming smaller batches, but it still delivers higher
throughput at these points (as seen earlier in Figure 12(a)).
As the workload increases, Feather gradually builds larger
batches from prefix-homogeneous requests, and its utiliza-
tion rises to match vLLM’s FCFS. In contrast, SGLang’s FCFS
maintains relatively low utilization because it operates with
consistently small batch sizes. Interestingly, even though
SGLang’s DFS-W and LPM achieve larger batch sizes, their
utilization remains low. This is mainly due to CPU-side stalls
between GPU executions, during which the GPU stays idle,
effectively reducing overall utilization.
E
Why the name Feather?
Feather is named after the structural pattern of prefix-
homogeneous batches in our system: a shared prefix forms a
central shaft, from which individual requests branch out
as they diverge, much like the barbs of a Feather. The
metaphor captures both the visual structure of our batches
and the functional benefit of keeping prefix sharing requests
together for better performance.
22
