--- Page 1 ---
ScaleGANN: Accelerate Large-Scale ANN Indexing
by Cost-effective Cloud GPUs
Lan Lu
University of Pennsylvania
lanlu@seas.upenn.edu
Peiqi Yin
CUHK
pqyin22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk
Isaac Yang
Duke Kunshan University
isaac.y@dukekunshan.edu.cn
Tao Luo
University of Pennsylvania
taoluo71@seas.upenn.edu
Hua Fan
Alibaba Cloud
guanming.fh@alibaba-inc.com
Wenchao Zhou
Alibaba Cloud
zwc231487@alibaba-inc.com
Feifei Li
Alibaba Cloud
lifeifei@alibaba-inc.com
Boon Thau Loo
University of Pennsylvania
boonloo@seas.upenn.edu
Abstract—Graph-based ANNS algorithms have gained increas-
ing research interest and market adoption due to their efficiency
and accuracy in retrieval. Existing approaches primarily rely
on CPUs for graph index construction and retrieval, but this
often requires significant time, especially for large-scale and
high-dimensional datasets. Some studies have explored GPU-
based solutions. However, GPUs are costly and their limited
memory makes handling large datasets challenging. In this
paper, we propose a novel end-to-end system ScaleGANN that
enables users to efficiently construct graph indexes for large-
scale, high-dimensional datasets by leveraging low-cost spot GPU
resources in a distributed cloud system. ScaleGANN utilized the
idea of divide-and-merge, with an optimized vector partitioning
algorithm to further improve the indexing time and space effi-
ciency while guaranteeing good index quality. Its novel resource
allocation strategy realized multi-GPU indexing parallelism and
overall cost-effectiveness for both build and query. Besides, we
designed a task scheduler and cost model for better spot instance
management and evaluation. We tested our system on large
real-world datasets. Experiment results show that our approach
can significantly accelerate the index build time to up to 9x
times at even 6x lower price compared with the state-of-the-
art extendable ANNS benchmark DiskANN, while we preserve
the same scalability and similar search quality as DiskANN.
I. INTRODUCTION
Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search (ANNS) is a funda-
mental technique in vector databases. By building an index
over the dataset and limiting the search to vectors similar to
a given query, ANNS significantly enhances retrieval speed,
with a minor sacrifice in accuracy. It has been widely adopted
across multiple domains including information retrieval [1],
[2], pattern recognition [3], [4], recommendation systems [5],
[6], and machine learning [7], [8]. Among various types of
index, graph-based indexes [2], [9]–[12] generally achieve
better search quality [4], [9] due to fine granularity graph
traversal. Therefore, they are widely adopted in practice.
Scaling graph indexing to large datasets. An increasing
number of applications operate over large-scale datasets, pos-
ing new challenges for ANNS. For example, e-commerce
platforms and social medias routinely store data at the billion-
scale [13], [14], often with thousands of dimensions or even
higher. Many of these services demand frequent index updates
and reconstructions to maintain accurate query results, such
as web search engines and recommendation systems [15].
Yet, efficiently constructing graph indexes for large datasets
remains challenging due to limited storage, and the time-
consuming extensive distance computations required for edge
discovery. For billion-scale, high-dimensional datasets, index
construction can take multiple terabytes of memory, and last
for several days to weeks to complete [16], [17].
Partition-based scalability and problems. The typical so-
lution to graph indexing with high storage demands is data
sharding, while trading off build and query performance.
Incorporated with disk storage, DiskANN [16] replicates
each vector across shards to maintain global connectivity
and facilitates shard index merging after the subgraphs are
built. However, replication increases I/O and lengthens build-
time roughly in proportion to the number of vectors repli-
cated [11], [18]. In contrast, other approaches split the dataset
into independent shards without replication or merging, such
as GGNN [19]. Yet, during querying, each shard must be
searched independently, increasing latency and compute.
GPU-based accelerations and challenges. To accelerate in-
dex building, existing works proposed GPU-based implemen-
tations [11], [19]–[21] in construction and querying. However,
limited GPU VRAM, frequent GPU-CPU transfers, and higher
on-demand pricing make them hard to use cost-effectively
at scale. According to AWS [22] and Alibaba cloud [23]
pricing, adding four 16GB V100 GPUs to a machine with
32 vCPUs and 256 GiB RAM can increase the cost by 6–7×.
The costs can escalate with higher memory capacity, greater
computational performance, or additional GPUs.
Balancing index build and search performance. Besides,
existing ANNS systems run entirely on CPUs or GPUs for
both index construction and query. The former slows index
construction, while the latter increases serving latency relative
to CPU-based ones [7], [24]. Especially, GPU-based shard
querying for large datasets incurs additional distance computa-
tions and frequent GPU-CPU data transfers. Furthermore, the
unpredictable distribution and frequency of queries in real-
world applications often limit batching and parallelism oppor-
arXiv:2605.10135v1  [cs.DB]  11 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
tunities, leading to expensive but suboptimal GPU utilization
during search. Most notably, CPU-based querying throughput
meets the performance requirements of most applications [7],
[24], making GPU-based querying unnecessary in many cases.
Our solution: ScaleGANN. Therefore, we present Scale-
GANN, a novel GPU-CPU hybrid and cloud-native framework
that enables efficient and disk-resident scalable graph ANNS
indexing for large-scale, high-dimensional datasets, which also
balances cost and search performance.
ScaleGANN propose use of cloud GPUs (especially cost-
effective spot instances up to 10x cheaper [22], [23], [25])
exclusively for accelerating the one-time (or periodic) index
construction, while delegating long-running, latency-sensitive
query serving [15] to CPUs. This design choice reflects the
nature of the workload: index construction is typically a one-
time, compute-intensive process, while query serving is long-
running and highly cost-sensitive. This also enables resource
isolation between build and query, ensuring stable query
performance, while allowing the built index to be replicated
for scalable serving across multiple machines.
At its core, ScaleGANN extends a disk-incorporated
partition-and-merge design with enhanced selective replication
to reduce disk I/Os, memory usage and build time, while
maintaining global graph connectivity and quality. Unlike
DiskANN which duplicates each point at least once with
a uniform count across the dataset, ScaleGANN effectively
replicates only the most essential vectors based on our pro-
posed pruning techniques. Once obtaining the partitioned
vector shards, ScaleGANN’s decoupled indexing tasks are
further accelerated by multi-GPU parallelism. We also parallel
the vector assignment to shards, and design a disk buffer
state check during index merge to handle the non-deterministic
vector order within each shard caused by thread parallelism.
To address the inherent instability and evaluate the cost-
effectiveness of preemptive spot instances, we introduce a spot
instance task scheduler and a intuitive cost model. We specify
spot GPU instance use only for shard indexing tasks which
are parallel and small in size limited by GPU memory limit,
and leave the tightly-coupled partition and merge on non-spot
machines. Then we deploy a spot instance task scheduler on
CPUs to manage the assignment of each shard indexing task to
an available GPU spot instance. By estimating task execution
time which is proportional to the shard size, the scheduler
tries to allow task assignment only to spot instances with
sufficient remaining availability. Lastly, we design a intuitive
cost model for evaluating the expense of different resources,
and illustrate the cost-effectiveness of spot instance with an
example in experiments.
While ScaleGANN’s general framework allows the inte-
gration with diverse indexing algorithms, in this work, we
integrate it with the state-of-the-art GPU-based CAGRA [11]
algorithm, and demonstrate its scalability, performance, re-
trieval quality, and cost-effectiveness on real-world datasets
ranging from millions to billions of vectors.
Notably, ScaleGANN significantly reduces index construc-
tion time relative to disk-incorporated CPU-based baselines,
while maintaining similar search quality at matched recall.
On high-dimensional Laion100M dataset and index build
degree R=128, we observe up to 9× overall acceleration over
DiskANN. Besides, compared to GPU-based approach, Scale-
GANN realizes affordable indexing time for large datasets,
while the partition-merge-based ScaleGANN achieves ∼3×
acceleration in search latency at same recall compared to the
partition-based Extended CAGRA (we extend CAGRA for
large datasets) and GGNN. While ScaleGANN achieves even
∼3× overall build acceleration over GGNN on Laion100M
(R=128), its GPU build-only time (without partition and merge
time) on the replicated dataset always remains <2× that of
Extended CAGRA, benefiting from our enhanced selective
vector replication for both the build efficiency and search
quality. Importantly, these improvements can be achieved at
much lower dollar cost (up to 6x cheaper than DiskANN) if
using GPU spot instances.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• We propose the first end-to-end spot-instance-aware GPU
system for graph ANNS indexing, which is highly efficient,
scalable, and extendable to cost-effective cloud resources.
• We design a novel resource allocation strategy which
supports multi-GPU parallelism for decoupled indexing
tasks and CPU-based querying, to balance build efficiency,
search latency and cost-effectiveness.
• We improve the partition-merge-based construction ap-
proach especially with selective vector replication and
parallelism to save indexing time and memory usage while
ensuring global connectivity. Search performance remains
unaffected or even improved after replication pruning.
• We design a spot instance scheduler and cost model to
manage task assignment and analyze the cost-effectiveness.
• We integrate ScaleGANN with CAGRA, and validate
it on real-world, large-scale high-dimensional datasets.
Compared to DiskANN, ScaleGANN brings a significant
acceleration in index build at a considerable low expense,
while maintaining similar high search performance.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Graph-based ANNS Index
Among various ANNS index structures [4], [26]–[28], the
graph-based index [2], [9], [10], [12] is considered the most
effective due to its high accuracy and low computational cost.
It builds a proximity graph [2], [9], [10] over the vector
dataset, typically using k-nearest-neighbor [11], [29], [30] or
small world graphs [10], [12] , where each node represents a
vector and is connected to its similar vectors. Existing graph-
based indexes use different construction techniques, such as
NSG [9] and HNSW [10], to balance the trade-off between
index quality and construction overhead.
Additionally, SONG [20], CAGRA [11], and GANNS [21]
leverage GPUs to speed up the graph construction. The exten-
sive distance calculations between nodes and their neighbors
can be efficiently parallelized by GPU using matrix multi-
plication (matmul). While CAGRA [11] achieves 2.2–27×


--- Page 3 ---
speedups compared to leading CPU-based methods such as
HNSW [10], all these works currently support only datasets
that fit entirely within a single GPU’s memory.
Vamana, introduced by DiskANN [16], enables graph con-
struction at billion-scale through a partition-and-merge ap-
proach. It begins by dividing the database into multiple shards
using K-means clustering. To maintain overall graph connec-
tivity, each node is assigned to multiple shards (typically two),
serving as a link between partitions. Each subgraph construc-
tion is then sequentially executed and parallelized by multiple
CPU threads, enabling independent and efficient subgraph
construction. Once the individual subgraphs are built, they
are merged into a single, connected graph over the complete
dataset via edge union, preserving the local structure within
shards while ensuring global connectivity. By leveraging disk
storage to overcome memory constraints during partition and
merge, DiskANN enables support for billion-scale datasets.
GGNN [19] partitions the graph into smaller shards, assign-
ing each GPU to construct the graph for a single shard. Unlike
Vamana, which partitions before construction and merges after,
GGNN performs partitioning during graph construction and
merging during the search phase. Its partitioning strategy
avoids node duplication, since each node appears in only
one subgraph and each subgraph resides independently in
GPU memory. During similarity search, GGNN exploits GPU
parallelism by having each GPU search for the local top-
k results within its subgraph. These local results are then
aggregated across GPUs to compute the final top-k results.
B. Spot Instance
Modern cloud providers offer spot GPU instance products
(e.g., Alibaba Cloud ECS [23], Azure spot VMs [31] and AWS
spot instances [22]), with a much cheaper price compared to
on-demand instances (up to 90% price reduction). However,
these spot instances are preemptible, and cloud providers may
terminate the service at any time. When the spot service is
terminated or preempted by other on-demand instances, the
user will generally receive a notification ahead (i.e., 5 minutes
by Alibaba ECS [23]). Users can migrate their working jobs
during that period. Besides, most spot instances have a safe
duration time at initialization (i.e., 1 hour [23]), while spot
instances without such a protection period are even cheaper.
III. MOTIVATION
As large-scale ANNS applications become prevalent, effi-
cient graph index construction is ever more critical. In this
section, we present several case studies to analyze the bottle-
necks in graph indexing for large datasets and explore potential
optimization directions, thereby motivating the design of our
framework. We conduct a simple sampling analysis on the
Sift1B and Laion1B datasets. The dimensionality and data
types of these datasets are summarized in Table II. The unit
of time is second (s) in this section.
Slow Graph Index Construction on Large Datasets, and
Shard Index Build Dominates the Time. Table I presents the
time breakdown of graph index construction on the Sift100M
TABLE I
TIME BREAKDOWN (S) OF DISKANN INDEX CONSTRUCTION.
Disk Partition
Index Build on shards
Disk Merge
Sift100M
129.1
3021.8
978.5
(R=32, L=64)
Sift100M
157.5
7847.9
1591.8
(R=64, L=128)
TABLE II
INDEX BUILD TIME (S) OF CAGRA AND DISKANN.
Dataset
Dimension
Data Type
CAGRA
DiskANN
(R=32, L=64)
(R=32, L=64)
Sift1M
128
uint8
12.7
13.2
Laion1M
768
float
25.8
112.4
dataset using DiskANN. Given a memory cap of 16 GB,
DiskANN performs partitioned index construction and merg-
ing. We conduct experiments using 80 parallel CPU threads,
with two different configurations of graph construction pa-
rameters where final index degree R and intermediate graph
degree L are set to (32, 64) and (64, 128), respectively. We
observe that DiskANN takes a considerable amount of time to
complete index construction on Sift100M. As the parameters
L and T increase, the construction time becomes even longer.
Furthermore, as shown in Table II, the Sift dataset is relatively
simple compared to others such as Laion. When the same
number of vectors are sampled from different datasets, we
find that higher data dimensionality and a shift from integer
to floating-point data types significantly increase DiskANN’s
index construction time. This is primarily due to the larger
number and higher cost of distance computations in high-
dimensional spaces with floating-point operations. In addition,
we observe that index building on data shards is the domi-
nant time contributor, compared to data partitioning and disk
merging. As the parameters L and R increase, the proportion
of time spent on index building becomes even larger—again,
due to the increasing cost of distance computations. These
findings clearly demonstrate the necessity of accelerating the
graph index build process, especially for large-scale datasets.
GPU Accelerates the Index Build. Table
II compares
the graph index construction time between the GPU-based
CAGRA algorithm and the CPU-based DiskANN algorithm on
the Sift1M and Laion1M datasets. Due to GPU memory limi-
tations (typically 16–80 GB), CAGRA can only support small-
scale datasets for index construction. Therefore, we restrict the
comparison to 1M-scale datasets. In this setting, DiskANN is
able to directly construct the graph index in memory without
partitioning and merging, and so can CAGRA. Thus, both
methods operate under the same assumption that there is no
need for partitioned indexing or post-processing merge steps.
We conduct experiments using an NVIDIA V100 GPU with 16
GB memory and 5120 threads. During index construction, we
fix the final index degree R and the intermediate graph degree
L to 32 and 64, respectively. Our results show that, compared
to CPU-based DiskANN, GPU-based CAGRA significantly
accelerates the index build process for datasets with higher
dimensionality and floating-point data types, where distance


--- Page 4 ---
Task
Allocation
Task
Status
Remote GPU Instances
Partition
Index Build Task Scheduling
Merge
Local CPU Server
Data Shard
Index Shard
1
2
3
Vector Dataset
Graph Index
Active Cloud Instance List 
Instance 1
Index Build 
Instance 2
Available
Instance …
Available
Instance n
Index Build
Cloud GPU Instance Pool 
Deactivate
Activate
Disk
Data
Spot GPU 
Instance
Regular GPU 
Instance 
Fig. 1. Illustration of ScaleGANN’s build Framework.
computations are denser and more computationally expensive.
These observations confirm the feasibility and effectiveness of
using GPUs to accelerate graph index construction for large
datasets with high dimensionality.
Scalable Datasets Brings Storage Limitation. Large-scale
and high-dimensional datasets can span several or more ter-
abytes [32], while graph index itself introduces additional
storage overhead. In contrast, CPU and GPU memory are
limited: modern GPUs often offer only 16–80GB, far below
the requirements for index construction. Besides, the partition-
and-merge based approaches like DiskANN further tighten this
constraint by uniformly duplicating every vector.
GPU Querying Leads to High Latency and Expense. Lim-
ited accelerator memory forces GPU-based querying to operate
over partitioned index subgraphs. In GGNN, shards are queried
independently with subsequent sorting and merging, whereas
swap-based approaches induce frequent host–device transfers.
These introduce high search latency. Moreover, unlike the
one-time cost of index construction, production-level querying
necessitates maintaining GPU availability for stochastic ar-
rivals, which is typically cost-inefficient and yields suboptimal
resource utilization relative to CPU-based deployments.
Based on the above findings, we motivate both the necessity
and feasibility of using GPUs to accelerate graph index
construction for large-scale datasets, while also highlighting
why GPUs are not suitable for index querying. In response,
we propose a novel framework that accelerates graph index
construction using GPU resources under a partition-and-merge
paradigm, while relying on CPUs to perform index querying.
This design strikes a balance between efficiency and cost-
effectiveness, leveraging the parallelism of GPUs for intensive
index building tasks, and the flexibility and scalability of CPUs
for handling dynamic, on-demand query workloads.
IV. FRAMEWORK OF SCALEGANN
We illustrate the overview of ScaleGANN’s build frame-
work in Figure 1. Given an input vector dataset, ScaleGANN
uses two types of computational resources, local CPU re-
sources and remote cloud GPU instances, to construct the out-
put merged index. In particular, ScaleGANN prefers GPU spot
instances when available rather than regular GPU services for
better cost-effectiveness. It also implements a cloud instance
task scheduler to manage task-instance assignment, and disk-
supported data handling for memory efficiency.
Workflow: The end-to-end index construction workflow con-
sists of three key stages: data partitioning, shard-wise index
construction using GPU instances, and index merging. (1)
Data Partitioning: Given a large input dataset necessary for
partitioning, we apply k-means clustering and assign vectors
to data shards. Vectors are selectively replicated and wisely
assigned across shards to preserve global connectivity and
shard locality, while reducing memory usage and processing
overhead. We also realize parallel implementation for partition
efficiency. The detailed partitioning mechanism is presented
in Sec V. (2) Index Build: We use remote GPU instances to
construct indexes for data shards, leveraging parallel execution
to speed up the distance computations. Each available GPU
instance is assigned an independent shard-level indexing task,
and invokes a GPU-based indexing algorithm such as CAGRA.
Since each per-shard subgraph is built independently, no back-
forth CPU-CPU communication or inter-GPU communication
is necessary during index building. This design not only elim-
inates redundant CPU-GPU data transfers, but also enables
efficient parallelism of multiple idle GPUs for accelerating the
otherwise time-consuming index construction process. We also
implement a task scheduler for task assignments to appropriate
cloud GPU instances, which will be described later. (3) Index
Merging: Finally, constructed shard-level indexes are merged
into a unified global index, using replicated vectors across
shards as connections, as discussed in prior work [16].
Resource Allocation: Our framework utilizes two types of
computational resources: local CPUs and remote GPUs. We
employ local CPU resources not only for querying, but also
for the tightly-coupled data partitioning and index merging.
Meanwhile, the remote cloud GPU resources, in particular idle
spot instances, are used to accelerate the decoupled shard-level
indexing with intensive distance computation.
Although certain steps in partitioning and merging could
theoretically benefit from GPU acceleration, we deliberately
choose to execute them on CPUs for two main reasons: 1.
Non-bottleneck nature: Compared to index construction, the
time spent on partitioning and merging does not constitute
the system’s performance bottleneck. Additionally, transfer-
ring data between CPU and GPU memory introduces extra
overhead that may offset any potential acceleration benefits. 2.
Disk-intensive and highly-coupled logic: Both partitioning and
merging involve frequent interactions with disk storage and
contain substantial non-parallel, tightly-coupled logic beyond
distance computations. These characteristics make them less
suitable for GPU acceleration, which is optimized specifically
for large-scale parallel numeric operations. By reserving GPU
resources for the most computation-intensive index construc-
tion, we achieve an effective balance between performance and
resource utilization.
Cloud Instance Task Scheduler: When constructing shard-
wise indexes using cloud GPU instances, we require a task
scheduler to assign appropriate index construction tasks to


--- Page 5 ---
available GPU instances. Specifically, the scheduler needs
to maintain two key components: A task list that tracks
all pending index construction tasks for data shards, and a
cloud instance list that manages active remote GPU instances
especially the spot GPU instances and records their status.
The cloud instance list records the following statuses for each
GPU instance: (1) Active: A GPU instance that has been suc-
cessfully rented from cloud service provider’s instance pool is
marked as active and added to the instance list. Conversely, if
the instance service is terminated, it is marked as inactive and
removed from the list. (2) Available: Within the cloud instance
list, if a GPU is currently executing a task, it is marked as
unavailable; otherwise, it is available. (3) Time remaining: For
each GPU instance especially the spot instances, if we have
accurate information about its remaining active lifetime, we
record it accordingly. Note that ScaleGANN always prefers
activating the spot GPU instances at a low price given idle
spot instances from the cloud.
We allocate tasks according to the following two scheduling
policies: (1) Availability-based scheduling: Tasks in the task
list will not be assigned to any unavailable GPU instance
that is already executing a task. (2) Time-based scheduling:
We estimate the runtime required for each index construction
task, and avoid assigning tasks to instances whose remaining
active time is insufficient to complete them. We first sample
multiple tiny subsets from the dataset and measure their index
construction time. Since construction time scales linearly with
dataset size under the same algorithm, hardware configuration
and dataset characteristics, we use these results and shard sizes
to estimate the build time of larger partitioned data shards
under the same indexing settings. Given this, if we know or the
cloud provider notifies that a spot instance will be terminated
in several minutes, the scheduler prioritizes assigning tasks
with estimated run-times less than that to this instance. If no
such instances, the scheduler will not assign any task to it.
Lastly, if a GPU instance is unfortunately terminated with a
unfinished task running on it, the task scheduler will reallocate
this task to another suitable instance in the cloud instance list.
Spot instance cost analysis: To estimate the cost saving of
using spot instances, we design a spot instance cost model.
Generally, the graph indexing cost of a given dataset can
be evaluated by the machine active time multiplied by the
machine price. We assume all the spot GPU instances we use
have the same price for simple illustration.
In ScaleGANN, throughout the entire index-construction
process, the CPU machine remains active, to handle not only
shard partitioning and merging, but also shard indexing task
scheduling across multiple GPU machines. In contrast, each
GPU machine is activated only when it is assigned a shard-
index construction task. It is worth noting that multi-GPU
parallelism can speed up the overall index-construction time
and reduces the CPU-active period. However, for GPU cost
consumption, multiple cards within the same GPU machine
do not incur additional charges, but multiple GPU machine
instances running in parallel are billed separately. Therefore,
the cost of using multiple GPU machines should be calculated
Fig. 2. Illustration of Assignment Policy.
as the unit price of a single GPU machine multiplied by the
total active time across all GPU machines. In addition, because
we rely on cloud resources, the total machine usage time
must also account for the network transfer time for shard data
communication between CPU and remote GPUs. Overall, the
total cost for ScaleGANN if using GPU spot instance(s) is
computed as: (overall construction time + data transfer time)
× CPU price + (aggregated GPU active time + data transfer
time) × GPU spot instance price.
Note that in this work, we apply time-based scheduling pol-
icy to guide task assignment which tries to avoid unexpected
termination. Therefore, the above cost model currently does
not consider the cost of spot instance interruption and task
rescheduling, and Sec VI presents a simple cost analysis under
this assumption.
V. ADAPTIVE VECTOR PARTITIONING
To construct a union and connected index for large dataset,
we proposed an adaptive disk-resident data partitioning strat-
egy with selective vector replication for both index quality
after merge and build efficiency considering storage and time.
Given limited GPU and CPU memory, prior partition-
and-merge-based indexing work partitions the large dataset
into multiple smaller data shards using k-means clustering,
replicates all the vectors once or more times across partitions
to ensure global connectivity, and then builds index on each
partition and merge shard indices.
However, there are two issues. (1) Vectors are loaded
and processed block-by-block from disk, and those in earlier
blocks may saturate clusters too early, preventing later vectors
from being assigned to their nearest clusters. To illustrate,
we show three cluster centroids c1, c2, c3, and three vectors
v1, v2, v3 depicted in Figure 2, with their respective cluster
preferences as follows: (c1 > c3 > c2), (c2 > c3 > c1),
(c3 > c1 > c2). Suppose each vector is replicated at least
once, with cluster capacity limit 2, and block order v1, v2, v3.
v1 replicas will be assigned to c1 and c3, then v2 replicas to c2
and c3, saturating cluster c3. As a result, v3 can no longer be
fairly assigned to its closest cluster c3, despite being the most
appropriate. (2) Since each vector has at least one replica, the
dataset size at least doubles, leading to significant memory
and processing time overheads.
A. Blockwise-adaptive Assignment
To ensure fairness in partitioning, we need to mitigate
the impact of vector processing order on assignment. We
distinguish two types of assignments: assigning (1) an original


--- Page 6 ---
vector to its nearest available cluster, and (2) its replicas to
other clusters. The first guarantees that every vector belongs
to at least one cluster, ensuring dataset completeness and
locality. The second improves inter-cluster connectivity, but
also introduces distant vectors into other clusters. Each cluster
must reserve capacity for original vectors processed later for
fairness and locality, while also accepting a certain number of
replicas for connectivity.
To balance fairness, locality, and connectivity, we introduce
a tunable threshold that controls the proportion of cluster space
available for replicas. Once this limit is reached, the cluster
can only accept original vectors and decline future replicas.
Each cluster can have its own replica threshold, adjusted by
the data distribution: dense clusters often serve as the nearest
choice for many vectors, so they use smaller thresholds to
preserve space for unprocessed original vectors.
We further support blockwise runtime adaptive adjustment
of thresholds. After each block is processed, we update the
data distribution information and thresholds for each cluster
based on observed vector assignments. Note that during the
whole assignment process, to avoid costly disk I/O, the dataset
is read only once: for each block, we first assign original
vectors to their nearest available clusters, then update cluster
distribution statistics and thresholds, finally allocate replicas
based on the latest thresholds, and then move to the next block.
B. Selective Replication
To further reduce data redundancy while maintaining inter-
shard connectivity and enhancing shard locality, we introduce
a selective replication strategy.
In addition to increased memory and time overhead for
storing, manipulating, and indexing the duplicated vectors,
full-scale replication introduces redundant assignments. Vec-
tors close to the centroid of their nearest clusters may be
unnecessarily replicated to distant clusters, as its neighbors
are likely to be only within the cluster and assigning replicas
to remote clusters would even create spurious edges.
To address these issues, we perform only necessary assign-
ments. Given vector v and its closest centroid c with distance
d, for any existing cluster c′ with radius r′ and distance d′
to v, the assignment of v to c′ is necessary if and only if
it obeys two constraints. (1) Distance Constraint: d′ < ϵ · d,
and (2) Radius Constraint: d′ < ϵ · r′, where ϵ is a tunable
parameter.
The intuition is as follows. If d′ is much larger than d or
r′, it can be implied that v is either close to the center of c, or
far from that of c′, rendering the assignment to c′ unnecessary.
Based on this strategy, we replicate vectors only to sufficiently
close neighboring clusters.
Algorithm 1 illustrates the assignment of replicas with
selective replication. Here ω denotes the maximum number of
clusters a vector can appear in, and ϵ is a tunable parameter
controlling pruning strength. For each loaded block B, we
first record the assignment between each vector and its nearest
available cluster (Line 2). We also update each cluster’s replica
Algorithm 1 Selective Replica Assignment
Input: Vector block B, Number of Clusters k, Cluster replica threshold
θ, Cluster radius R, Clusters (set of assigned vectors) S, ω, ϵ, τ
Output: Updated clusters S
1: for v ∈B do
2:
c ←loadCentroid(v) # original vector assignment
3:
d ←dist(v, c)
4:
assigned ←1
5:
for c′ ∈sorted(Centroids, key = dist(v, c′)) do
6:
if assigned ≥ω then break
7:
if c′ ̸= c and checkSizeLimit(c′, θ) then
8:
d′ ←dist(v, c′)
9:
if d′ < ϵ · d and d′ < ϵ ∗τ ∗R[c′] then
10:
Sc′ ←Sc′ ∪v
11:
assigned ←assigned + 1
threshold θ and radius R based on the block data, which serves
as inputs for the assignment.
As in Line 5-6, a vector v’s assignment ends once all k
clusters have been iterated, or cluster replica limit ω has been
reached. For each vector v in the current block, we iterate
through the clusters in an ascending order of distances from
v shown in Line 5. In Line 7-11, we check the size and
remaining replica space of the target cluster c′, and perform
replica assignment from v to c′ if it passes both size check and
the selective pruning. During block-by-block manipulation, we
observed that in the early stage with fewer processed blocks,
the radius of each cluster can be smaller than its actual value.
Therefore, we introduce a dynamic radius parameter τ that is
initially large and decreases as the number of processed blocks
increases, to remedy the actual radius for a more accurate
radius-based pruning as shown in Line 9.
Recall the example in Figure 2. v1 are replicated on c1 and
c3, while v2 is assigned only to c2, as it lies close to its center.
Similarly, v3 is assigned only to c3 because its distance from c1
exceeds the pruning threshold. This not only ensures expected
assignment of v3 to its nearest cluster c3, it also improves
memory and time efficiency during index builds.
C. Parallelism
We further accelerate the partitioning algorithm using multi-
threading on the CPU, primarily in the following three com-
ponents: (1) The distance computation between vectors and
centroids can be executed in parallel. (2) The assignment of
multiple vectors can be processed simultaneously. (3) The data
distribution of multiple clusters can be updated concurrently.
Previous work such as DiskANN only leveraged multi-
threading for the distance computation between vectors and
centroids. One reason for this limitation is that, although using
multiple threads can significantly speed up vector assignment
and data partitioning, it also results in a non-deterministic
processing order. That is, the order in which vectors are
processed and written into data shards becomes random,
thus the arrangement of vectors within each shard no longer
matches the order in the original dataset. During shard-level


--- Page 7 ---
TABLE III
DATASET.
Size
Dimension
Data Type
Sift100M
100,000,000
128
uint8
Deep100M
100,000,000
96
float
MicrosoftTuring100M
100,000,000
100
float
Laion100M
100,000,000
768
float
Sift1B
1000,000,000
128
uint8
index merging, DiskANN relies on sequential disk reads
to efficiently utilize read buffers. If the vector ordering is
inconsistent across data shards, it leads to index information
being read and merged incorrectly. To address this, we extend
the original implementation by adding a simple buffer state
check, enabling us to safely support random disk reads while
still maintaining efficient buffer utilization. This ensures that
the vector reading order during index merging matches the
true original vector order.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
Our default experimental setup includes a 40-core 80-thread
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6133 CPU @ 2.50GHz with 251G
RAM and 2T SanDisk SDSSDH3, and the Tesla V100-SXM2-
16GB GPU(s) with a total of 5120 threads.
In our experiments, we compare four different implementa-
tions:
• ScaleGANN: Our proposed GPU-based system for large-
scale ANNS index construction where the dataset is se-
lectively replicated and partitioned, followed by parallel
block-wise GPU index construction, and finally merging
of shard indexes. Queries are served on CPUs for high
throughput and low latency.
• GGNN: A state-of-the-art GPU-based ANNS system de-
signed for large-scale datasets. It partitions the dataset
without replication, constructs a graph index for each block
independently, and performs queries on each block sepa-
rately. Final results are obtained by merging and ranking
the per-block query results.
• Extended CAGRA: A baseline adaptation based on
CAGRA, a cutting-edge GPU ANNS system for small
datasets. We extend it using GGNN’s block-partitioning
and block-wise querying approach to enable it to handle
large-scale datasets. For each block, Extended CAGRA
performs graph index construction and querying, followed
by result aggregation and re-ranking.
• DiskANN: A leading CPU-based ANNS solution for large-
scale datasets. It replicates and partitions the dataset,
constructs a graph index for each block on CPU, and
merges these indexes into a global index. Queries are
executed on the merged index.
The datasets used in our experiments are listed in Table III.
Sift, Deep, and SimSearchNet (with query sets) are from the
BIGANN benchmarks [33]. Laion100M is a sampled subset of
Laion5B [32], [34], and the query set is created by sampling
10,000 items from Laion5B, following VectorDBBench [35].
In principle, our framework is capable of scaling to the full
TABLE IV
SIFT100M INDEX TIME (S) AT DIFFERENT SELECTIVITY ϵ.
ScaleGANN
ϵ = 1.1
ϵ = 1.2
ϵ = 1.5
Original
Proportion
33.3%
54.3%
81.8%
100%
Overall Time (s)
4216
4726
3428
5837
Build-Only Time (s)
2220
2570
3025
3564
Laion5B dataset, provided sufficient disk space is available.
However, due to the computational demands and hardware
limitations, processing the entire dataset would require pro-
hibitively long runtimes on our current setup. Therefore,
for experimental analysis, we sample 100M vectors, which
already requires 2.5 times more raw storage than Sift1B. More
importantly, since index construction time scales linearly with
dataset size
[11], [18], [19], results on 100M-scale datasets
can serve as reliable estimates for billion-scale performance.
Codes and results are available in an anonymous repo [36].
A. Overall Result
In this section, we illustrate the effectiveness of our partition
with selective replication based on ScaleGANN and the other
partition-and-merge approach DiskANN. Then we present the
build and search results of four benchmarks, and comprehen-
sively analyze ScaleGANN’s performance in both indexing
and querying.
1) Selective Vector Partitioning: Compared to DiskANN’s
default setting where each vector is replicated once, we show
a wise choice of selectivity ϵ can reduce 20%-70% vector
replication, thus saving disk and memory usage, reducing
data processing and indexing time. While accelerating the
index build, the search quality is maintained or even improved
instead of trading off one for the other.
Table IV presents ScaleGANN’s build performance under
different selectivity ϵ. ”Proportion” denotes the percentage of
replicated input vectors, while ”Overall Time” and ”Build-
Only Time” represent the total indexing time and shard
indexing time respectively (excluding both partitioning and
merging). In addition, Figure 3 illustrates ScaleGANN’s cor-
responding query performance under varying duplication rates.
As the replication proportion decreases, we can save more
index build time. In particular, ”Build-Only Time” shows an
even near-linear reduction corresponding to the decrease in
overall data size. Interestingly, a moderate choice of ϵ can
maintain or even improve query quality at the same time.
At ϵ = 1.1 with a replica reduction of up to 66.7%, both
search latency and query per second are improved, due to
the elimination of assigning distant vectors to clusters during
replication explained in Section V-B.
Besides, when applying this approach to DiskANN’s Va-
mana index, the conclusion still holds, which is also shown
in Figure 3. This further demonstrates the generality of our
selective duplication across different indexing algorithms.
2) Indexing Time and Quality: We compare the index
construction time of all the benchmarks on a single machine
(CPU/GPU) with a 16 GB memory budget, as shown in
Table V. Corresponding search efficiency of these indexes are


--- Page 8 ---
75
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
10000
20000
30000
Query Per Second
ScaleGANN
E=1.1
E=1.2
E=1.5
Original
75
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
5
10
15
20
Average Latency (ms)
ScaleGANN
E=1.1
E=1.2
E=1.5
Original
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
10000
20000
30000
Query Per Second
DiskANN
E=1.1
E=1.2
E=1.5
Original
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
5
10
15
Average Latency (ms)
DiskANN
E=1.1
E=1.2
E=1.5
Original
Fig. 3. Sift100M Search Quality at Different Selectivity ϵ.
TABLE V
INDEX CONSTRUCTION TIME (S).
Dataset
Extended CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Sift100M
Overall
1790
1287
9597
4727
Build-Only
1693
1287
7848
2570
Deep100M
Overall
1775
2004
21159
5222
Build-Only
1673
1840
19155
2797
MSTuring
Overall
2063
10977
20221
6672
100M
Build-Only
1871
10744
18089
3480
Laion100M
Overall
5483
44735
62109
11259
Build-Only
3850
43131
57163
6504
Sift1B
Overall
18155
13899
119039
70617
Build-Only
17362
13025
83732
27676
provided in Figure 4 and Figure 5, fairly based on a unified
CPU query algorithm following DiskANN’s search strategy.
In Table V, the default build degree and intermediate build
degree are 64 and 128, which is the widely adopted setting
for large datasets. For GGNN, we adopt a build degree of
20 for Sift and 24 for Deep, following the settings in its
paper. During partition, DiskANN and ScaleGANN allows one
replication for a vector while ScaleGANN uses a selectivity
factor of ϵ = 1.2 to remove unnecessary replicas. For Extended
CAGRA and GGNN, datasets are naively splitted without
vector replication. We propose two metrics ”Overall Time”
and ”Build-Only Time” for a comprehensive performance
comparison. For DiskANN and ScaleGANN, the overall index
construction time includes data partitioning, shard index con-
struction and index merging. While for CAGRA and GGNN,
only partitioning and shard indexing are considered in overall
time. Besides, the ”Build-Only” times represent the shard
indexing time only for all the approaches, excluding both
partitioning and merging.
For search experiments, due to limited space, we compare
only the top-10 recall with query per second (QPS) and aver-
age latency as in Figure 4. For high-dimensional large-scale
Laion100M, we perform a disk-based search in Figure 5, and
use the average number of distance computed as a proportional
proxy for both QPS and latency. Though we could compress
Laion100M using vector quantizations and thus enable in-
memory search, search optimization is not the focus of this
work. Therefore, we leave it for future search enhancements.
ScaleGANN vs Extended CAGRA and GGNN. We first
compare the partition-and-merge based ScaleGANN with split-
only Extended CAGRA and GGNN, where all approaches use
GPU for index construction acceleration. With selective vec-
tor replication and index merging, ScaleGANN substantially
improves search performance without introducing prohibitive
index construction overhead.
Both Extended CAGRA and GGNN exhibit higher search
latency and significantly lower QPS than ScaleGANN at
equivalent recall. For example, as in Figure 4, at 95% recall,
the two split-only methods incur over 3× higher latency and
achieve roughly only 1/3 the QPS of the split-and-merge
methods. The results on Laion100M in Figure 5 confirm the
same trend. Note that for split-only methods, though GPU-
based querying can potentially boost the QPS, latency and
excessive vector reads still remain to be bottlenecks without
index merging.
ScaleGANN’s indexing time is better than GGNN if at
the same build degrees, with up to 4x overall improvement
on Laion100M. However, GGNN can be faster on low-
dimensional datasets like Sift100M, Deep100M and Sift1B,
where GGNN builds the graph index using small build degrees
(20 and 24, respectively). Notably, if both were configured
with the same build degree of 64, GGNN’s build time would
increase by nearly 5×, making it slower than ScaleGANN.
Compared to Extended CAGRA, ScaleGANN requires
roughly 2–3× the total construction time, mainly because the
dataset is duplicated to ensure shard connectivity, effectively
doubling its size and processing time, along with additional
disk-based complex data partitioning and index merging. This
overhead is magnified in Sift1B given increased slow disk
operations. However, since ScaleGANN performs a selective
replication to to minimize vector replication, the build-only
time which reflects only the graph index construction time on
GPU is always less than 2× that of CAGRA. This strategy
also reduces the time of partitioning and merging to a certain
extent, benefited by saved computation, disk read and write.
ScaleGANN vs DiskANN. We then compare the GPU-
based ScaleGANN with CPU-based DiskANN, both adopting
the split-and-merge strategy.
Compared to DiskANN, ScaleGANN achieves an signifi-
cant overall speedup in index construction, and up to 5.5×
overall acceleration on high-dimensional Laion100M. This
improvement stems from two key factors: (1) the use of
GPU acceleration, which significantly improves distance com-
putation efficiency in high-dimensional spaces, and (2) our
selective replication strategy, which reduces unnecessary data
duplication to lower data processing and indexing overhead.
Meanwhile, since both DiskANN and ScaleGANN rely on
CPU and costly disk-based implementations for partitioning
and merging large datasets, which incur similar and non-
negligible overhead towards the ”overall” time. Therefore,
if isolating the shard index construction stage, the actual
index build-only time speedup of ScaleGANN over DiskANN
increases to almost 9x.
Importantly, ScaleGANN is anticipated to maintain its ad-
vantage on other billion-scale datasets instead of just Sift1B,
since the ”build-only” indexing time scales approximately
linearly with dataset size. Though the ”overall” time of Scale-


--- Page 9 ---
TABLE VI
OVERALL CONSTRUCTION TIME (S) OF LAION100M.
Graph Degree
Extended CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
R=32, L=64
5022
20309
29309
9477
R=64, L=128
5483
44735
62109
11259
R=128, L=256
7142
49708
149065
16311
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
0
10000
20000
30000
Query Per Second
Sift100M
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Naive CAGRA
75
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
0
10000
20000
30000
Query Per Second
Deep100M
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Naive CAGRA
75
80
85
90
95
Recall@10
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
Query Per Second
MicrosoftTuring100M
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Naive CAGRA
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
0
10
20
30
40
Average Latency (ms)
Sift100M
Naive CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
75
80
85
90
95
100
Recall@10
0
20
40
60
80
Average Latency (ms)
Deep100M
Naive CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
75
80
85
90
95
Recall@10
0
25
50
75
100
125
Average Latency (ms)
MicrosoftTuring100M
Naive CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Fig. 4. Search Performance of Low-dimensional Datasets.
GANN indicates potential improvement space for disk-based
data processing procedures in the future.
Besides, though under the current settings, ScaleGANN’s
search performance is slightly worse than DiskANN’s, this is
mainly due to differences between the indexing algorithms,
instead of trading-off the search performance for construction
time. DiskANN uses Vamana graph, while CAGRA builds
KNN graphs. However, this is orthogonal to our framework
which actually can integrate with any of these indexing
methods. In fact, search performance of the same given index
can even be improved by adjusting ScaleGANN ’s parameters,
especially the selectivity factor ϵ which should be tuned for
different datasets and is further explored in Sec VI-A1.
B. Results under Various Settings
1) Increased Build Degree: According to Table VI, we
observe an increase on the overall index construction time
as build degree becomes large, though the growth rate varies
across different methods considering their different data pro-
cessing overhead. Under a larger index degree, the GPU based
approaches can bring larger acceleration due to the increased
proportion of distance computation tasks. At the same time,
ScaleGANN with selective replication maintains its affordable
replication overhead (∼2x) compared to Extended CAGRA,
and performs better than GGNN. On Laion100M, for instance,
when the build degree is set to 128 and the intermediate degree
is set to 256, ScaleGANN achieves up to 9× overall speedup
over DiskANN, and 3x over GGNN.
2) Multi-GPU parallelism: Multi-GPU parallelism can fur-
ther accelerate index construction. As shown in Table
VII,
using 2 and 4 V100 GPUs achieves near-linear speedup for
shard index build stage compared to a single GPU under the
same build parameters R = 64, L = 128 and ϵ = 1.2. Note
that speedup is not exactly linear due to system overhead and
uneven shard sizes. However, if with larger datasets and more
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
Recall@10
0
50000
100000
150000
Avg # of Dist
Laion100M
Naive CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
82.5
85.0
87.5
90.0
92.5
95.0
Recall@10
104
105
Log (Avg # of Dist)
Laion100M
Naive CAGRA
GGNN
DiskANN
ScaleGANN
Fig. 5. Search Performance of Laion100M.
TABLE VII
INDEX BUILD-ONLY TIME (S) OVER GPU PARALLELISM.
Sift100M
Deep100M
MSTuring100M
Laion100M
1 GPU
2570
2797
3480
6504
2 GPU
1495
1557
1992
3394
4 GPU
877
882
1158
2003
shards, task distribution could become more balanced, and the
acceleration could become ideal scaling.
This confirms that our graph index construction framework
which divides the workload into many small and independent
tasks is highly suitable for multi-GPU parallelism. Each GPU
will independently process one or more data shards, while
each separate shard construction takes only a few minutes.
For example, with Sift100M, the dataset is divided into 16
shards, each taking approximately 160 seconds to build. In
this case, if using 4 GPUs, each GPU handles 4 shards in
average, leading to efficient parallel construction. This design
further makes our system naturally adaptable to cloud-native
spot instance environments where small and fast tasks can be
flexibly scheduled across dynamic cheap GPU resources.
C. Spot Instance Cost Analysis
Lastly, we provide a simple cost analysis of DiskANN and
ScaleGANN based on the cost model in Sec IV. In this study,
DiskANN uses a regular CPU machine with similar conditions
to our local machine, while ScaleGANN uses one GPU spot
instance (with 4 V100 GPU cards) for shard index construction
and the same CPU machine for partitioning and merging.
According to AWS ECS [22], a regular Linux CPU machine
with around 80 threads, 200G RAM and 2T disk (e.g.,
c5d.24xlarge) is at $3.9-4.6/h, while a Linux GPU machine
with 4 16G V100 (e.g., p3.8xlarge) has regular price $13.7/h
and spot instance price changing normally between $1.22-
3.67/h. While all the instances offer at least 10Gbps network
bandwidth, we estimate the total data transfer time as: number
of shards × 16GB / network bandwidth. This is because each
shard transfer task consists of shard data sent to GPU and the
index returned to CPU, which involves at most 16GB data
bounded by the GPU memory.
Using Laion100M index construction in Table V as an
example, it generates less than 100 shards, indicating a 1600G
upper bound for data transfer amount and correspondingly at
most 160s, namely 0.045h, data transfer time. Besides, we ob-
serve that DiskANN’s overall build time is 17.25h in Table V,
while Laion100M takes 0.56h to build the index using 4 V100
parallelism in Table VII. Then we also obtain ScaleGANN’s


--- Page 10 ---
partition and merge time calculated by its overall time minus
the index build-only time, which is 1.32h as shown in Ta-
ble II. Thus, the overall build time of ScaleGANN is 1.88h
(0.56h+1.32h). Therefore, the cost estimate for DiskANN with
regular CPU is at least $67.3 (17.25×3.9), while ScaleGANN
costs at most $11.1 ((1.88+0.045)×4.6+(0.56+0.045)×3.67)
which is even 6x cheaper than DiskANN.
Notably, in this scenario, even on-demand cloud GPUs can
be more cost-effective than CPUs. This is primarily due to the
efficiency of GPU acceleration on high-dimensional datasets,
which substantially reduces runtime and, consequently, the
overall cost. For low- and mid-dimensional datasets, using
GPU spot instances still offers indexing speedups while greatly
lowering the cost. Moreover, although older regular GPUs are
already relatively affordable, newer GPUs with larger memory
and more threads enable faster and more stable indexing
by reducing the number of shards and speeding up distance
computations. In such cases, spot instances of the latest GPUs
can achieve better performance at the same or even lower cost
than older regular GPUs.
VII. RELATED WORK
Storage Management. To serve large-scale vector indexing
and search, DiskANN [16] offloads data to disk and preserves
10-20% memory for efficiency. Starling [17] further reorders
the disk layout to improve locality and reduce search disk
access. Besides, LM-DiskANN [37] and AiSAQ [38] propose
disk-only designs that do not rely on memory in extreme
senarios. Alternative ANNS systems including SPANN [39]
and FusionANNS [40] adopt IVF indexes for disk-resilient de-
sign. In particular, FusionANNS optimize index build on CPUs
by reducing random I/O via layout and I/O de-duplication.
Furthermore, some ANNS systems offload data to emerging
memory devices such as PMEM [41], CXL [42], UPMEM
PIM [24], and SmartSSD [43]. All are orthogonal to our study.
Acceleration. Distance calculation can be accelerated through
CPU parallelism (e.g., DiskANN
[16]) or GPU parallelism
(e.g., GANNS [21] and CAGRA [11]), though the latter is con-
strained by memory of a single GPU. Besides, asynchronous
GPU data transfer help hide transffering time [44], [45], while
quantization techniques [46] (e.g. PQ, SQ, and PCA) further
reduce memory footprint and trade some accuracy for speed.
For large datasets across multiple machines, methods explore
partitioning, multi-shard parallelism, and load balancing: ex-
amples include GPU-based GGNN, CPU-based Starling [17],
and distributed shard builds in SOGAIC [47]. ScaleGANN
adopts a more flexible, cost-efficient approach by leveraging
GPU spot instances in parallel while maintaining a CPU union
index to balance efficiency and cost.
Graph Update. Streaming scenarios with frequent vec-
tor updates (insertions and deletions) motivate specialized
ANNS systems: SPFresh [48] extends SPANN, while IP-
DiskANN [49] and FreshDiskANN [50] enhance DiskANN
with update capabilities. However, as changes and updates
accumulate over time, index rebuilding is still necessary to
maintain search quality, especially for graph-based indices.
Systems with spot instances. Spot instances are widely
employed on various workloads for cost-effectiveness, such
as ML training [51], MapReduce tasks [52], and MPI appli-
cations [53]. Specifically, recent AI serving systems like Sky-
Serve [54] and SpotServe [25] consider spot GPU instances,
with LLM specific parallelization configurations. Meanwhile,
mechanisms [55]–[57] of check-pointing, migration and node
replicas are proposed to handle unexpected terminations of
spot instances. To the best of our knowledge, ScaleGANN is
the first ANNS graph indexing system to exploit spot GPU
instances for both cost efficiency and performance.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end GPU-based cloud-
native ANNS graph index construction framework, Scale-
GANN, that is highly efficient, scalable, and cost-effective. We
enhance ScaleGANN’s disk-resident extendable partition-and-
merge strategy with adaptive vector assignment and selective
replication, optimizing time and storage efficiency while pre-
serving the overall search quality. In addition, ScaleGANN’s
framework with a novel resource allocation strategy achieves
both efficiency and cost-effectiveness. We use spot GPUs
exclusively for the one-time computation-intensive shard in-
dexing tasks which are also compatible to multi-GPU par-
allelism, while still leaving partitioning, merging and long-
term querying on CPUs. Lastly, while our framework can be
integrated with any graph index build algorithm, in this paper
we apply CAGRA to our implementation. Experiment results
show that our approach can bring up to 9x acceleration at a
even lower cost compared with DiskANN, while maintaining
similar search QPS and latency at the same recall.
Our work also lays the foundation for several valuable future
directions. A natural extension is to address the instability
of spot instances by developing more robust task recovery
mechanisms. For example, live migrating unfinished tasks to
another instance, or designing checkpoint-based task resuming
methods to avoid full re-execution upon interruption. Addi-
tionally, our current setup assumes homogeneous spot instance
types, Therefore, it opens up opportunities for specific designs
for task re-allocation and cost analysis under heterogeneous
settings with available instances varying in GPU memory size
and compute capacity. Lastly, our approach demonstrates how
cost-effective, pay-as-you-go cloud resources can be leveraged
to complete one-time, compute-intensive ANNS index con-
struction, encouraging further exploration of cloud-native or
serverless solutions for scalable vector search.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Flickner, H. Sawhney, W. Niblack, J. Ashley et al., “Query by image
and video content: The qbic system,” computer, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 23–
32, 1995.
[2] M. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Yue, and Y. Wang, “A comprehensive survey and
experimental comparison of graph-based approximate nearest neighbor
search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12631, 2021.
[3] T. Cover and P. Hart, “Nearest neighbor pattern classification,” IEEE
transactions on information theory, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 21–27, 1967.


--- Page 11 ---
[4] W. Li, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, W. Wang et al., “Approximate nearest
neighbor search on high dimensional data—experiments, analyses, and
improvement,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 1475–1488, 2019.
[5] P. Covington, J. Adams, and E. Sargin, “Deep neural networks for
youtube recommendations,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM conference
on recommender systems, 2016, pp. 191–198.
[6] R. Chen, B. Liu, H. Zhu, Y. Wang et al., “Approximate nearest neighbor
search under neural similarity metric for large-scale recommendation,” in
Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information
& Knowledge Management, 2022, pp. 3013–3022.
[7] D. Liu, M. Chen, B. Lu, H. Jiang et al., “Retrievalattention: Accel-
erating long-context llm inference via vector retrieval,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.10516, 2024.
[8] N. Li, B. Kang, and T. De Bie, “Skillgpt: a restful api service for
skill extraction and standardization using a large language model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.11060, 2023.
[9] C. Fu, C. Xiang, C. Wang, and D. Cai, “Fast approximate nearest
neighbor search with the navigating spreading-out graph,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.00143, 2017.
[10] Y. A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and robust approxi-
mate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world
graphs,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 824–836, 2018.
[11] H. Ootomo, A. Naruse, C. Nolet, R. Wang et al., “Cagra: Highly parallel
graph construction and approximate nearest neighbor search for gpus,” in
2024 IEEE 40th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 4236–4247.
[12] Y. Malkov, A. Ponomarenko, A. Logvinov, and V. Krylov, “Approximate
nearest neighbor algorithm based on navigable small world graphs,”
Information Systems, vol. 45, pp. 61–68, 2014.
[13] J. Arthurs, S. Drakopoulou, and A. Gandini, “Researching youtube,” pp.
3–15, 2018.
[14] C. Schuhmann, R. Beaumont, R. Vencu, C. Gordon et al., “Laion-5b: An
open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models,”
Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 35, pp. 25 278–
25 294, 2022.
[15] Y. Shi, Y. Sun, J. Du, X. Zhong et al., “Scalable overload-aware
graph-based index construction for 10-billion-scale vector similarity
search,”
ArXiv,
vol.
abs/2502.20695,
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:276725449
[16] S. Jayaram Subramanya, F. Devvrit, H. V. Simhadri, R. Krishnawamy
et al., “Diskann: Fast accurate billion-point nearest neighbor search on
a single node,” Advances in neural information processing Systems,
vol. 32, 2019.
[17] M. Wang, W. Xu, X. Yi, S. Wu et al., “Starling: An i/o-efficient disk-
resident graph index framework for high-dimensional vector similarity
search on data segment,” Proceedings of the ACM on Management of
Data, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 2024.
[18] CVPR.
(2023)
Cvpr
2023
tutorial.
[Online].
Available: https://matsui528.github.io/cvpr2023 tutorial neural search/
assets/pdf/billion scale ann.pdf
[19] F. Groh, L. Ruppert, P. Wieschollek, and H. P. Lensch, “Ggnn: Graph-
based gpu nearest neighbor search,” IEEE Transactions on Big Data,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 267–279, 2022.
[20] W. Zhao, S. Tan, and P. Li, “Song: Approximate nearest neighbor
search on gpu,” in 2020 IEEE 36th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1033–1044.
[21] Y. Yu, D. Wen, Y. Zhang, L. Qin et al., “Gpu-accelerated proximity
graph approximate nearest neighbor search and construction,” in 2022
IEEE 38th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 552–564.
[22] AWS.
(2024)
Amazon
ec2
spot
instances.
[Online].
Available:
https://aws.amazon.com/cn/ec2/spot/
[23] A.
Cloud.
(2025)
Alibaba
cloud
elastic
compute
service.
[On-
line]. Available: https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/ecs/user-guide/
what-is-a-spot-instance
[24] S. Chen, A. C. Zhou, Y. Shi, Y. Li, and X. Yao, “Memanns: Enhancing
billion-scale anns efficiency with practical pim hardware,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.23805, 2024.
[25] X. Miao, C. Shi, J. Duan, X. Xi et al., “Spotserve: Serving generative
large language models on preemptible instances,” in Proceedings of
the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2, 2024, pp.
1112–1127.
[26] M. Douze, A. Guzhva, C. Deng, J. Johnson et al., “The faiss library,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08281, 2024.
[27] M. R. Abbasifard, B. Ghahremani, and H. Naderi, “A survey on
nearest neighbor search methods,” International Journal of Computer
Applications, vol. 95, no. 25, 2014.
[28] T. Liu, A. Moore, K. Yang, and A. Gray, “An investigation of practical
approximate nearest neighbor algorithms,” Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, vol. 17, 2004.
[29] C. Fu and D. Cai, “Efanna: An extremely fast approximate near-
est neighbor search algorithm based on knn graph,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.07228, 2016.
[30] K. Hajebi, Y. Abbasi-Yadkori, H. Shahbazi, and H. Zhang, “Fast approx-
imate nearest-neighbor search with k-nearest neighbor graph,” in IJCAI
Proceedings-International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 22, no. 1, 2011, p. 1312.
[31] Azure. (2024) Use azure spot virtual machines. [Online]. Available:
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/spot-vms
[32] “Laion5b,” https://laion.ai/blog/laion-5b/.
[33] “Big ann benchmarks,” https://big-ann-benchmarks.com/neurips21.html.
[34] “Laion5b
data,”
https://the-eye.eu/public/AI/cah/laion5b/embeddings/
laion1B-nolang/img emb/.
[35] “Vectordbbench,” https://github.com/zilliztech/VectorDBBench.
[36] Anonymous.
(2025)
Scalegann
anonymous
code
repo.
[Online].
Available: https://github.com/AnonymousAuthor1111/ICDCS26
[37] Y. Pan, J. Sun, and H. Yu, “Lm-diskann: Low memory footprint in disk-
native dynamic graph-based ann indexing,” in 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Big Data (BigData).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 5987–5996.
[38] K. Tatsuno, D. Miyashita, T. Ikeda, K. Ishiyama et al., “Aisaq: All-
in-storage anns with product quantization for dram-free information
retrieval,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06004, 2024.
[39] Q. Chen, B. Zhao, H. Wang, M. Li et al., “Spann: Highly-efficient
billion-scale approximate nearest neighborhood search,” Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 5199–5212, 2021.
[40] B. Tian, H. Liu, Y. Tang, S. Xiao et al., “Towards high-throughput
and low-latency billion-scale vector search via cpu/gpu collaborative
filtering and re-ranking,” in FAST ’25: Proceedings of the 23rd USENIX
Conference on File and Storage Technologies, 2025, pp. 171–185.
[41] J. Ren, M. Zhang, and D. Li, “Hm-ann: Efficient billion-point nearest
neighbor search on heterogeneous memory,” Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 10 672–10 684, 2020.
[42] J. Jang, H. Choi, H. Bae, S. Lee et al., “{CXL-ANNS}:{Software-
Hardware} collaborative memory disaggregation and computation for
{Billion-Scale} approximate nearest neighbor search,” in 2023 USENIX
Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 23), 2023, pp. 585–600.
[43] B. Tian, H. Liu, Z. Duan, X. Liao et al., “Scalable billion-point
approximate nearest neighbor search using {SmartSSDs},” in 2024
USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 24), 2024, pp.
1135–1150.
[44] P.
Bhatotia,
R.
Rodrigues,
and
A.
Verma,
“Shredder:
Gpu-
accelerated
incremental
storage
and
computation,”
in
10th
USENIX
Conference
on
File
and
Storage
Technologies
(FAST
12).
San
Jose,
CA:
USENIX
Association,
feb
2012. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/conference/fast12/
shredder-gpu-accelerated-incremental-storage-and-computation
[45] T.-Y. Yang, Y. Chen, Y. Liang, and M.-C. Yang, “Seraph: Towards
scalable
and
efficient
fully-external
graph
computation
via
on-
demand processing,” in 22nd USENIX Conference on File and
Storage
Technologies
(FAST
24).
Santa
Clara,
CA:
USENIX
Association,
feb
2024,
pp.
373–387.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/fast24/presentation/yang-tsun-yu
[46] M. Wang, H. Wu, X. Ke, Y. Gao et al., “Accelerating graph indexing
for anns on modern cpus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.18113, 2025.
[47] Y. Shi, Y. Sun, J. Du, X. Zhong et al., “Scalable overload-aware graph-
based index construction for 10-billion-scale vector similarity search,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20695, 2025.
[48] Y. Xu, H. Liang, J. Li, S. Xu et al., “Spfresh: Incremental in-place update
for billion-scale vector search,” in Proceedings of the 29th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles, 2023, pp. 545–561.
[49] H. Xu, M. D. Manohar, P. A. Bernstein, B. Chandramouli et al.,
“In-place updates of a graph index for streaming approximate nearest
neighbor search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.13826, 2025.


--- Page 12 ---
[50] A. Singh, S. J. Subramanya, R. Krishnaswamy, and H. V. Simhadri,
“Freshdiskann: A fast and accurate graph-based ann index for streaming
similarity search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.09613, 2021.
[51] J. Duan, Z. Song, X. Miao, X. Xi et al., “Parcae: Proactive,{Liveput-
Optimized}{DNN} training on preemptible instances,” in 21st USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI
24), 2024, pp. 1121–1139.
[52] N. Chohan, C. Castillo, M. Spreitzer, M. Steinder et al., “See spot run:
Using spot instances for {MapReduce} workflows,” in 2nd USENIX
Workshop on Hot Topics in Cloud Computing (HotCloud 10), 2010.
[53] M. Taifi, J. Y. Shi, and A. Khreishah, “Spotmpi: A framework for
auction-based hpc computing using amazon spot instances,” in In-
ternational Conference on Algorithms and Architectures for Parallel
Processing.
Springer, 2011, pp. 109–120.
[54] Z. Mao, T. Xia, Z. Wu, W.-L. Chiang et al., “Skyserve: Serving ai
models across regions and clouds with spot instances,” in Proceedings
of the Twentieth European Conference on Computer Systems, 2025, pp.
159–175.
[55] J. Danysz, V. Del Rosal, and H. Gonz´alez-V´elez, “Aws ec2 spot
instances for mission critical services,” in Proceedings of the 34th ECMS
International Conference on Modelling and Simulation (ECMS 2020).
European Council for Modeling and Simulation, 2020.
[56] C. Wang, Q. Liang, and B. Urgaonkar, “An empirical analysis of amazon
ec2 spot instance features affecting cost-effective resource procurement,”
ACM Transactions on Modeling and Performance Evaluation of Com-
puting Systems (TOMPECS), vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1–24, 2018.
[57] K. Kim and K. Lee, “Making cloud spot instance interruption events
visible,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2024, 2024, pp.
2998–3009.
