--- Page 1 ---
Attention Once Is All You Need:
Efficient Streaming Inference with Stateful
Transformers
Victor Norgren
LayerScale, Inc.
https://layerscale.ai
victor@layerscale.ai
Abstract
We introduce a computational model for transformer inference centred on stateful
sessions: a stateful KV cache that lives across persistent sessions, advanced incre-
mentally by ingesting only new data as it arrives. By decoupling the data plane
from the query plane, incoming data is processed into the cache asynchronously
via lock-free pipelines, while queries execute as lightweight consumers of pre-
computed attention state. The resulting query complexity is O(|q|) in the query
length, independent of accumulated context size.
Stateful sessions are the foundational construct on which we build two further
mechanisms. Flash Queries pre-compute answers to registered questions after
each data update, pushing latency from the ∼43 ms standard-query path toward
zero for predictable query patterns by exploiting idle GPU cycles between data
arrivals, caching results, and pushing them to clients via server-sent events before
any question is asked. The architecture treats inference as continuously produc-
tive rather than discretely reactive, and this stance is only possible because the
underlying context is persistent. A multi-tenant continuous-batching scheduler
with cell-budget admission, adaptive chunked prefill, prefix-aware grouped prefill,
and concurrency-capped speculative decoding allows dozens of stateful sessions to
coexist on a single GPU alongside stateless API traffic, each retaining the O(|q|)
query-latency profile.
Unlike subquadratic architectures (Mamba Gu and Dao [2023], RWKV Peng et al.
[2023], Linear Attention Katharopoulos et al. [2020], RetNet Sun et al. [2023])
that trade model capacity for inference efficiency, we preserve full quadratic self-
attention Vaswani et al. [2017]. This matters: transformers consistently outperform
state-space and linear recurrence models on multi-step reasoning, in-context learn-
ing, and precise information retrieval. The proposed architecture delivers the
latency profile of O(1)-style designs without sacrificing the representational power
that makes transformers dominant on complex reasoning tasks.
On streaming benchmarks, the reference implementation achieves 2.4×–5.9×
speedup over conventional inference engines (vLLM, SGLang, TensorRT-LLM,
llama.cpp) and 22×–92× over cloud APIs (GPT-5.2, Claude Haiku, Claude Opus
4.5).
1
Introduction
Large language models perform well on financial analysis tasks: trend detection, pattern recognition,
and quantitative reasoning over market data Lopez-Lira and Tang [2023], Wu et al. [2023]. Deploying
these models in real-time trading systems is difficult. A trading system continuously receives price
updates and must answer analytical queries like “What is the current trend?” with minimal latency.
arXiv:2605.13784v1  [cs.LG]  13 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Modern inference frameworks address latency through KV-cache optimization. vLLM, llama.cpp,
SGLang, and TensorRT-LLM cache intermediate attention values and reuse them for requests sharing
common prefixes. This works for request-driven workloads: many users sending similar prompts to
the same model.
Streaming workloads are different. Data arrives continuously from external sources (market feeds,
sensors, logs). Queries arrive sporadically, each seeing the latest accumulated data. The “prefix”
changes with every data update. Request-driven caching provides no benefit: cache hit rate approaches
zero because each query has a unique prompt.
Conventional inference processes the entire context for each query, requiring O(n) operations for
context length n:
Cstandard = Q · O(n)
(1)
As context grows, query latency scales linearly with accumulated data.
We address streaming workloads directly. Instead of optimizing cache hit rates for request-driven
traffic, we exploit the asymmetry between data and query arrival rates to move prefill off the critical
path: data arrival triggers processing, not queries. The context partitions into regions with distinct
update semantics. Data processing is amortised across the streaming window. Queries consume
pre-computed state with O(|q|) latency.
Moving prefill off the critical path has a second consequence that is the focus of the present section:
GPU utilisation. Sustained accelerator utilisation in large production inference deployments is well
known to sit substantially below peak, typically in the 10–45% band, with the high end achieved
by the most mature serving stacks and the low end characteristic of clusters whose software cannot
keep their accelerators busy. The structural cause is the same in both regimes: under a request-driven
model, the accelerator has nothing useful to do between requests, so idle cycles are simply wasted
heat. A stateful, data-driven design converts those cycles into useful work. Data continues to flow
into the KV cache between user queries, and the Flash Query mechanism introduced in Section 3.9
spends idle GPU time pre-computing answers to registered questions against the latest cache state.
The same accelerator therefore does meaningfully more analytical work per unit power than the same
accelerator serving the same workload through a stateless request loop, with no change to the model
weights or the kernel implementations.
2
Problem Formulation
Let C = [S; D1; D2; . . . ; Dk] represent a context consisting of a static prefix S and k data segments
Di. In streaming applications:
(i) S remains constant across all queries
(ii) Di are appended incrementally
(iii) Queries Qj require attention over the full context
The naïve approach recomputes attention over [S; D1; . . . ; Dk; Qj] for each query Qj. We seek an
approach where:
T(Qj) = O(|Qj|) + o(|C|)
(2)
That is, query processing time scales with query length, not context length.
3
Architecture
Our system is designed for streaming-first inference, distinct from request-driven serving frameworks.
The core insight: existing KV-cache systems optimize for the wrong workload. They assume queries
drive computation, with caching as an optimization for repeated prefixes. Streaming workloads reverse
the relationship: data drives computation, and queries are sporadic consumers of pre-computed state.
3.1
Data-Driven vs Request-Driven Processing
Request-driven systems (vLLM, SGLang, TensorRT-LLM, llama.cpp, Ollama) follow this pattern:
2


--- Page 3 ---
1. Query arrives with full prompt
2. Check cache for prefix match
3. On miss: process entire prompt; on hit: process suffix only
4. Return response
This works well when many requests share static prefixes. It fails for streaming: each query has a
different “prefix” (the accumulated data), so cache misses dominate.
We exploit the asymmetry between the two arrival rates and move prefill off the critical path:
1. Data arrives continuously, independent of queries
2. Process and store representations immediately on arrival
3. Query arrives (sporadically)
4. Compute only the query tokens against pre-computed data state
5. Return response
The difference: data processing happens before any query arrives, driven by the data stream itself.
Queries become lightweight consumers of already-computed state.
(a) Request-Driven (vLLM, llama.cpp, Ollama)
time
Query
Data
Prefill
(full context)
Decode
T = O(n) per query
(b) Data-Driven (Ours)
time
Data
Data
Data
KV Cache
(pre-built)
Query
Decode
Continuous (amortized)
T = O(1)
Figure 1: Architectural comparison. (a) Request-driven systems process the full context when a query
arrives, yielding O(n) latency. (b) Our data-driven approach processes data continuously into the KV
cache; queries only trigger lightweight decoding, yielding O(1) latency.
3.2
On the Architectural Foundations of Constant-Time Query Performance
In transformer attention, each token computes attention over all preceding tokens. The standard
attention operation is:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QK⊤
√dk

V
(3)
where Q ∈Rm×dk are query vectors, K ∈Rn×dk are keys, and V ∈Rn×dv are values. For a
context of n tokens, computing attention requires O(mn) operations.
The key insight: when processing a new query of m tokens against a pre-computed context of n
tokens, we can decompose the computation. Let Kctx, Vctx denote the cached keys and values from
prior data ingestion. The query attention becomes:
Attention(Qquery, Kctx, Vctx) = softmax
QqueryK⊤
ctx
√dk

Vctx
(4)
3


--- Page 4 ---
Since Kctx and Vctx are pre-computed and stored, query processing requires only O(m · n) operations
for the attention computation itself. Critically, when m ≪n (short queries against large contexts), and
with the KV cache eliminating redundant key-value computation, the effective query cost becomes
O(m).
Request-driven systems exploit this for prefix reuse. We exploit it for continuous ingestion: data
tokens are processed on arrival, not on query. When a query arrives, it attends to pre-computed values.
Query cost scales with query length (∼50 tokens in our benchmarks), not context length (14,800+
tokens).
Complexity profile. The O(|q|) bound applies to query latency. Data ingestion and query response
operate on distinct paths that scale on different time bases: the ingestion path tracks the data arrival
rate, the query path scales only with query length. For workloads where these two cadences are
structurally separate (continuous data, sporadic queries), this separation is the load-bearing property
of the architecture, and the user-visible latency is governed by the query path alone, independent of
accumulated context size.
Formal latency model. Let Tprefill(n) denote the time to process n context tokens, Tdecode the time
per generated token, and m the number of output tokens. Conventional inference latency is:
Tstandard = Tprefill(nctx) + m · Tdecode
(5)
where Tprefill(n) = O(n) grows with context size. Our approach yields:
Tours = Tprefill(|q|) + m · Tdecode
(6)
where |q| is the query length (30–50 tokens in our benchmark queries). Since |q| ≪nctx, query
latency becomes effectively constant. For fast-answer queries where m = 1 and the token matches
pre-computed vocabulary:
Tfast = Tprefill(|q|) + Tsample ≈const
(7)
3.3
Hierarchical Context Partitioning
We partition the context into three regions with distinct update semantics:
• Region 0 (Frozen): System prompt, static instructions
• Region 1 (Sliding): Streaming data buffer with configurable retention
• Region 2 (Ephemeral): Query and response tokens
Region 0 is processed once during session initialization. Region 1 supports incremental updates with
configurable retention policy. Region 2 is cleared between queries, enabling multiple queries over the
same accumulated context. Figure 2 illustrates this partitioning scheme.
Hierarchical Context Partitioning
Region 0
(Frozen)
Region 1 (Sliding)
Region 2
(Ephemeral)
System Prompt
Streaming Data Buffer
Query + Response
Processed once
at init
Continuous updates
FIFO eviction
Cleared between
queries
Old data evicted
New data
arrives
Token Position
0
n
Figure 2: Hierarchical context partitioning. Region 0 (frozen) contains static instructions processed
once. Region 1 (sliding) holds streaming data with FIFO eviction for bounded memory. Region 2
(ephemeral) contains query/response tokens, cleared between queries.
4


--- Page 5 ---
3.4
Persistent Session State
Conventional inference frameworks treat each request as independent: the connection terminates
after response generation, and all intermediate state (including the KV cache) is discarded. This
stateless design simplifies scaling and load balancing, but forces complete recomputation when the
same context is queried again.
For streaming workloads, statelessness is fundamentally incompatible with low-latency queries. If
intermediate representations are discarded between requests, every query must reprocess the entire
accumulated context: precisely the O(n) cost we seek to eliminate. Persistent session state is
therefore not an optimization but a requirement for O(1) query latency.
Each session maintains:
• Processed intermediate representations for Regions 0–1
• Position tracking for sequence continuity
• Buffer metadata for sliding window management
• Session isolation for concurrent multi-user deployments
When new data arrives, only the delta is processed and appended to existing state. This enables
true streaming: data can flow continuously while queries access the latest accumulated context with
constant latency.
The trade-off is memory: each active session consumes KV cache storage proportional to its context
length (see Section 6.3 for memory analysis). We accept this trade-off because streaming workloads
are inherently session-oriented: a sensor feed or market data stream maintains logical continuity that
maps naturally to persistent state.
3.5
Continuous Background Ingestion
For true streaming applications, data arrives faster than individual processing requests can complete.
We implement asynchronous ingestion where:
1. Data push operations return immediately without blocking
2. A background processor continuously ingests queued data into the KV cache
3. Queries execute against the latest processed state
4. If ingestion cannot keep pace, oldest unprocessed data is automatically discarded
This architecture separates the data plane (high-throughput ingestion) from the query plane (low-
latency responses). The producer (data source) is never blocked by processing latency, and queries
always see a consistent, pre-computed context state.
The background processor batches incoming data for efficient KV cache updates, amortizing the
per-item overhead across multiple entries. After each batch, the system pre-computes query response
scaffolding, enabling sub-100ms responses when queries arrive. The ring buffer is sized to absorb
typical burst patterns; when sustained arrival rate exceeds ingestion throughput, the oldest unprocessed
data is discarded rather than blocking the producer.
WebSocket transport. In addition to HTTP POST ingestion, sessions accept a persistent WebSocket
connection for bidirectional streaming. Clients push data frames without per-request overhead, and
the same socket carries outbound Flash Query results and data-version notifications back to the client.
Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 formalize the data ingestion and query processing loops.
3.6
Priority-Scheduled GPU Decoding
The data plane / query plane separation is architectural, but a single GPU still serializes every forward
pass underneath. Without coordination, a long-running background ingestion batch can block an
incoming query for hundreds of milliseconds; an overlapping Flash Query evaluation can starve the
decode needed for an interactive response. A per-request GPU mutex solves correctness but creates
arbitrary tail latencies.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Algorithm 1 Data Ingestion (Background Thread)
Require: Ring buffer B, KV cache K, batch size b
1: loop
2:
batch ←[]
3:
while |batch| < b and B.pending() > 0 do
4:
batch.append(B.dequeue())
5:
end while
6:
if |batch| > 0 then
7:
tokens ←Tokenize(batch)
8:
if K.size() + |tokens| > K.capacity() then
9:
K.evict_oldest(|tokens|) {FIFO eviction}
10:
end if
11:
K.append(Forward(tokens, K)) {Incremental KV update}
12:
PrecomputeQueryScaffold(K)
13:
end if
14: end loop
Algorithm 2 Query Processing
Require: Query q, KV cache K already populated from prior data ingestion
1: tokensq ←Tokenize(q)
2: logits ←Forward(tokensq, K) {O(|q|) not O(|K|)}
3: token ←Sample(logits)
4: output ←[token]
5: while token ̸= EOS do
6:
logits ←Forward(token, K)
7:
token ←Sample(logits)
8:
output.append(token)
9: end while
10: return Detokenize(output)
Data
Source
Ring Buffer
(Lock-free)
Background
Processor
KV Cache
Non-blocking
Batch
Query
Decode
Pre-computed state
Non-blocking
Backpressure
O(1)
Figure 3: Data plane / query plane separation. The data plane handles high-throughput ingestion via
a lock-free ring buffer. The query plane executes against pre-computed KV cache state, achieving
O(1) latency.
6


--- Page 7 ---
We centralize all GPU decode dispatch through a single worker thread fronted by a priority queue.
Submissions are tagged with one of four priority classes:
π ∈{FLASH, SESSION, POOL, STREAM}
(8)
ordered from highest to lowest. FLASH is used for registered Flash Query evaluation on the
latency-critical path; SESSION for interactive /generate queries; POOL for stateless request-driven
completions on the OpenAI and Anthropic endpoints; STREAM for background data ingestion
batches. Within a priority class, requests are FIFO by submission sequence number. The worker
thread blocks on a condition variable, wakes when any request arrives, pops the highest-priority
request, runs the forward pass, waits for GPU completion under the mutex, and signals the caller.
Callers submit a batch and wait on a per-request condition variable. While they wait, they hold no
GPU lock, so CPU-bound work elsewhere (sampling, SSE serialization, JSON parsing) proceeds
in parallel. A Flash Query evaluation can preempt a streaming ingest at the next batch boundary
rather than after the current decode: the scheduler yields after every decode, not every request. This
bounds the worst-case wait for a FLASH-priority decode to the duration of a single in-flight batch,
independent of how many background ingestion jobs are queued behind it.
3.7
Multi-Tenant Continuous Batching
A single stateful session is sufficient to demonstrate the O(|q|) query property, but a production deploy-
ment must host many concurrent sessions and stateless API traffic on the same GPU. We implement an
admit-many / run-few continuous-batching scheduler that builds heterogeneous PREFILL+DECODE
batches per iteration, with four mechanisms that together let stateful sessions of widely different
context sizes coexist without starvation.
Cell-budget admission. The scheduler tracks occupancy of the unified KV cache in cells (one cell per
token per layer) and admits a new prefill only when the projected total (sum of prompt + max_tokens
across admitted slots) remains below a fixed ceiling Cbudget = 1
2|pool|. The other half is reserved for
cached prefixes (Section 3.10) and in-flight session state. When occupancy crosses a high-water mark
(95%), incoming prefill chunks are deferred at chunk granularity rather than at request granularity,
providing fine-grained backpressure without rejecting requests.
Adaptive chunked prefill. For N slots with pending prefill work, each slot is allocated a per-iteration
chunk of size chunk = clamp(nbatch/N, 128, 1024) tokens. With a single active prefill the chunk
reaches ∼1024 (large prefill batches, near-peak throughput); with many concurrent prefills the chunk
shrinks so that decoding slots are not starved within an iteration. This contrasts with static chunk
sizes (e.g. vLLM’s default 512) and prefill-priority gating (e.g. SGLang) that can stall decode under
heavy admission.
Prefix-aware grouped prefill. Slots whose prompts share a byte-identical prefix beyond the radix-
cache match point, identified by FNV-1a hashing the next K = 8 tokens, are grouped into a single
leader-follower prefill. The leader processes the chunk; each follower acquires the resulting state via
a metadata-only sequence-aliasing operation on the unified KV cache. This converts N redundant
forward passes into one and is particularly effective for shared system prompts and tool schemas
across tenants.
Concurrency-capped speculative decoding. The scheduler runs prompt-lookup speculative decod-
ing (PLD) Saxena [2023] per slot, predicting continuations from the slot’s recent token history and
verifying them in a batched forward pass. Naive per-slot speculation collapses at high admission,
because the verification cost scales as the product of the per-slot draft length and the number of
concurrent decoders, while the acceptance rate falls sharply on unfamiliar content. The scheduler
therefore caps the per-slot draft length as a joint function of two signals: the number of active
decoders, and the per-slot historical acceptance rate. Specific thresholds are tuned per accelerator
class and model size and surface as configuration parameters rather than constants in the architecture.
The per-slot prediction step is parallelized across worker threads, removing it from the critical path.
The result preserves the latency win of speculation on high-acceptance workloads (single-agent tool
loops, repetitive structured output) while avoiding the throughput collapse that uncapped speculation
produces under load.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Why this matters for stateful inference. Without these mechanisms, stateful sessions would not
scale beyond a small handful: a single long-context session would either starve, or be starved by, all
other tenants. With cell-budget admission and adaptive chunked prefill, dozens of sessions of mixed
context lengths coexist on one GPU, each retaining the O(|q|) query-latency profile of Section 3.2.
The full set of mechanisms above is, to our knowledge, distinct from the schedulers shipped in vLLM
(PagedAttention with static chunk size) and SGLang (RadixAttention with prefill-priority gating); the
cell-budget admission, prefix-aware grouped prefill, and concurrency-capped PLD are original to this
work.
3.8
On-Device Greedy Sampling
The remaining per-token cost in a streaming query is the sampling step. Every generated token
reduces to an argmax over the vocabulary logits, which for a 128 k-token vocabulary is ∼512 KB of
floats per token. The naive pipeline pulls those logits back to host memory after a GPU synchronise,
materialises a candidate array on the CPU, and scans for the maximum. That synchronise-plus-scan
round trip costs 2–4 ms per token on Apple silicon and 0.5–1 ms on server-class NVIDIA and AMD
GPUs, comparable to the entire target latency budget on short responses.
We instead run the argmax on the device. A small runtime dispatcher selects a device-specific
reduction kernel at startup (one path each for the major accelerator families) and routes greedy
argmax, along with a batched speculative-verification variant, through the native kernel. Builds
without a supported accelerator fall back to a wide-SIMD CPU reduction. Each device kernel is a
parallel reduction with a shared-memory tournament that returns a single token id directly, so the
host never materialises or scans the logits vector. The same kernel surface exposes a batched variant
for accepting or rejecting a window of speculated tokens in one dispatch.
In addition, a set of small CPU-side optimizations (pre-tokenised digit and template fragments for
numerical streaming data, cache-line aligned atomic counters, lock-free single-producer / single-
consumer ring buffers between the data plane and ingestion thread) collectively reduce per-operation
overhead from milliseconds to microseconds. These follow well-known patterns from low-latency
systems engineering and are not novel in themselves; they appear here because the constant-time
query path is only constant-time end-to-end if every layer along it is.
3.9
Flash Queries: Ahead-of-Time Query Evaluation
The preceding optimizations minimize query latency but cannot eliminate it: every query still requires
at least one forward pass over the question tokens. We now introduce Flash Queries, a mechanism
that pushes latency toward zero by pre-computing answers before questions are asked.
3.9.1
Motivation: Reclaiming Idle GPU Cycles
In streaming workloads, data arrives at a natural cadence: market ticks at 1–60 s intervals, sensor
readings at fixed sample rates, log entries at variable but bounded rates. Between arrivals, the GPU
sits idle. The aggregate cost of that idleness is substantial: large inference deployments typically
run at sustained accelerator utilisation in the 10–45% band, and the gap to peak is dominated by
exactly this between-request idle time. Meanwhile, many analytical queries are predictable: users
repeatedly ask the same questions (“What is the trend?”, “Is the signal confirmed?”) as data evolves.
Flash Queries exploit this predictability by spending the otherwise-wasted GPU cycles between data
arrivals to pre-evaluate registered questions against the current context state. The accelerator is busy
whenever it is powered on; the user sees the cached answer instantly when they ask.
This treats inference as continuously productive rather than discretely reactive: between data arrivals
the accelerator pre-evaluates registered questions against the latest KV state, so the user-visible query
path collects a cached answer rather than triggering generation. The framing parallels recent work
on real-time interaction models, where the same shift from turn-based to always-on processing is
applied to the human-facing channel instead of the data-facing one.
Critically, this optimization is only possible in a stateful architecture. Stateless inference engines
discard the KV cache after each request, making it impossible to speculatively evaluate queries
against a persistent context. The persistent session state described in Section 3.4 is a prerequisite.
8


--- Page 9 ---
3.9.2
Formal Definition
Let F = {f1, f2, . . . , fk} be a set of k registered Flash Queries, where each fi is a tokenized question
template. Let Kt denote the KV cache state at data version t (incremented after each data ingestion
batch). For each Flash Query fi, we define the ahead-of-time evaluation operator:
ˆa(t)
i
= Sample(Forward(fi, Kt))
(9)
where ˆa(t)
i
is the pre-computed answer for query fi at data version t. The Flash Query cache is the
mapping:
Ct =
n
fi, ˆa(t)
i , γ(t)
i

| i = 1, . . . , k
o
(10)
where γ(t)
i
= ℓ(1)
i
−ℓ(2)
i
is the logit gap, the difference between the highest and second-highest logit
values, serving as a confidence measure. Larger gaps indicate stronger model certainty. The cache is
invalidated whenever the data version advances: Ct becomes stale when t′ > t.
When a query q arrives at data version t, the system first checks the Flash Query cache:
Response(q, t) =
(
ˆa(t)
i
if ∃fi ∈F : h(q) = h(fi) and ˆa(t)
i
is valid
Forward(q, Kt)
otherwise
(11)
where h(·) is a hash function over the question string. Cache hits bypass all GPU computation
entirely.
3.9.3
In-Place Evaluation with Header Restore
Flash Query evaluation must not corrupt the primary KV cache state. We achieve this through
in-place evaluation: temporarily extending the primary sequence at the pre-decoded header position,
then removing the extension and restoring the original state.
Let s0 denote the primary sequence containing the accumulated context through the pre-decoded
response header at position p. For each Flash Query fi, the evaluation procedure is:
1. Strip: Remove the pre-decoded header tokens from s0 at position p: SeqRemove(s0, p, ∞)
2. Extend: Decode the question tokens of fi on s0 starting at position p, yielding logits ℓi
3. Sample: Compute ˆa(t)
i
= arg max(ℓi) with confidence γ(t)
i
= ℓ(1)
i
−ℓ(2)
i
(logit gap between
top two tokens)
4. Clear: Remove the question tokens: SeqRemove(s0, p, ∞)
After all Flash Queries are evaluated, the original header is restored by re-decoding the header tokens
at position p, returning the KV cache to its pre-evaluation state. This re-decode also refreshes the
ready-position logits for speculative exit.
This approach avoids the memory overhead of shadow sequence copies by reusing the primary
sequence. Each evaluation costs only the forward pass over question tokens (proportional to question
length, not context length), plus a single header re-decode amortized across all queries.
3.9.4
Ready-Position Speculative Exit
The background ingestion loop (Algorithm 1) already computes a forward pass to pre-decode the
response header after each data batch. This pass produces logits ℓready that represent the model’s
output distribution before seeing any question, a signal of the model’s “default” assessment of the
current data state.
We cache these ready-position logits and use them for speculative early exit at query time. When a
query arrives, before any tokenization or GPU work, we check:
9


--- Page 10 ---
∆ready = ℓ(1)
ready −ℓ(2)
ready
(12)
where ℓ(1)
ready and ℓ(2)
ready are the highest and second-highest logit values, respectively. If ∆ready > τ (we
use τ = 2.0) and the top token belongs to the fast-answer vocabulary V :
ℓ(1)
ready ∈V and ∆ready > τ =⇒return Detokenize(arg max(ℓready))
(13)
This exits in O(1) time: no forward pass, no tokenisation, just a comparison and table lookup. The
logit-gap threshold τ controls the confidence-latency trade-off; a higher τ requires stronger model
confidence for speculative exit, reducing false positives at the cost of fewer cache hits.
3.9.5
Cost Model and Amortization
Let Tf denote the time to evaluate a single Flash Query (dominated by the forward pass over question
tokens), and Tdata the interval between data arrivals. The total background compute cost per data
update is:
Tbackground = Tingest + Theader + k · Tf
(14)
where Tingest is the data ingestion time and Theader is the response header pre-decode time. For Flash
Queries to be “free” (invisible to query latency), we require:
Tbackground < Tdata
(15)
In practice, with Tf ≈30–35ms per Flash Query and Tdata ≥1s for typical streaming workloads, the
system can sustain:
kmax =
Tdata −Tingest −Theader
Tf

(16)
For Tdata = 1 s and Tf = 33 ms, this yields kmax ≈25 Flash Queries, far more than typical analytical
workloads require.
3.9.6
Event-Driven Result Delivery
Flash Query results are delivered to clients via server-sent events (SSE) over a persistent HTTP
connection. After each evaluation cycle, the system emits structured events:
Event(fi, t) =
D
flash_ready, fi, ˆa(t)
i , γ(t)
i , t
E
(17)
This push-based delivery model means clients receive updated answers before they ask, enabling
reactive UIs, dashboards, and automated decision systems that respond to model assessments in
real time. The SSE protocol provides automatic reconnection semantics, ordered delivery, and
compatibility with standard HTTP infrastructure.
The event stream also emits data_updated events after each ingestion batch, allowing clients to
track data freshness and correlate Flash Query answers with specific data versions.
3.9.7
Latency Taxonomy
With Flash Queries and ready-position speculative exit, query latency falls into three tiers:
The effective average latency depends on the hit rate ρ across the three paths:
¯T = ρflash · Tflash + ρspec · Tspec + (1 −ρflash −ρspec) · Tstandard
(18)
10


--- Page 11 ---
Path
Latency
Condition
Flash Query cache hit
∼2ms
Question matches registered Flash Query
Speculative exit
∼2ms
Ready-position logit gap > τ
Standard query
∼45ms
Fallback to full query processing
For workloads where 60–80% of queries match Flash Query templates and 10–20% trigger specu-
lative exit, the expected average latency drops from the ∼43 ms standard-query path to single-digit
milliseconds, a further order-of-magnitude improvement over the already-optimized baseline.
Algorithm 3 formalizes the complete Flash Query evaluation cycle.
Algorithm 3 Flash Query Evaluation (Background, after data ingestion)
Require: KV cache K with primary sequence s0, Flash Queries F, data version t, header position p
1: ℓready ←GetLogits(K, s0) {Cache ready-position logits}
2: SeqRemove(s0, p, ∞) {Strip pre-decoded header}
3: for each fi ∈F do
4:
ℓi ←Forward(fi.tokens, K, s0, p) {Decode question at position p}
5:
ˆa(t)
i
←arg max(ℓi)
6:
γ(t)
i
←ℓ(1)
i
−ℓ(2)
i
{Logit gap confidence}
7:
Ct[fi] ←(ˆa(t)
i , γ(t)
i , t)
8:
Emit(flash_ready, fi, ˆa(t)
i , γ(t)
i , t) {Push via SSE}
9:
SeqRemove(s0, p, ∞) {Clear question tokens}
10: end for
11: RestoreHeader(K, s0, p) {Re-decode header, refresh ℓready}
3.10
Sequence Pool and Radix Prefix Cache
The preceding sections describe session-based inference, where each session owns a dedicated, long-
lived sequence within the inference context. For stateless request-driven workloads (e.g. OpenAI-
compatible or Anthropic-compatible API endpoints), the proposed architecture additionally provides
a sequence pool backed by a radix prefix cache, delivering sub-millisecond prefix reuse without CPU
serialization.
3.10.1
Sequence Pool
At startup, the scheduler partitions the unified KV cache into a transient pool (P sequence IDs for
stateless requests) and a session pool (S sequence IDs reserved for long-lived sessions). Transient
slots are recycled across requests through a thread-safe free list with condition-variable blocking
when all slots are in use. Pre-allocation removes per-request context construction from the critical
path.
This single-context, multi-sequence design is deliberate. A single forward pass mixes prefill and
decode tokens from any subset of sequence IDs (the heterogeneous batching of Section 3.7), so prefix
sharing across requests reduces to metadata-only aliasing within the same KV cache rather than
cross-context coordination.
3.10.2
Radix Prefix Cache
Shared prefixes are tracked in a radix trie keyed by token sequences. Each node records the donor
sequence ID whose KV state still holds the matched cells. When a new request arrives with a
matching prefix, the scheduler restores the prefix into a freshly acquired slot via a metadata-only
sequence-aliasing operation:
Trestore = Talias(m) ≪Tserialize(m)
(19)
11


--- Page 12 ---
where m is the prefix length in tokens. Aliasing operates on GPU pointer tables and completes
in constant time independent of m, an asymptotic improvement over the linear-in-m cost of CPU-
mediated serialization used by some block-paged designs.
The radix is admission-aware: prefix saves are gated against the cell budget of Section 3.7, and
eviction follows a leaf-oldest policy that preserves long shared branches (system prompts, tool
schemas) while shedding stale tails. Saves are incremental: when a new request extends a cached
branch, only the delta cells are committed.
3.10.3
Response and Render Caches
Beyond prefix caching, the proposed architecture caches the full response text for any prompt that
has been served before. The sampler is seeded deterministically from an FNV-1a hash of the prompt
tokens:
seed(P) = FNV1a(P) mod 232
(20)
so that identical prompts produce identical outputs at any temperature. A 1024-entry LRU response
cache is consulted before the sequence pool is acquired: on hit, the request returns at network-
roundtrip latency with zero GPU work. Two complementary caches handle the template-render and
tokenize stages (256 and 64 entries respectively), eliminating redundant Jinja application and BPE
tokenization, which on long prompts otherwise consume tens of milliseconds.
4
Experimental Setup
4.1
Benchmark Scenario
We designed the benchmark to simulate a realistic streaming workload where data arrives continuously
and queries arrive sporadically after data updates:
1. Initialize with 100 data samples
2. For each of 15 iterations: add 55 new samples, then issue a query
3. Measure query latency (time from query submission to response)
This scenario specifically tests the streaming use case: data accumulates over time, and users query
against the latest state. Context grows from 155 to 925 samples (approximately 2,600 to 14,800
tokens).
4.2
Dataset
We constructed a synthetic OHLCV dataset representing hourly candlestick bars for a single equity.
Each sample contains open, high, low, close prices and volume (∼16 tokens per sample). The data
includes realistic market microstructure:
• Uptrend phases with higher highs and higher lows
• Correction phases with pullbacks
• Consolidation phases with sideways movement
We report OHLCV results because financial streaming is the most latency-sensitive use case in our
target workloads. The ingestion framework itself is data-type-agnostic: only the record schema and
tokenisation rule are application-specific; the ring buffer, ingestion loop, Flash Queries, and caching
infrastructure are shared.
4.3
Query Set
Six query types testing different analytical capabilities:
• Q1: Trend classification (UP/DOWN)
12


--- Page 13 ---
• Q2: Pullback detection (YES/NO)
• Q3: Recent high detection (YES/NO)
• Q4: Consolidation detection (YES/NO)
• Q5: Volume pattern detection (YES/NO)
• Q6: Exact value retrieval (numeric)
Q6 specifically tests precise information retrieval from mid-context, a known challenge for trans-
former models Liu et al. [2024].
4.4
Baselines
We compare against eight baselines spanning open-weight and proprietary models:
• vLLM: High-throughput inference server with PagedAttention Kwon et al. [2023]
• SGLang: Structured generation framework with RadixAttention Zheng et al. [2024]
• TensorRT-LLM: NVIDIA’s optimized inference library with FP8 quantization
• llama.cpp: Lightweight C++ inference engine with prompt caching enabled
• OpenAI GPT-4o-mini: Cloud API baseline (smaller, faster model)
• OpenAI GPT-5.2: Cloud API baseline (latest generation model)
• Claude 3.5 Haiku: Cloud API baseline (Anthropic’s fast model)
• Claude Opus 4.5: Cloud API baseline (Anthropic’s flagship model)
For cloud APIs, each query sends the complete accumulated context. While these services offer
prompt caching for repeated prefixes, they do not maintain persistent conversational sessions across
requests. All systems use temperature τ = 0 (greedy decoding) for reproducibility.
4.5
Hardware Configuration
All open-weight model experiments (the proposed system, llama.cpp, vLLM, SGLang, and TensorRT-
LLM) were conducted on a single NVIDIA L40S accelerator (48 GB GDDR6, 864 GB/s memory
bandwidth) in a single-tenant configuration. All systems use Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct in BF16
precision (∼16 GB of model weights). The same model checkpoint, tokeniser, and chat template
are used across every engine to isolate the contribution of the inference stack from any model-side
variation.
Speedup interpretation. The 2.4×–5.9× speedup over conventional inference engines is an algo-
rithmic improvement, not a hardware-specific one. Processing data at ingest time rather than query
time reduces query latency complexity from O(n) to O(|q|) regardless of the accelerator. On more
capable hardware the relative speedup should be preserved or amplified as larger contexts become
feasible.
Scaling projections. On a single accelerator, the proposed architecture achieves sub-50 ms median
query latency (∼43 ms). Multi-accelerator deployments would enable larger concurrent session
counts and potentially sub-20 ms latency through parallelisation of the data plane.
4.6
Metrics
• Query latency (ms): Time from query submission to response completion
• Accuracy (%): Correct responses / total queries
• Latency scaling: How latency changes as context grows
13


--- Page 14 ---
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Samples
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Query Latency (ms)
Query Latency Comparison
llama.cpp
vLLM
SGLang
TRT-LLM
LayerScale
LayerScale
SGLang
vLLM
TRT-LLM
llama.cpp
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Average Latency (ms)
43ms
53%
106ms
2x | 53%
139ms
3x | 53%
229ms
5x | 53%
254ms
6x | 47%
Average Latency & Accuracy
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Samples
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
14000
16000
Tokens in Context
14,950 tokens
Context Size
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Samples
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
Latency per Token (ms)
Efficiency: Latency / Token
llama.cpp
vLLM
SGLang
TRT-LLM
LayerScale
Figure 4: Performance comparison across nine systems on streaming OHLCV data (155–925 samples).
The proposed architecture maintains constant ∼43 ms query latency regardless of context size.
Conventional inference engines (vLLM, SGLang, TensorRT-LLM, llama.cpp) show ∼106–254 ms
latency, while cloud APIs range from 926 ms to 3,962 ms.
Table 1: Performance comparison (streaming benchmark: 155–925 samples, 15 iterations)
Platform
Avg Latency (ms)
Accuracy (%)
vs LayerScale
LayerScale
43.4
53.3
baseline
SGLang
105.6
53.3
2.4× slower
vLLM
139.1
53.3
3.2× slower
TensorRT-LLM
228.8
53.3
5.3× slower
llama.cpp (with caching)
254.0
46.7
5.9× slower
GPT-5.2
926
75
21× slower
GPT-4o-mini
1,124
55
26× slower
Claude Opus 4.5
2,628
70
61× slower
Claude 3.5 Haiku
3,962
65
92× slower
14


--- Page 15 ---
5
Results
5.1
Latency Analysis
The proposed architecture shows constant query latency regardless of context size. Conventional
inference engines reach 106–254 ms average latency on the same workload; the stateful path holds
steady at ∼43 ms throughout, a 2.4×–5.9× speedup.
Why constant latency? Under the access pattern characterised in Section 3, the query path scales
with |q| rather than with nctx: the dependence on accumulated context is collapsed into a constant-
time term that does not grow with the streaming horizon. With short user queries (|q| ≈50 in our
benchmarks) against contexts that span thousands to tens of thousands of tokens, the observed query
latency is dominated by the small per-query term and is therefore effectively independent of how
much data has arrived since the session was opened. Single-token classification responses complete
in tens of milliseconds.
Inference engine comparison. Despite their optimizations, request-driven inference engines must
reprocess the full context every query:
• SGLang reaches 105.6 ms average latency with RadixAttention prefix caching
• vLLM reaches 139.1 ms average latency with PagedAttention
• TensorRT-LLM reaches 228.8 ms average latency
• llama.cpp reaches 254.0 ms average latency with prompt caching enabled
The advantage on the streaming workload comes from amortising data ingestion across the inter-query
interval, which all four request-driven systems cannot exploit because they discard intermediate state
between requests. The gap to the closest competitor (SGLang) is the smallest because RadixAttention
captures some incremental savings on a partially-shared context; the gap widens for the remaining
systems.
Cloud API comparison. Cloud APIs must transmit and process the full context for each request:
• GPT-5.2 and GPT-4o-mini reach ∼900–1,100 ms average through optimized infrastructure
• Claude Opus 4.5 shows ∼2,600 ms latency
• Claude 3.5 Haiku shows ∼4,000 ms latency
The stateful path outperforms conventional inference engines by 2.4×–5.9× and cloud APIs by
21×–92×.
5.2
Latency Variance Analysis
Beyond average latency, variance is critical for real-time applications. Table 2 presents standard
deviation measurements across all systems.
Table 2: Latency variance analysis (15 iterations)
Platform
Avg (ms)
Std Dev (ms)
Min (ms)
Max (ms)
LayerScale
43.4
15.6
26.8
83.4
SGLang
105.6
21.3
72.0
135.6
vLLM
139.1
37.2
80.1
193.6
TensorRT-LLM
228.8
47.5
159.8
318.4
llama.cpp
254.0
44.3
189.9
334.1
GPT-5.2
926
213
697
1,590
GPT-4o-mini
1,124
423
602
2,209
Claude Opus 4.5
2,628
261
2,215
3,251
Claude 3.5 Haiku
3,962
1,519
1,550
6,824
Key observations:
15


--- Page 16 ---
• The stateful path exhibits the lowest absolute variance (σ = 15.6 ms)
• Open-weight inference engines show moderate variance (σ = 21–48 ms)
• Cloud APIs exhibit high variance, particularly Claude 3.5 Haiku (σ = 1,519 ms) due to
network latency and shared infrastructure
For latency-sensitive applications, low variance is as important as low mean latency: the proposed
architecture provides both.
5.3
Accuracy
All four open-weight engines run the same Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct checkpoint and reach the
same 53.3% accuracy on the streaming query set, with the exception of llama.cpp at 46.7%. Cloud
models (GPT-5.2 75%, Claude Opus 4.5 70%, Claude 3.5 Haiku 65%, GPT-4o-mini 55%) generally
score higher on the harder reasoning queries, reflecting model scale rather than serving architecture.
The architectural optimizations described in Section 3 preserve model quality while delivering
substantially lower latency.
6
Discussion
6.1
Applicability
Our approach is applicable when:
(i) Context has static/dynamic partitioning
(ii) Data arrives continuously but queries arrive sporadically
(iii) Data updates are incremental (append or sliding window)
(iv) Low query latency is required
Financial streaming is a natural fit. Other applicable domains include log analysis, sensor monitoring,
IoT data processing, and conversational agents with persistent memory.
6.2
Limitations
The current implementation assumes:
• Single-sequence contexts (no cross-document attention)
• Causal attention patterns
• Sufficient memory to maintain session state
Multi-document retrieval and bidirectional models require architectural extensions not addressed in
this work.
Attention scope. Within the sliding window, we maintain full quadratic attention over all retained
data. However, when data is evicted from Region 1, attention over that data is lost. The model retains
only what remains in the active context. For applications requiring awareness of historical patterns
beyond the retention window, a promising architectural extension is to add a dedicated KV cache
region for rolling summaries: periodically compressing older data into summary representations
before eviction, preserving semantic information while bounding memory growth.
6.3
Memory Considerations
We trade memory for computation. Each session maintains intermediate representations proportional
to context length. The KV cache memory footprint per session is:
MKV = 2 · L · d · nctx · sizeof(dtype)
(21)
where L is the number of layers, d is the hidden dimension, nctx is the context length, and the factor
of 2 accounts for both keys and values. For Meta-Llama-3.1-8B (L = 32, d = 4096) with 32K
context and FP16 precision:
MKV = 2 · 32 · 4096 · 32768 · 2 bytes ≈17 GB per session
(22)
16


--- Page 17 ---
For deployments with many concurrent sessions, memory management matters. The maximum
concurrent sessions is bounded by:
Nsessions ≤Mavailable −Mmodel
MKV
(23)
We implement session pooling and LRU eviction for production deployments, prioritizing active
sessions while evicting idle ones to disk or discarding them entirely.
7
Related Work
KV-Cache Serving Frameworks. Production inference systems like vLLM Kwon et al. [2023],
TensorRT-LLM, SGLang Zheng et al. [2024], llama.cpp, Ollama, and HuggingFace TGI implement
KV-cache persistence and prefix sharing to amortize computation across requests with common
prefixes. These systems are request-driven: computation occurs when queries arrive, and caching
optimizes for repeated identical prefixes across multiple users. We address a different problem:
data-driven inference where a single session receives continuous data updates and sporadic queries.
The optimization target shifts from “serve many users with shared static prefixes” to “serve one
session with continuously evolving context.”
Prefix Caching. RadixAttention (SGLang) and automatic prefix caching (vLLM) identify and
reuse common prefixes across requests. These techniques assume prefixes are static and shared. In
streaming workloads, the “prefix” changes with each data update, invalidating cached state. Our
region-based architecture treats the dynamic portion as first-class, processing updates incrementally
rather than invalidating on change. In companion work, we extend prefix caching with response-level
caching and n-gram speculative generation for multi-agent tool calling workloads, where conversation
prefixes grow monotonically across turns.
Disaggregated Prefill. vLLM’s disaggregated prefilling Zhong et al. [2024] separates prompt
processing (prefill) from token generation (decode) across different instances, transferring KV caches
via connectors. This improves time-to-first-token by preventing prefill jobs from blocking decode
operations. However, it remains request-driven: prefill still occurs when queries arrive, and KV cache
must be transferred between instances for each request. The approach optimizes latency distribution
but explicitly does not improve throughput. Our approach is fundamentally different: we process
data into the KV cache before any query arrives, eliminating prefill from the query path entirely.
There is no KV cache transfer overhead because the cache already resides where queries execute. For
streaming workloads, this yields both lower latency and higher throughput.
Prompt Caching. Cloud providers Anthropic [2024] offer prompt caching for repeated identical
prompts. This fails for streaming: each query has a different prompt (new data appended), so cache
hit rate approaches zero.
Sparse Attention. Longformer Beltagy et al. [2020], BigBird Zaheer et al. [2020], and Sparse
Transformer Child et al. [2019] reduce attention complexity from O(n2) to O(n) by limiting which
tokens can attend to which: sliding windows, random patterns, or strided access. The drawback:
sparse patterns sacrifice full global context access. Long-range dependencies may be missed if they
don’t align with the sparsity pattern, degrading performance on tasks requiring precise information
retrieval across the full context. We maintain full quadratic attention while achieving constant query
latency through architectural separation of data and query processing.
FlashAttention. FlashAttention Dao et al. [2022] and FlashAttention-2 Dao [2023] optimize the
implementation of attention by exploiting GPU memory hierarchy: tiling attention computation to
maximize SRAM utilization and minimize HBM transfers. This achieves 2–4× wall-clock speedups
while computing mathematically identical results. FlashAttention is orthogonal to our contribution: it
accelerates individual attention operations, while we eliminate repeated attention operations through
architectural redesign. Our system can use FlashAttention as the underlying attention kernel while
still benefiting from data-driven processing that avoids redundant computation.
RAG. Retrieval-augmented generation Lewis et al. [2020] externalizes context to a retrieval system.
This introduces retrieval latency, recall failures, and loses the benefits of full attention over complete
data. We keep all data in-context with full attention, avoiding retrieval overhead and ensuring
complete context access.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Summarization Chains. Approaches that summarize context to fit within token limits lose informa-
tion and introduce summarization errors. We maintain full fidelity of the original data without lossy
compression.
Recursive Language Models. Recent work on Recursive Language Models (RLMs) Zhang et al.
[2025] addresses long-context processing by allowing models to programmatically decompose and
recursively call themselves over context snippets. RLMs can process inputs up to 100× beyond the
native context window by treating long prompts as an external environment. However, this approach
has significant latency implications: each recursive call is blocking with no prefix caching, resulting
in query latencies ranging from “a few seconds to several minutes” depending on decomposition
strategy Zhang et al. [2025]. The framework explicitly “did not optimize implementation for speed”
and provides “no strong guarantees about controlling either the total API cost or the total runtime.”
Our approach differs fundamentally in optimization target. RLMs optimize for context capacity:
handling arbitrarily long inputs at the cost of unpredictable, high latency. We optimize for query
latency: achieving constant tens-of-milliseconds responses within the model’s context window. For
streaming applications requiring real-time responses, the difference is stark: RLMs may take minutes
per query while the proposed architecture maintains sub-50 ms latency regardless of accumulated
context. Additionally, RLMs require multiple recursive LLM calls with information potentially lost
during decomposition, while we preserve full quadratic attention over all retained data in a single
forward pass. The approaches are complementary: RLMs excel at one-shot processing of very long
documents; we excel at continuous streaming with sporadic low-latency queries.
8
Conclusion
Request-driven inference frameworks optimize for the wrong workload when applied to streaming
applications. Prefix caching assumes static, shared prefixes; streaming workloads have dynamic,
per-session context. Cache hit rates approach zero, and every query pays full O(n) cost.
We exploit the asymmetry between data and query arrival rates and move prefill off the critical
path: data arrival triggers processing, not queries. This enables O(|q|) query latency regardless of
accumulated context size.
Results on streaming benchmarks:
• Sub-50 ms query latency: ∼43 ms average as context grows from 2,600 to 14,800 tokens,
while request-driven inference engines reach 106–254 ms on the same workload
• 2.4×–5.9× speedup over conventional inference engines (vLLM, SGLang, TensorRT-LLM,
llama.cpp)
• 21×–92× speedup over cloud APIs (GPT-4o-mini, GPT-5.2, Claude Haiku, Claude Opus
4.5)
• Continuous ingestion: background processing enables true streaming with non-blocking
data push, and only the new delta is ever processed
• Full attention over retained context: unlike sparse attention approaches, we maintain
complete quadratic attention over all data within the retention window
Flash Queries extend this further: by pre-evaluating registered questions against evolving context state
during idle GPU cycles, we push latency from ∼43 ms toward ∼2 ms for predictable query patterns.
Combined with ready-position speculative exit, the system can return cached or high-confidence
answers with zero GPU work at query time. For workloads where 60–80% of queries are predictable,
the effective average latency drops to single-digit milliseconds, approaching the theoretical minimum
of network round-trip time.
The contribution is architectural: recognising that streaming workloads require data-driven, not
request-driven, computation models. Existing KV-cache techniques are necessary but not sufficient.
We provide the session management, region semantics, incremental update mechanisms, and ahead-
of-time query evaluation that streaming applications require.
A second consequence, with broader operational impact than per-query latency, is GPU utilisation.
Large inference deployments typically run at sustained accelerator utilisation in the 10–45% band,
18


--- Page 19 ---
with the gap to peak dominated by between-request idle time on accelerators that have nothing useful
to do. The architecture described here turns that idle time into pre-computed Flash Query answers
against an always-current KV cache, so the same hardware delivers a higher rate of useful analytical
output per unit time and per unit power, without any change to model weights or kernel implementa-
tions. For operators of large clusters, this is the rare class of optimization that simultaneously lowers
latency, raises throughput, and improves accelerator utilisation.
References
Lopez-Lira, A. and Tang, Y. Can ChatGPT Forecast Stock Price Movements? Return Predictability
and Large Language Models. SSRN, 2023.
Wu, S., Irsoy, O., Lu, S., Daber, V., Dredze, M., Gehrmann, S., Kambadur, P., Rosenberg, D., and
Mann, G. BloombergGPT: A Large Language Model for Finance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17564,
2023.
Liu, N., Lin, K., Hewitt, J., Paranjape, A., Bevilacqua, M., Petroni, F., and Liang, P. Lost in
the Middle: How Language Models Use Long Contexts. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2024.
Anthropic. Prompt Caching. Documentation, 2024.
Beltagy, I., Peters, M.E., and Cohan, A. Longformer: The Long-Document Transformer. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.05150, 2020.
Zaheer, M., Guruganesh, G., Dubey, A., Ainslie, J., Alberti, C., Ontanon, S., Pham, P., Ravula, A.,
Wang, Q., Yang, L., and Ahmed, A. Big Bird: Transformers for Longer Sequences. NeurIPS,
2020.
Child, R., Gray, S., Radford, A., and Sutskever, I. Generating Long Sequences with Sparse Trans-
formers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.10509, 2019.
Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., Küttler, H., Lewis, M., Yih,
W., Rocktäschel, T., Riedel, S., and Kiela, D. Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Knowledge-
Intensive NLP Tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474, 2020.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, Ł., and
Polosukhin, I. Attention Is All You Need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
30, 2017.
Gu, A. and Dao, T. Mamba: Linear-Time Sequence Modeling with Selective State Spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.00752, 2023.
Peng, B., Alcaide, E., Anthony, Q., Albalak, A., Arcadinho, S., Cao, H., Cheng, X., Chung, M.,
Grber, M., et al. RWKV: Reinventing RNNs for the Transformer Era. Findings of EMNLP, 2023.
Katharopoulos, A., Vyas, A., Pappas, N., and Fleuret, F. Transformers are RNNs: Fast Autoregressive
Transformers with Linear Attention. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2020.
Sun, Y., Dong, L., Huang, S., Ma, S., Xia, Y., Xue, J., Wang, J., and Wei, F. Retentive Network: A
Successor to Transformer for Large Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.08621, 2023.
Kwon, W., Li, Z., Zhuang, S., Sheng, Y., Zheng, L., Yu, C.H., Gonzalez, J., Zhang, H., and Stoica,
I. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention.
Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2023.
Zheng, L., Yin, L., Xie, Z., Huang, J., Sun, C., Yu, C.H., Cao, S., Kober, C., Sheng, Y., et al. SGLang:
Efficient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07104,
2024.
Zhong, Y., Liu, S., Chen, J., Hu, J., Zhu, Y., Liu, X., Jin, X., and Zhang, H. DistServe: Disaggregating
Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized Large Language Model Serving. OSDI, 2024.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Dao, T., Fu, D.Y., Ermon, S., Rudra, A., and Ré, C. FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact
Attention with IO-Awareness. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 2022.
Dao, T. FlashAttention-2: Faster Attention with Better Parallelism and Work Partitioning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.08691, 2023.
Zhang, A.L., Kraska, T., and Khattab, O.
Recursive Language Models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.24601, 2025.
Saxena,
A.
Prompt
Lookup
Decoding.
https://github.com/apoorvumang/
prompt-lookup-decoding, 2023.
20
