--- Page 1 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for
Mixture-of-Experts Models
Can Hankendi
Boston University
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Boston, MA, USA
hankendi@bu.edu
Rana Shahout
Harvard University
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Cambridge, MA, USA
ranash.cs@gmail.com
Minlan Yu
Harvard University
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences
Cambridge, MA, USA
minlanyu@g.harvard.edu
Ayse K. Coskun
Boston University
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
Boston, MA, USA
acoskun@bu.edu
Abstract
Large language model (LLM) inference has become a domi-
nant workload in modern data centers, driving significant
GPU utilization and energy consumption. While prior sys-
tems optimize throughput and latency by batching, schedul-
ing, and parallelism, they largely treat GPU power as a static
constraint rather than a controllable resource.
In this paper, we present a power-aware runtime for LLM
serving, PALS, that treats GPU power caps as a first-class con-
trol knob and jointly optimizes them with software param-
eters such as batch size. The system combines lightweight
offline power–performance models with a feedback-driven
controller to select configurations that satisfy throughput
targets while maximizing energy efficiency.
We implement PALS within an existing LLM serving frame-
work, vLLM, demonstrating that it requires no model retrain-
ing or API changes. Across multi-GPU systems and both
dense and mixture-of-experts (MoE) models, PALS improves
energy efficiency by up to 26.3%, reduces QoS violations by
4×–7× under power constraints, and tracks dynamic power
budgets. These results highlight the potential of integrating
power control directly into LLM inference runtimes, enabling
energy-proportional and grid-interactive AI systems.
1
Introduction
Large language model (LLM) inference has rapidly emerged
as a dominant workload in modern data centers, driving an
unprecedented demand for GPU resources and electricity.
Unlike traditional batch-oriented workloads, LLM serving is
latency-sensitive, bursty, and increasingly deployed at scale
across heterogeneous multi-GPU systems [14, 22, 36]. As
a result, operators must simultaneously meet strict perfor-
mance targets while managing increasing energy costs and
power constraints [5, 8, 17].
Recent systems introduced batching, request scheduling,
and model-parallel execution to improve LLM inference
throughput and latency [14, 16, 22, 29, 30, 33, 36]. However,
these mechanisms largely assume fixed power provisioning
and treat GPU power as an external constraint rather than a
controllable resource. In practice, operators rely on coarse
power provisioning and static power caps to remain within
rack- or cluster-level limits, but lack runtime mechanisms
that can precisely and rapidly trade performance for power
in response to changing workload conditions. This leads to
inefficient operation, as systems either over-provision power,
wasting energy, or under-provision, resulting in degraded
throughput and quality-of-service (QoS) violations [5, 8, 17].
Data centers are increasingly becoming subject to facility-
level power caps, real-time electricity pricing, and demand-
response signals from the grid [2, 28, 38]. At the same time,
carbon-aware computing introduces additional incentives
to modulate energy consumption over time and across loca-
tions [2, 28]. As LLM inference becomes increasingly energy-
intensive, improving efficiency has become as important
as maximizing throughput. These trends require inference
systems to treat power not as a fixed constraint, but as a
controllable resource that can be dynamically adjusted to
balance performance, efficiency, and external signals.
In this paper, we argue that GPU power caps should be
treated as a first-class control primitive in LLM inference
runtimes. We present a power-aware runtime that jointly
optimizes hardware-level power limits and software-level
parameters such as batch size and parallelism. By coordinat-
ing these knobs, the system exposes a controllable trade-off
between throughput, latency, and energy efficiency.
However, enabling such control is challenging. The re-
lationship between power, performance, and efficiency in
LLM inference is highly non-linear and depends on workload
characteristics, batching behavior, and system bottlenecks
such as compute and communication. As a result, configu-
rations that are efficient under one workload may become
suboptimal as conditions change, making static or offline
1
arXiv:2605.21427v1  [cs.AI]  20 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
tuning insufficient. Effective control, therefore, requires light-
weight predictive models and fast feedback mechanisms that
operate at runtime.
Our design is guided by three observations: increasing
power yields diminishing returns beyond model-dependent
thresholds, batch size dominates efficiency, and the optimal
degree of parallelism depends on the compute–communication
balance. These observations are particularly pronounced in
mixture-of-experts (MoE) models [11, 31]. In MoE architec-
tures, tokens are dynamically routed to a subset of experts,
introducing significant communication alongside computa-
tion. This leads to highly variable and often communication-
bound execution, where performance depends on routing
patterns, load imbalance, and interconnect bandwidth. Con-
sequently, increasing power caps may amplify communica-
tion overhead rather than useful computation, further com-
plicating the relationship between power and performance.
To address this challenge, we design a power-aware run-
time that combines offline power–performance modeling
with a feedback-driven control loop. The system continu-
ously selects configurations that meet performance targets
while maximizing efficiency, and adapts to workload changes
and dynamic power budgets with low overhead. Importantly,
our approach is plug-and-play: it integrates into existing
LLM serving frameworks (e.g., vLLM) without requiring
changes to model architectures or inference APIs. Our spe-
cific contributions are as follows:
• We identify and quantify previously unexploited cross-
layer interactions between GPU power caps, batching,
and parallelism in LLM inference, showing that inde-
pendent optimization is fundamentally suboptimal.
• We design a closed-loop control system that jointly
tunes hardware (power caps) and software (batch-
ing) knobs under QoS constraints, enabling energy-
proportional LLM serving under dynamic power bud-
gets.
• We implement our design in vLLM without modifying
model architectures or inference APIs, demonstrating
a practical and deployable approach.
• We show that treating power as a first-class schedul-
ing primitive expands the achievable Pareto frontier
beyond what is possible with either dynamic volt-
age and frequency scaling (DVFS) or batching alone,
achieving up to 26.3% efficiency improvement and
4×-7× reduction in QoS violations.
Prior work on GPU power management and DVFS treats
power as a low-level hardware knob, while LLM serving
systems focus on batching, scheduling, and parallelism un-
der fixed power budgets. These two layers are optimized
independently. In contrast, we show that for modern LLM
inference, especially MoE models, power caps fundamen-
tally interact with batching and parallelism through com-
pute/communication tradeoffs, creating operating regimes
150
200
250
300
GPU Power Cap (W)
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
Norm. Tokens/J
~200 W
knee
(a) Efficiency vs. Power Cap (TP=4, BS=64)
Mixtral-8x7B
Qwen-MoE
OLMoE
1
4
8
16
32
64
Batch Size
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Norm. Tokens/J
(b) Efficiency vs. Batch Size (300 W, TP=4)
Mixtral-8x7B
Qwen-MoE
OLMoE
Figure 1. (a) tokens/J vs. power cap showing divergent
behavior: compute-bound Mixtral continues to improve
while communication-bound Qwen-MoE and OLMoE peak
at 200 W and decline. (b) tokens/J vs. batch size: efficiency
gains are substantial for all model families.
that cannot be captured by either layer alone. This paper
introduces the first LLM serving runtime that jointly opti-
mizes hardware power limits and software scheduling knobs
under explicit QoS constraints, enabling dynamic navigation
of the power–performance–efficiency space at runtime. We
show that treating power as a first-class control dimension
expands the achievable efficiency–performance Pareto fron-
tier beyond what is possible with batching or DVFS alone.
Across multi-GPU systems and both dense and MoE mod-
els, our runtime improves energy efficiency by up to 26.3%,
reduces QoS violations by 4×-7× under power constraints.
2
Motivation
LLM inference has emerged as a sustained, high-power work-
load in modern data centers, requiring systems to meet strict
throughput and latency targets under growing power con-
straints. In practice, deployments are increasingly subject to
facility-level power limits, electricity price variability, and
external signals such as demand response and carbon-aware
operation [2, 5, 28, 38].
Despite these constraints, existing LLM serving frame-
works do not explicitly incorporate power into runtime
decision-making. GPU power is typically provisioned stat-
ically, leading to either over-provisioning and energy inef-
ficiency or under-provisioning and QoS degradation. Criti-
cally, these systems lack mechanisms to dynamically adjust
power consumption in response to workload conditions and
performance objectives.
To understand this gap, we conduct an empirical study
of LLM inference across diverse models and configurations.
Our analysis reveals that the relationship between power,
performance, and efficiency is highly non-linear and strongly
dependent on workload characteristics. These findings moti-
vate the need for a runtime that treats power as a first-class
control dimension and jointly optimizes it with software-
level parameters.
2.1
Key Empirical Insights from Offline Profiling
Our experiments reveal three consistent trends across models
and configurations.
2


--- Page 3 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
Insight 1: Power caps exhibit diminishing returns at
model-dependent thresholds. Figure 1(a) shows tokens/J
vs. power cap of three models: Mixtral, Qwen-MoE and OL-
MoE. While increasing power initially improves throughput,
beyond a workload-dependent threshold (typically 150–200
W), efficiency gains diminish. This behavior varies across
models depending on whether they are compute-bound or
communication-bound. Compute-bound models (e.g., Mix-
tral) continue to benefit from higher power caps, as addi-
tional power increases SM clock frequency and compute
throughput. In contrast, communication-bound models (e.g.,
Qwen-MoE and OLMoE) reach peak efficiency at lower power
levels. Beyond this point, additional power primarily accel-
erates communication overhead (e.g., NCCL all-to-all traf-
fic over NVLink) rather than useful computation, resulting
in lower tokens/J. Contrary to common practice, operating
GPUs at maximum power is often suboptimal for LLM infer-
ence, particularly for communication-bound workloads.
Insight 2: Batch size dominates power efficiency. Fig-
ure 1(b) shows tokens/J normalized to batch size 1. Increas-
ing batch size from 1 to 64 improves efficiency by 1.7×–2.1×
across all models. This improvement arises from amortizing
fixed per-step overheads, including kernel launches, atten-
tion computation, and communication setup, across more
tokens, thereby increasing SM utilization and effective arith-
metic intensity.
The magnitude of this effect depends on model characteris-
tics. Compute-bound models (e.g., Mixtral) saturate efficiency
gains at smaller batch sizes, while communication-bound
models (e.g., Qwen-MoE and OLMoE) continue to benefit at
larger batch sizes due to additional amortization of routing
and communication overheads. For example, the marginal
gain from increasing batch size from 32 to 64 is only 2% for
Mixtral, but remains 7% for Qwen-MoE.
Insight 3: Compute-communication ratio determines
optimal parallelism. Figure 2 breaks down inference time
into compute and communication components across differ-
ent models and configurations. The results show that the
effectiveness of power scaling depends strongly on the rela-
tive contribution of these components.
For compute-bound workloads (e.g., Mixtral under mod-
erate parallelism), increasing GPU power caps directly im-
proves throughput by raising SM clock frequency and ac-
celerating arithmetic operations. As a result, higher power
levels can translate into both higher throughput and im-
proved efficiency, up to a saturation point.
In contrast, communication-bound workloads (e.g., Qwen-
MoE and OLMoE under high expert parallelism) derive lim-
ited benefit from increased power. In these regimes, a signif-
icant portion of inference time is spent on communication
operations such as expert routing and all-to-all exchanges
over NVLink or PCIe.
As a result, the optimal operating point shifts toward lower
power caps for communication-bound configurations. Fur-
thermore, the same power configuration can yield funda-
mentally different efficiency outcomes depending on the
communication/computation ratio, making static configura-
tions inherently suboptimal.
2.2
Pareto Frontier Expansion via HW-SW Knob
Combination
We quantify the benefit of jointly controlling hardware and
software parameters by comparing the achievable efficiency
frontier against configurations that vary only one class of
knobs. Figure 3 shows the impact of combining hardware and
software control knobs on the achievable efficiency frontier.
To illustrate this, we construct three Pareto frontiers for each
model, each corresponding to a different set of available
control knobs.
1. SW only: We vary batch size over {1, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64}
and Tensor Parallelism (TP) over {1, 2, 4} without ap-
plying power caps. This represents the operating range
available without hardware-level power control.
2. HW only: We vary the GPU power cap over its al-
lowable range while fixing batch size and parallelism.
This captures the effect of hardware-level power scal-
ing in isolation, corresponding to what DVFS alone
can achieve.
3. HW+SW (cap × batch × TP): We jointly vary power
cap, batch size, and parallelism configurations, captur-
ing the full space of available control knobs.
HW-only and SW-only frontiers are largely non-
overlapping. Power capping alone (HW only) shifts op-
erating points toward lower throughput with improved ef-
ficiency, it trades performance for power. Batch size alone
(SW only) shifts toward higher throughput and higher ef-
ficiency simultaneously, but is capped by the fixed 300 W
budget. The two frontiers occupy different regions of the
throughput-efficiency plane and are therefore complemen-
tary, not interchangeable.
Combining HW+SW strictly dominates either alone.
The joint (cap × batch × TP) frontier envelops both individual
TP2
BS8
TP2
BS64
TP4
BS8
TP4
BS64
0
20
40
60
80
100
% Wall Time
Mixtral-8x7B
TP2
BS8
TP2
BS64
TP4
BS8
TP4
BS64
Qwen-MoE
TP2
BS8
TP2
BS64
TP4
BS8
TP4
BS64
OLMoE
Compute
Comm. (NCCL)
Other
Figure 2. Compute vs. communication time breakdown by
model and configuration. Mixtral remains compute-bound;
Qwen-MoE and OLMoE become communication-bound at
higher TP and batch size.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
Figure 3. Pareto frontier expansion for three MoE models (single node, 4×A100). Four frontiers are shown: SW only (batch
sweep, fixed cap), HW only (cap sweep, fixed batch), HW+SW (joint cap×batch), and full joint (HW+SW+TP). The full frontier
dominates any single-knob approach; gains are model-dependent and follow the compute/communication ratio.
frontiers: it achieves the high-throughput end of the SW-only
frontier and the high-efficiency end of the HW-only frontier,
with new configurations filling the gap in between.
The expansion is model-dependent and follows the
compute-communication ratio. For Mixtral-8x7B (compute-
bound), the efficiency gain from adding TP as a third degree
of freedom is substantial. Higher TP at larger batch sizes un-
locks operating points that neither cap nor batch adjustment
can reach alone (+15% efficiency gain at the frontier tip vs.
HW+SW alone). For Qwen-MoE (communication-bound),
the marginal gain from TP is smaller, TP=2 already suffices at
most batch sizes because increasing TP adds extra all-reduce
overhead. OLMoE behaves similarly to Qwen-MoE in this
regard.
The full joint frontier improves peak efficiency by 1.18×
(Mixtral), 1.13× (Qwen-MoE), and 1.14× (OLMoE) over SW-
only optimization—gains that are practically significant at
data-center scale but invisible to any system that treats HW
and SW knobs in isolation.
1
2
3
Number of Nodes
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Norm. Tokens/J
(a) Efficiency Does Not Scale Linearly
Mixtral-8x7B
Qwen-MoE
OLMoE
1
2
3
Number of Nodes
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Norm. Throughput
(b) Throughput Scales but at Efficiency Cost
Mixtral-8x7B
Qwen-MoE
OLMoE
Figure 4. Multi-node scaling: (a) efficiency drops as node
count grows, especially for communication-bound Qwen-
MoE; (b) throughput grows but at diminishing efficiency
returns.
2.3
Multi-Node Scaling Behavior
MoE models do not always scale efficiently simply by adding
more nodes. Figure 4 shows normalized tokens/J and through-
put as node count increases from 1 to 3. Qwen-MoE suffers a
30% efficiency drop at 3 nodes because its inter-node all-to-all
traffic saturates InfiniBand bandwidth. Mixtral scales more
smoothly (15% drop at 3 nodes) due to higher per-expert
compute density. This means the optimal configuration strat-
egy changes with node count and static offline policies are
not sufficient.
These observations collectively reveal a fundamental limi-
tation of existing inference systems, where no single control
knob, whether batching, parallelism, or power, can achieve
optimal performance and efficiency across workloads. In-
stead, effective operation requires coordinated control across
hardware and software layers, with the ability to dynamically
adapt to workload conditions and external constraints. This
motivates the design of a power-aware runtime system that
jointly manages GPU power caps and inference parameters
to achieve energy-efficient, QoS-aware execution.
2.4
Impact of Expert Parallelism Across Nodes
We evaluate the impact of expert parallelism (EP) on energy
efficiency as the system scales from one to multiple nodes.
Figure 5 shows normalized tokens per joule (tokens/J) for
representative MoE models under increasing node counts.
Across all models, efficiency decreases as EP extends across
nodes. This degradation is primarily driven by increased com-
munication overhead, including expert routing and all-to-all
exchanges, which grow with the number of participating
GPUs and nodes. While EP improves model capacity and
throughput scalability, these gains are offset by communica-
tion costs at larger scales.
The rate of efficiency degradation is strongly model depen-
dent. Compute heavy models such as Mixtral degrade more
4


--- Page 5 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
gradually, as a larger fraction of execution time remains dom-
inated by arithmetic operations. In contrast, communication-
sensitive models such as Qwen and OLMoE experience steeper
efficiency declines, reflecting their higher sensitivity to rout-
ing and synchronization overheads.
Overall, these findings confirm that scaling MoE inference
through expert parallelism introduces a trade-off between
capacity and efficiency. This further motivates the need for
runtime mechanisms that adapt parallelism and system con-
figuration based on workload characteristics and system
constraints.
3
PALS Runtime Design
We present a power-aware runtime for LLM inference, PALS,
that dynamically coordinates hardware-level power control
with software-level inference parameters. It is designed to
meet performance targets while maximizing energy effi-
ciency under dynamic workload conditions and power con-
straints.
Figure 6 illustrates the design of PALS, which consists
of three key components: (1) a telemetry layer that collects
real-time performance and power metrics, (2) a control layer
that selects configurations based on predictive models and
feedback signals, and (3) an actuation layer that enforces
decisions by adjusting GPU power caps and inference pa-
rameters such as batch size.
At a high level, the runtime operates as a closed-loop con-
troller. During each control interval, telemetry data is used
to estimate current system performance. A model-guided
decision module selects candidate configurations that satisfy
performance targets, while a feedback controller corrects for
modeling errors and runtime variability. The selected con-
figuration is then applied through hardware and software
actuation mechanisms. This design enables the runtime to
continuously adapt to workload dynamics and external sig-
nals, such as power budgets or demand-response events,
while maintaining stable and efficient operation.
Mixtral-8x7B
Phi-3.5-MoE
Qwen1.5-MoE DeepSeek-MoE OLMoE-1B-7B
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
Norm. Tokens/J
0.95
0.92
0.90
0.89
0.86
0.88
0.84
0.81
0.79
0.76
1 node
2 nodes
3 nodes
Figure 5. Energy efficiency under expert parallelism across
different node counts. Each group shows normalized tokens/J
for a given model at 1, 2, and 3 nodes. Models with higher
communication intensity exhibit larger efficiency degrada-
tion as parallelism increases.
Telemetry layer. The telemetry layer monitors system
state in real time, including GPU power consumption, through-
put (tokens/s) and GPU utilization. These signals are ob-
tained through standard interfaces such as NVML and run-
time instrumentation. The collected telemetry provides the
basis for both performance estimation and feedback control.
Control layer. The control layer is responsible for select-
ing configurations that satisfy performance targets while
optimizing energy efficiency. It combines two complemen-
tary mechanisms. First, a model-driven selection process
uses lightweight power-performance model to predict the
throughput and efficiency of candidate configurations. Sec-
ond, a feedback controller adjusts decisions based on ob-
served deviations from target performance, enabling robust
operation under modeling inaccuracies and workload vari-
ability.
At each control interval (i.e., 500ms) , the controller eval-
uates feasible configurations that are defined by power caps
and software-level parameters such as batch size and se-
lects the configuration that maximizes efficiency subject to
performance constraints. This process enables continuous
adaptation to workload dynamics and external signals such
as power budgets, performance targets or demand-response
events.
Actuation layer. The actuation layer applies control deci-
sions by interfacing with both hardware and software mech-
anisms. Hardware-level actuation adjusts GPU power caps
using vendor-supported interfaces (e.g., NVML). Software-
level actuation modifies inference parameters such as batch
size and request scheduling behavior within the serving
framework. These adjustments are lightweight and can be
applied at runtime without interrupting ongoing inference.
Closed-loop operation. Together, these components form
a closed-loop control system. Telemetry is continuously col-
lected and used to estimate system performance, the con-
trol layer selects updated configurations, and the actuation
layer enforces these decisions. This loop operates at 500ms
timescale, enabling the system to respond rapidly to work-
load fluctuations and changing power constraints.
This design decouples system-level decision making from
the underlying inference engine, allowing our approach to
be plug-and-play, integrated with existing LLM serving sys-
tems without requiring changes to model architectures or
inference APIs.
3.1
Power–Performance Modeling
Methodology. To enable power-aware runtime optimiza-
tion, we construct an offline power-performance model from
systematic profiling experiments across a wide range of infer-
ence configurations. The goal of this process is to construct
5


--- Page 6 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
Figure 6. PALS runtime design. Telemetry from inference execution is aggregated and fed to a controller that predicts feasible
operating points and issues hardware- and software-level actuation decisions.
a dataset that captures the mapping from inference config-
urations to performance and power, which is later used to
train predictive models for runtime control.
We perform controlled parameter sweeps over the follow-
ing dimensions:
• Power caps. GPU power limits are varied across the
allowable platform range (i.e., 100-400W) using vendor-
provided interfaces (i.e., NVML, nvidia-smi) [23, 24]. This
allows us to characterize performance scaling under vari-
ous power budgets.
• Batch sizes. Continuous batching [14, 36] is evaluated
over a wide range (e.g., batch sizes 1-64) to capture utiliza-
tion scaling effects. This range reflects realistic serving
scenarios where batch sizes fluctuate with request arrival
patterns.
• Parallelism configurations. We evaluate tensor paral-
lelism (TP), expert parallelism (EP), and data parallelism
(DP) where applicable. These configurations affect both
compute efficiency and communication overhead, making
them important factors in power-performance tradeoffs.
Table 1 summarizes the five tunable parameters. We eval-
uate three static (require model reload) (i.e., TP, EP, DP)
and two dynamic (i.e., batch size, power cap) knobs. During
each experiment, we collect GPU power consumption (via
NVML/IPMI), throughput in tokens-per-second (𝑡𝑜𝑘𝑒𝑛𝑠/𝑠),
latency metrics, and system-level telemetry. This range of
configurations spans both low-utilization and saturation
regimes, capturing the non-linear behavior of throughput
and efficiency across different operating points. This dataset
serves as the foundation for the predictive models described
in the next section.
System-Level Power Estimation. We estimate system-
level power from GPU telemetry by fitting a linear model
between aggregate GPU power and IPMI measurements:
𝑃sys = 𝛼Í
𝑖𝑃GPU,𝑖+ 𝛽. Across configurations, we obtain
𝛼≈1.05 and 𝛽≈340–350 W, with high accuracy (𝑅2 ≈0.98,
MAE 12–27 W). This enables reliable system-level energy
estimation without continuous IPMI polling.
Table 1. HW and SW control knobs.
Knob
Cat.
Adj.
Values tested
Power Cap
HW
Runtime
150,200,250,300,350,400 W
Batch Size
SW
Runtime
1,4,8,16,32,64
TP
SW
Static
1, 2, 4
EP
SW
Static
1, 4, 8
DP
SW
Static
1, 2, 3 nodes
3.2
Prediction Model
The prediction model maps a configuration
𝑐= (cap, batch, parallelism, . . .)
to predicted performance and power metrics, including to-
kens/s, average power consumption (𝑃), and derived effi-
ciency metrics such as tokens-per-watt. The prediction model
is trained offline, while the runtime policy uses it for fast
decision-making with feedback correction. The model is used
to score discrete candidate configurations rather than to di-
rectly control the runtime. At inference time, the controller
queries the model to estimate throughput and power for
feasible operating points and ranks them according to the
optimization objective.
We use a lightweight regression model to predict through-
put and power as a function of configuration parameters. We
evalaute various machine learning algorithms, such as XG-
Boost, gradient boosting and random forest. We empirically
determine that random forest provide the most accurate for
both MoE and dense models. Random forest model is able
to capture non-linear relationships between configuration
parameters and system performance while maintaining low
inference overhead. These relationships arise from interac-
tions between batching, power scaling, and communication
overhead, which vary across model architectures and paral-
lelism configurations. The model provides fast, approximate
predictions of performance and power for candidate config-
urations, enabling efficient exploration of the configuration
space at runtime. We evaluate the accuracy of the offline
prediction model using held-out configurations. Across all
6


--- Page 7 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
workloads, the random forest model achieves a mean abso-
lute percentage error (MAPE) of 6.8% for throughput pre-
diction and 4.5% for power prediction. Furthermore, feature
importance analysis shows that batch size is the dominant
predictor of efficiency, followed by power cap and tensor par-
allelism degree. This aligns with our empirical observations
in Section 2, where batching provides the largest gains.
This modeling approach provides sufficiently accurate es-
timates for candidate ranking while avoiding costly online
exploration. While the offline predictor provides fast esti-
mates of throughput and power, residual error and workload
variability are handled by the online controller described in
the next section.
3.3
Runtime Control Policy
At runtime, the controller uses the offline prediction model to
evaluate feasible configurations and select operating points
that satisfy performance constraints while maximizing en-
ergy efficiency.
Control Problem. We formulate power-aware LLM infer-
ence as a constrained optimization problem over a discrete
configuration space. At each control interval, the runtime se-
lects a configuration, 𝑐, that determines both hardware-level
power limits and software-level execution parameters.
The objective is to maximize energy efficiency, measured
in tokens per joule, while satisfying performance constraints.
Formally, we seek to solve:
max
𝑐∈𝐶(𝑡) Eff(𝑐)
s.t.
𝑇(𝑐) ≥𝑇target.
where 𝐶(𝑡) denotes the set of feasible configurations at con-
trol interval 𝑡. In practice, system dynamics and workload
variability make it difficult to directly solve this problem
online. The mapping from configuration to performance is
non-linear and workload-dependent, and optimal configu-
rations may shift over time as request patterns and system
conditions change.
These challenges motivate a model-guided control ap-
proach that combines offline prediction with online feed-
back correction. The offline model provides fast estimates of
throughput and power for candidate configurations, while
the feedback controller compensates for prediction error and
workload variability during runtime.
Decision Policy. To approximately solve the control prob-
lem online, the runtime combines model-guided candidate
selection with feedback-driven correction. Algorithm 1 sum-
marizes the runtime decision loop. At each control interval,
the controller enumerates feasible configurations and queries
the offline model to estimate throughput and power. It then
constructs the subset 𝐶ok of configurations that satisfy the
throughput target. If 𝐶ok ≠∅, the controller selects the con-
figuration with the highest predicted efficiency; otherwise,
Algorithm 1 PALS Runtime Control
1: Input: 𝐶, 𝑇target, 𝜖
2: while every control interval do
3:
Measure throughput 𝑇meas
4:
𝑒←𝑇target −𝑇meas
5:
𝐶𝑡←feasible configurations
6:
for all 𝑐∈𝐶𝑡do
7:
(𝑇(𝑐), 𝑃(𝑐)) ←Model(𝑐)
8:
end for
9:
𝐶ok ←{𝑐| 𝑇(𝑐) ≥𝑇target}
10:
if 𝐶ok ≠∅then
11:
𝑐∗←arg max𝑐∈𝐶ok
𝑇(𝑐)
𝑃(𝑐)
12:
else
13:
𝑐∗←arg max𝑐∈𝐶𝑡𝑇(𝑐)
14:
end if
15:
if |𝑒| > 𝜖for sustained intervals then
16:
Apply 𝑐∗
17:
end if
18: end while
it falls back to the configuration with the highest predicted
throughput.
Model-guided selection. At each control interval, the
controller evaluates feasible candidate configurations using
the offline predictor and discards those that do not satisfy the
throughput target. Among the remaining candidates, it se-
lects the configuration with the highest predicted efficiency.
Feedback adjustment. As the offline predictor is approxi-
mate, the runtime continuously compares predicted behavior
against measured throughput and applies correction based
on throughput error using a PID controller. This improves
robustness to modeling error and workload variability by
compensating for steady-state mismatch and transient de-
viations. To avoid oscillations, configuration updates are
applied only when deviations persist beyond a threshold
(5%) or when external constraints, such as power budgets or
throughput targets, change. This prevents frequent reconfig-
uration in response to transient fluctuations.
4
Evaluation Methodology
4.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluate PALS on multi-GPU server nodes equipped with
NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Each node consists of 4×A100 GPUs
interconnected via NVLink. This setup allows us to evaluate
both compute-bound and communication-bound inference
regimes.
We evaluate both dense and MoE models to capture a
range of compute–communication characteristics. Experi-
ments are conducted under both steady-state and dynamic
conditions, including scenarios with time-varying power
budgets.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
Model
Tot Act Exp 𝑘Type
(B)
(B)
GPT-2
0.12 0.12
– – Dense
Llama-2-7B
6.74 6.74
– – Dense
Mistral-7B
7.25 7.25
– – Dense
OLMoE-1B-7B
6.92 1.30
64 8 MoE
Qwen1.5-MoE‡
14.3 2.70
64 4 MoE
DeepSeek-MoE† 16.4 2.80
66 6 MoE
Phi-3.5-MoE
41.9 6.60
16 2 MoE
Mixtral-8x7B
46.7 12.9
8 2 MoE
Table 2. Model summary. Tot and Act denote total and active
parameters (in billions). For MoE models, Exp is the number
of experts per layer and 𝑘is the number of selected experts
(top-𝑘). Dense models activate all parameters (Tot = Act),
while MoE models activate only a subset, leading to lower
effective compute despite larger total size.
Workloads consist of request streams with configurable
arrival rates and sequence lengths, simulating realistic infer-
ence serving conditions. We use Poisson arrival processes
to model bursty request patterns commonly observed in
production LLM services.
Our implementation is built on top of the vLLM inference
framework [14]. We extend the runtime scheduler to expose
batch size as a dynamically controllable parameter, while
GPU power caps are enforced through NVML interfaces.
The control loop operates externally to the core execution
engine and periodically updates runtime parameters without
modifying model execution logic. We evaluate the system
using standard benchmark datasets, including HellaSwag
and GSM8K [9, 37], to generate realistic inference workloads
with diverse sequence lengths and reasoning complexity.
4.2
Workloads
We evaluate PALS across a diverse set of LLMs, including
both dense and MoE architectures. Table 2 summarizes the
evaluated models, including total parameter count, active
parameters per token, and parallelism characteristics. The
workload set includes representative models including GPT-
2 [27], Llama-2-7B [34], Mistral-7B [12], Mixtral–8x7B [13],
Qwen1.5-MoE [26], OLMoE-1B-7B [20], DeepSeek-MoE [10],
and Phi-3.5-MoE [1]. These models span a wide range of
compute and communication behaviors, enabling evalua-
tion under both compute-bound and communication-bound
regimes.
4.3
Baselines
We compare PALS against four representative control strate-
gies that isolate different dimensions of runtime adaptation.
The Baseline uses a fixed 400W power cap and maximum
batch size, reflecting a throughput-optimized production
configuration without dynamic adaptation. Adaptive Batch
keeps the power cap fixed while selecting batch size using
the offline prediction model, capturing software-level opti-
mization in isolation. Adaptive Cap dynamically adjusts GPU
power caps based on QoS requirements while keeping batch
size fixed, representing hardware-level control without co-
ordination with batching. In contrast, PALS jointly adapts
both power caps and batch size using model-guided selec-
tion combined with feedback control. Finally, we include
an Oracle that performs an exhaustive offline search over
all configurations, providing an upper bound on achievable
efficiency. All methods are implemented within the same
vLLM serving framework, only the control policy differs.
4.4
Metrics
We evaluate system performance using a set of complemen-
tary metrics that capture both service quality and efficiency.
Throughput, measured in tokens per second, reflects the over-
all inference performance of the system. To quantify service
reliability, we measure the QoS violation rate, defined as the
fraction of time the system fails to meet target throughput
thresholds. Under constrained operation, we also evaluate
power tracking error, which measures the deviation between
actual and target power consumption. Finally, we assess
energy efficiency in terms of tokens per joule, enabling com-
parison across configurations with different power budgets
and capturing the effectiveness of joint power–performance
optimization.
5
Results
We evaluate PALS along three dimensions: (1) single-node
efficiency, (2) QoS under power-constrained multi-node op-
eration, and (3) responsiveness to dynamic power signals
in demand-response scenarios. These experiments validate
that jointly controlling hardware (power caps) and software
(batching) expands the achievable operating space and en-
ables robust performance under power constraints.
5.1
Single-Node Efficiency
We first evaluate whether joint control of power caps and
batching improves energy efficiency on a single node. Fig-
ure 7 compares five configurations on five MoE models in
Table 2: (1) Baseline (400W, BS=64), (2) Cap Only (model-
selected power cap, fixed batch), (3) Batch Only (maximum
power cap, model-selected batch size), (4) PALS (jointly opti-
mized power cap and batch size), and (5) Oracle (exhaustive
offline optimum).
PALS achieves 1.26× normalized efficiency, capturing 95%
of the oracle headroom. Batch-only adaptation (1.14×) ac-
counts for most of the improvement, indicating that batching
is the dominant factor in efficiency. Power cap adaptation
provides an additional gain when combined with batching.
This behavior reflects the Pareto frontier expansion ob-
served in Section 2.2, where jointly controlling hardware and
8


--- Page 9 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
software knobs enables operating points that are not achiev-
able with either knob alone. Consistent with our empirical
observations, batching improves utilization by amortizing
overheads, while power caps exhibit diminishing returns
beyond model-dependent thresholds.
Overall, these results show that while batching drives most
efficiency gains, power control provides a complementary
benefit, and joint optimization is necessary to approach near-
optimal operating points.
5.1.1
Near-Optimality Under Runtime-Feasible Knobs.
PALS adapts only runtime-feasible knobs, namely GPU power
caps and batch size, while tensor parallelism (TP) is fixed
at deployment time. To quantify the resulting gap, we com-
pare a fixed-TP configuration against the best offline TP
choice at each power cap. Figure 8 shows the efficiency
headroom for models with TP sensitivity. For many models,
fixed TP achieves near-optimal efficiency across all power
caps, indicating that runtime adaptation alone captures most
gains. However, for a subset of models, the gap widens un-
der lower power caps. This trend reflects a shift toward
communication-sensitive regimes under constrained power,
where the optimal compute-communication balance depends
on TP. Overall, PALS achieves near-optimal efficiency us-
ing only runtime-feasible knobs, with remaining headroom
attributable to deployment-time parallelism choices.
5.2
QoS Under Multi-node Power Constraints
We next evaluate whether PALS maintains QoS under con-
strained power budgets in a multi-node setting. We consider
a three-node deployment, where each node runs a differ-
ent model (e.g., DeepSeek-MoE, Mixtral-8x7B, and OLMoE)
under a maximum cluster-wide power budget of 4,800W.
Each model is assigned a QoS constraint, defined as a target
throughput relative to its unconstrained performance (e.g.,
90%, 60%, and 75% for DeepSeek-MoE, Mixtral, and OLMoE,
respectively). Workloads follow a Poisson arrival process
Figure 7. Normalized tokens/J, average of five MoE models
and three dense models. PALS achieves 26.3% improvement
over baseline and reaches 95% of oracle efficiency.
Figure 8. Efficiency headroom from TP under varying power
caps. Each curve shows the gap between a fixed-TP deploy-
ment and the best offline TP choice. Headroom varies with
changing power caps, indicating that the benefit of TP selec-
tion is power-dependent.
over 60-minute runs. We compare four strategies correspond-
ing to different levels of control: no adaptation (Baseline),
software-only adaptation (Adaptive Batch), hardware-only
adaptation (Adaptive Cap), and joint hardware–software op-
timization (PALS). Figure 9(a) shows QoS violation rates. The
baseline exhibits high violation rates (18.7%-35.2%), reflect-
ing its inability to adapt under constrained power. Adaptive
batch and adaptive cap reduce violations modestly, but re-
main insufficient.
In contrast, PALS reduces QoS violations to 3.2%-5.3%,
achieving a 4×–7× improvement across all models. At the
same time, it improves aggregate energy efficiency by 12.1%
(Figure 9(b)). Adaptive batch alone cannot compensate when
models become power-constrained, while adaptive power
capping assumes a simplified relationship between power
and performance that does not hold in practice. These limi-
tations explain the gap between partial adaptation strategies
and the full joint controller.
Overall, these results demonstrate that the key benefit
of PALS is not simply adapting to power constraints, but
maintaining QoS while doing so. Joint optimization of power
and batching is required to simultaneously satisfy QoS tar-
gets and achieve efficient operation under constrained power
budgets.
5.3
Grid-Interactive Demand Response
We evaluate whether PALS can operate as a grid-interactive
workload by dynamically adapting to external power signals.
We simulate a demand-response (DR) scenario over 1-hour
on a 3-node system running DeepSeek-MoE. We compare
a static-batch baseline (i.e., fixed BS=64, dynamic cap only)
against PALS, which jointly adapts power cap and batch size.
Figure 10(a) shows that both approaches are able to follow
the target power signal. However, Figure 10(b) shows a key
difference: PALS maintains significantly higher throughput
at lower power targets by dynamically adjusting batch size
to match available compute capacity. In contrast, the static
9


--- Page 10 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
Figure 9. Multi-node power-constrained evaluation (3 nodes,
60 min). (a) QoS violation rates: PALS reduces violations by
4×–7×. (b) Normalized aggregate efficiency by strategy.
baseline, while able to track the power signal, suffers from
underutilization at low power levels, as large batch sizes
become inefficient under constrained power. PALS improves
throughput by up to 22% at low power targets compared to
the static-batch baseline.
6
Discussion
PALS’ predictive models are built from offline profiling over
a fixed set of configurations and a representative set of
prompts. When the online workload deviates significantly,
for example, due to unusually long prompts, adversarial
inputs, or shifts in output length distribution, the offline
model may mispredict throughput or efficiency, leading to
suboptimal configuration selection. The PID feedback con-
troller partially compensates for such errors by correcting
steady-state deviations, but it cannot anticipate sudden load
changes. Incorporating lightweight online model updates or
uncertainty-aware prediction could reduce this gap.
PALS operates at the node level and is designed to comple-
ment, not replace, cluster-level energy management systems
such as DynamoLLM [18]. Cluster-level systems are well-
suited to coarse-grained decisions, such as instance counts,
routing policies, and aggregate power budgets, but cannot
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
Total GPU Power (W)
(a) DR Signal Tracking – DeepSeek-MoE (3 nodes, 12×A100)
DR Signal (Target)
Static Batch
PALS
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time (min)
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
Throughput (tok/s)
(b) Throughput During DR Event
Static Batch
PALS
Figure 10. Grid demand-response tracking (1-hour,
DeepSeek-MoE, 3-nodes). PALS maintains higher through-
put at low power targets by co-adapting batch size. PALS
improves throughput by up to 22% at low power targets
compared to the static-batch baseline.
Figure 11. PALS is able to track throughput target by dynam-
ically tuning batch size and power cap decisions at runtie.
react to sub-second workload fluctuations within a single
serving node. Our solution fills this gap, as the main sched-
uler sets per-node power budgets and throughput targets as
external signals, which PA-vLLM tracks with its closed-loop
controller. This division of responsibility, the cluster decides
where and how much, the node runtime decides how enables
coordinated control across timescales without requiring ei-
ther layer to solve the full joint optimization problem, pro-
viding a practical path toward grid-interactive LLM serving
at scale.
7
Related Work
LLM inference serving systems. A substantial line of work
focus on improving LLM inference performance by opti-
mizing scheduling, memory management, and parallelism
under fixed power budgets. Orca [36] introduce iteration-
level scheduling and selective batching, enabling continuous
batching that keeps GPUs saturated across diverse request
streams. vLLM [14] propose a technique to eleminate KV-
cache fragmentation via PagedAttention, allowing larger
effective batch sizes and 2-4× throughput gains over static-
batch systems. Sarathi-Serve [3] further decoupled prefill
and decode latency through chunked prefills and stall-free
scheduling. DistServe [39] disaggregates prefill and decode
onto separate GPU pools, independently optimizing time-to-
first-token and per-token generation latency. AlpaServe [16]
uses statistical multiplexing with model parallelism to im-
prove GPU utilization across concurrent bursty workloads.
FlexGen [32] maximizes throughput under tight memory
constraints by orchestrating offloading across GPU, CPU,
and disk via a linear-programming policy. Helix [19] serves
LLMs on heterogeneous GPU clusters by formulating place-
ment and request routing as a max-flow problem. All of these
systems treat GPU power as a fixed constraint; PA-vLLM
introduces power caps as a first-class scheduling dimen-
sion that expands the achievable efficiency frontier beyond
software-only optimization.
Model parallelism for large-scale LLM execution.
Megatron-LM [22, 33] defines the standard composition of
10


--- Page 11 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
Table 3. Comparison with closely related systems.
System
Scope
Objective
Knobs
MoE
Key result
PALS (this work)
Node/multi-node infer-
ence
Max
tokens/J
under
power + QoS
Power cap + batch (runtime)
✓
+26.3% eff.; 4×–7× QoS
improvement
DynamoLLM [18]
Cluster routing + in-
stance mgmt
Min energy/cost/carbon
w/ SLOs
Routing, GPU freq, instance cnt
×
52% energy; 38% carbon
savings
TAPAS [6]
VM placement in GPU
clusters
Reduce TCO via cool-
ing/power
VM placement, routing
×
Thermal/power
throt-
tling reduction
Zeus [8]
Single-GPU DNN train-
ing
Energy-time trade-off
Power limit + batch (offline)
×
15-76% training energy
savings
tensor, pipeline, and data parallelism for training and serv-
ing multi-billion-parameter models on multi-GPU clusters.
These works show that parallelism configurations critically
affect the compute-communication balance, a relationship
PA-vLLM directly exploits: our profiling reveals that the opti-
mal power cap depends on how compute- or communication-
bound a given parallelism configuration renders a model,
particularly in MoE architectures.
Mixture-of-Experts inference. Sparsely-gated MoE [31]
introduce conditional computation via learned routing, scal-
ing model capacity without proportional increases in active
parameters. Switch Transformers [11] scales this approach to
trillion-parameter regimes, highlighting load-balancing and
communication as primary system challenges. GShard [15]
targets distributed MoE training with expert parallelism
across accelerators, and DeepSpeed-Inference [4] optimizes
MoE inference at scale via kernel fusion and communication
scheduling. Expert offloading [35] reduces memory pressure
by paging inactive experts to CPU.
GPU power management and DVFS for ML work-
loads. Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) has
long been studied as a hardware knob for energy-performance
tradeoffs in processors [5]. Zeus [8] applies joint power-limit
and batch-size optimization to DNN training on a single GPU,
achieving 15-76% energy savings through offline exploration.
Nabavinejad et al. [21] propose BatchDVFS, a runtime sys-
tem that coordinates batch size and DVFS to meet power
caps in single-GPU DNN inference, demonstrating that the
achievable power range via DVFS alone depends on batch-
determined utilization. PA-vLLM extends this cross-layer
insight to multi-GPU LLM serving, where continuous batch-
ing, autoregressive generation, and MoE communication
overhead create fundamentally different power-performance
dynamics that batch-size and frequency tuning in isolation
cannot capture. Unlike BatchDVFS, PA-vLLM incorporates
parallelism as a third control dimension, operates under a
closed-loop feedback controller that responds to dynamic
external power budgets, and integrates into a production
serving framework targeting QoS-constrained inference. Pa-
tel et al. [25] characterize LLM power consumption patterns
in production cloud clusters and proposed POLCA, a power
oversubscription framework that safely deploys 30% more
inference servers within fixed datacenter power budgets. PA-
vLLM is complementary to POLCA, where POLCA targets
cluster-level provisioning, PA-vLLM operates within a single
inference node and dynamically co-adapts per-GPU power
caps and batch size at 500ms granularity to maintain QoS
while maximizing tokens per joule.
Cluster-level LLM energy management. DynamoLLM
reduces energy and carbon cost at the cluster level by dy-
namically reconfiguring instance counts, routing policies,
and GPU frequencies to meet latency SLOs, however oper-
ates at the granularity of minutes and does not address sub-
second variability within a running inference instance [17] .
TAPAS [7] reduces total cost of ownership through thermal-
and power-aware VM placement in GPU clusters, treating
power as an infrastructure-level capacity constraint. PA-
vLLM operates at the node level and complements both sys-
tems: a cluster scheduler sets per-node budgets and through-
put targets, which PA-vLLM tracks with its local controller,
enabling coordinated control across timescales without ei-
ther layer solving the full joint optimization.
Distinguishing characteristics of Power-Aware vLLM.
Compared to prior work, Power-Aware vLLM makes three
key departures. First, it elevates GPU power caps to a first-
class runtime control primitive and integrates them directly
into the inference scheduling loop, rather than treating power
as a static provisioning constraint. Second, it explicitly mod-
els the interaction between power, batching, and the com-
munication/computation ratio of LLM inference, enabling
stable control even in communication-bound regimes com-
mon in multi-GPU and MoE deployments. Third, it targets
production LLM serving scenarios, requiring sub-second re-
sponse times, negligible overhead, and zero changes to model
architectures or inference APIs.
Together, these differences position Power-Aware vLLM
as the first system to provide fine-grained, communication-
aware power control for multi-GPU LLM inference at run-
time, complementing existing job-level, cluster-level, and
data center–level energy management solutions.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Can Hankendi, Rana Shahout, Minlan Yu, and Ayse K. Coskun
8
Conclusion
In this paper, we present a plug-and-play power-aware run-
time that treats GPU power caps as a first-class control
knob, jointly optimizing them with batch size and paral-
lelism inside an unmodified LLM engine deployment. Our
characterization reveals that power efficiency exhibits model-
dependent diminishing returns, that batch size dominates
tokens per joule, and that the compute-communication ratio
determines whether additional power aids computation or
amplifies overhead, particularly in MoE models. Jointly con-
trolling hardware and software knobs expands the achievable
efficiency frontier beyond what either alone can reach.
We implement our approach within vLLM. Across single-
and multi-node evaluations on dense and MoE models, our
runtime improves energy efficiency by up to 26.3%, reduces
QoS violations by 4×–7× under multi-node power budgets,
and tracks dynamic demand-response signals without re-
quiring changes to model architectures or inference APIs.
These results establish GPU power as a practical runtime
control dimension for LLM inference, opening a path toward
energy-proportional, grid-interactive AI serving at scale.
9
Acknowledgments
Authors used generative AI tools to assist with light editing
and refinement of the text.
References
[1] Marah Abdin, Jyoti Aneja, Hany Awadalla, Ahmed Awadallah, Am-
mar Ahmad Awan, Nguyen Bach, Amit Bahree, Arash Bakhtiari, Jian-
min Bao, Harkirat Behl, et al. 2024. Phi-3 Technical Report: A Highly
Capable Language Model Locally on Your Phone.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14219 (2024).
[2] Bilge Acun, Benjamin Lee, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Kiwan Maeng, Udit
Gupta, Manoj Chakkaravarthy, David Brooks, and Carole-Jean Wu.
2023. Carbon Explorer: A Holistic Framework for Designing Car-
bon Aware Datacenters. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International
Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and
Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’23). 118–132. doi:10.1145/3575693.3575754
[3] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference
with Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation (OSDI ’24). USENIX Association, 117–134.
[4] Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Samyam Rajbhandari, Minjia Zhang, Am-
mar Ahmad Awan, Cheng Li, Du Li, Elton Zheng, Jeff Rasley, Shaden
Smith, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. 2022. DeepSpeed-Inference:
Enabling Efficient Inference of Transformer Models at Unprecedented
Scale. In SC22: International Conference for High Performance Comput-
ing, Networking, Storage and Analysis.
[5] Luiz André Barroso, Urs Hölzle, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan. 2019.
The Datacenter as a Computer: Designing Warehouse-Scale Machines
(3rd ed.). Morgan & Claypool Publishers.
[6] Rishabh Bhoria, Anubhav Sehgal, Divyanshu Saxena, Debadatta
Mishra, and Purushottam Kulkarni. 2025. TAPAS: Thermal and Power-
Aware Scheduling for GPU Clusters. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems.
[7] Rishabh Bhoria, Anubhav Sehgal, Divyanshu Saxena, Debadatta
Mishra, and Purushottam Kulkarni. 2025. TAPAS: Thermal and Power-
Aware Scheduling for GPU Clusters. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’25).
[8] Jae-Won Chung, Yile Gu, Insu Jang, Luoxi Meng, Nikhil Bansal, and
Mosharaf Chowdhury. 2023. Zeus: Understanding and Optimizing
GPU Energy Consumption of DNN Training. In 20th USENIX Sym-
posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’23).
USENIX Association, 119–139.
[9] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen,
Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob
Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman.
2021. Training Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168 (2021).
[10] Damai Dai, Chengqi Deng, Chenggang Zhao, R. X. Xu, Huazuo Gao,
Deli Chen, Jiashi Li, Wangding Zeng, Xingkai Yu, Y. Wu, Zhenda
Xie, Y. K. Li, Panpan Huang, Fuli Luo, Chong Ruan, Zhifang Sui, and
Wenfeng Liang. 2024. DeepSeekMoE: Towards Ultimate Expert Spe-
cialization in Mixture-of-Experts Language Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.06066 (2024).
[11] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022. Switch Trans-
formers: Scaling to Trillion Parameter Models with Simple and Effi-
cient Sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 120 (2022),
1–39.
[12] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bam-
ford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand,
Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard
Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023.
Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 (2023).
[13] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch,
Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de
Las Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Bour, Guillaume Lample, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian, Sophia
Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao, Théophile Gervet, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothy Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2024.
Mixtral of Experts. https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.04088
[14] Woojin Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serv-
ing with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Principles. doi:10.1145/3600006.3613165
[15] Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen,
Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and
Zhifeng Chen. 2020. GShard: Scaling Giant Models with Conditional
Computation and Automatic Sharding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.16668
(2020).
[16] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng,
Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
and Ion Stoica. 2022. AlpaServe: Statistical Multiplexing with Model
Parallelism for Deep Learning Serving. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22). 663–679.
[17] Rohan Mahajan, Minsung Jang, Arjun Singhvi, Krishnan Kutty, Aditya
Akella, and Shivaram Venkataraman. 2025. DynamoLLM: Designing
LLM Inference Clusters for Performance and Energy Efficiency. In
2025 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA ’25).
[18] Rohan Mahajan, Minsung Jang, Arjun Singhvi, Krishnan Kutty, Aditya
Akella, and Shivaram Venkataraman. 2025. DynamoLLM: Designing
LLM Inference Clusters for Performance and Energy Efficiency. In
2025 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer
Architecture (HPCA).
12


--- Page 13 ---
PALS: Power-Aware LLM Serving for Mixture-of-Experts Models
[19] Yixuan Mei, Yonghao Zhuang, Xupeng Miao, Juncheng Yang, Zhihao
Jia, and Rashmi Vinayak. 2025. Helix: Serving Large Language Models
over Heterogeneous GPUs and Network via Max-Flow. In Proceedings
of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for
Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS ’25). 1–17.
doi:10.1145/3669940.3707215
[20] Niklas Muennighoff, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Jacob
Morrison, Sewon Min, Weijia Shi, Pete Walsh, Oyvind Tafjord, Nathan
Lambert, Yuling Gu, Shane Arora, Akshita Bhagia, Dustin Schwenk,
David Wadden, Alexander Wettig, Binyuan Hui, Tim Dettmers, Douwe
Kiela, Ali Farhadi, Noah A. Smith, Pang Wei Koh, Amanpreet Singh,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. OLMoE: Open Mixture-of-Experts
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02060 (2024).
[21] Seyed Morteza Nabavinejad, Sherief Reda, and Masoumeh Ebrahimi.
2022. Coordinated Batching and DVFS for DNN Inference on GPU
Accelerators. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 33,
10 (2022), 2496–2508. doi:10.1109/TPDS.2021.3137867
[22] Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGres-
ley, Mostofa Patwary, Vijay Anand Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand,
Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan Catanzaro, Amar Phan-
ishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2021. Efficient Large-Scale Language
Model Training on GPU Clusters Using Megatron-LM. In Proceedings
of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Net-
working, Storage and Analysis (SC ’21). doi:10.1145/3458817.3476209
[23] NVIDIA Corporation 2024. NVIDIA Management Library (NVML)
API Reference Guide. NVIDIA Corporation. https://docs.nvidia.com/
deploy/nvml-api/index.html Version R550.
[24] NVIDIA Corporation 2024. nvidia-smi: NVIDIA System Management
Interface. NVIDIA Corporation. https://developer.nvidia.com/nvidia-
system-management-interface
[25] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Brijesh
Warrier, Nithish Mahalingam, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2024. Charac-
terizing Power Management Opportunities for LLMs in the Cloud. In
Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS
’24). 207–222. doi:10.1145/3620666.3651329
[26] Qwen Team. 2024. Qwen1.5-MoE: Matching 7B Model Performance
with 1/3 of the Parameters. Qwen Blog (2024). https://qwenlm.github.
io/blog/qwen-moe/
[27] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei,
and Ilya Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask
Learners. OpenAI Blog 1, 8 (2019), 9. https://openai.com/research/
language-unsupervised
[28] Ana Radovanovic, Ross Koningstein, Ian Schneider, Bokan Chen,
Alexandre Duarte, Binz Roy, Diyue Xiao, Maya Haridasan, Patrick
Hung, Nick Care, Saurav Talukdar, Eric Mullen, Kendal Smith,
MariEllen Cottman, and Walfredo Cirne. 2023. Carbon-Aware Com-
puting for Datacenters. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems 38, 2
(2023), 1270–1280. doi:10.1109/TPWRS.2022.3173250
[29] Rana Shahout, Cong Liang, Shiji Xin, Qianru Lao, Yong Cui, Minlan
Yu, and Michael Mitzenmacher. 2024. Fast inference for augmented
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18248 (2024).
[30] Rana Shahout, Eran Malach, Chunwei Liu, Weifan Jiang, Minlan Yu,
and Michael Mitzenmacher. 2024. Don’t Stop Me Now: Embedding
Based Scheduling for LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01035 (2024).
[31] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis,
Quoc V. Le, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously
Large Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer.
In 5th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR ’17).
https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg
[32] Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max
Ryabinin, Daniel Y. Fu, Zhiqiang Xie, Beidi Chen, Clark W. Barrett,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Percy Liang, Christopher Ré, Ion Stoica, and Ce
Zhang. 2023. FlexGen: High-Throughput Generative Inference of
Large Language Models with a Single GPU. In Proceedings of the 40th
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML ’23), Vol. 202.
PMLR, 31094–31116.
[33] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley,
Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Megatron-LM: Training
Multi-Billion Parameter Language Models Using Model Parallelism.
In arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053.
[34] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Alma-
hairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal
Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes,
Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami,
Naman Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan
Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann,
Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut
Lavril, Jenya Lee, Diana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier
Martinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Molybog, Yixin Nie,
Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizenstein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi,
Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subramanian,
Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Taylor, Adina Williams, Jian Xi-
ang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, An-
gela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Rodriguez,
Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama
2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288 (2023).
[35] Runxin Wu, Yushi Bai, Siyang He, Shengding Hu, Yukun Zhou,
Zhiyuan Liu, Furu Wei, and Maosong Sun. 2024. Fast Inference of
Mixture-of-Experts Language Models with Offloading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.17238 (2024).
[36] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and
Byung-Gon Chun. 2022.
Orca: A distributed serving system for
{Transformer-Based} generative models. In 16th USENIX symposium
on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 22). 521–538.
[37] Rowan Zellers, Ari Holtzman, Yonatan Bisk, Ali Farhadi, and Yejin
Choi. 2019. HellaSwag: Can a Machine Really Finish Your Sentence?.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL ’19). 4791–4800. doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1472
[38] Zhuoran Zhang, Daniel Wang, and Ayse K. Coskun. 2021. HPC Data
Center Participation in Demand Response: An Adaptive Policy with
QoS Assurance. IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing 8, 3 (2021),
754–768. doi:10.1109/TSUSC.2021.3079166
[39] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating
Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-Optimized Large Language Model
Serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI ’24). USENIX Association, 193–210.
13
