--- Page 1 ---
AlgoEvolve: LLM-driven Meta-evolution of Algorithmic Trading Programs
Dhruv Sharma1 , Dr. Gautam Shroff2 ,
1Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi
2Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi
{dhruv22170, gautam.shroff}@iiitd.ac.in,
Abstract
Recent work shows that Large Language Models
(LLMs) can act as semantic mutation operators for
the evolutionary discovery of programs and proofs.
Most current applications focus on static coding
benchmarks. We extend this paradigm to algorith-
mic trading.
This domain is uniquely challeng-
ing because it is noisy, non-stationary, and highly
discontinuous. We present AlgoEvolve, an LLM-
driven evolutionary framework that generates, eval-
uates, and iteratively improves executable trading
strategies. These strategies are expressed as Python
code and evaluated through a rigorous testing pro-
tocol. Across multiple experiments, the system ex-
hibits emergent regime-adaptive strategy logic, in-
cluding autonomous shifts in trading rules.
We
further introduce a meta-evolutionary outer loop
that evolves the prompts guiding program synthe-
sis in the inner loop. This outer loop discovers im-
proved search heuristics. These heuristics balance
exploration and exploitation while reducing zero-
trade failures. They consistently outperform initial
human-designed instructions. The results demon-
strate that LLM-based semantic evolution provides
a viable approach for continual program synthesis
in complex environments.
1
Introduction
Procedures that aim to discover optimal strategies for al-
gorithmic trading in financial markets, e.g., using machine-
learning, need to synthesize and select heterogeneous mar-
ket signals as well as adapt to non-stationary regimes [Ham-
bly et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023]. A trad-
ing strategy’s performance (i.e., profit and loss) is most of-
ten a non-differentiable and highly discontinuous function of
any parameters it may choose to use (e.g., thresholds, model
weights etc.) [Zhang et al., 2020], due to the noisy character
of the domain, i.e., a very low signal-to-noise ratio [Lim and
Zohren, 2021]. Traditional deep learning and reinforcement
learning (RL) approaches are also limited by their reliance
on ’black-box’ parametric optimization, lacking the trans-
parency often required by regulatory frameworks [Arsenault
et al., 2025]. These are also prone to overfitting to historical
noise [De Prado, 2018], leading to severe degradation during
abrupt regime shifts.
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demon-
strated their potential in financial decision-making and ad-
dressing the limitations of parametric models: Beyond serv-
ing as multi-modal feature extractors [Chen et al., 2021;
Yang et al., 2023b], LLMs exhibit emergent capabilities in
capturing long-range temporal dependencies and generaliz-
ing across diverse market regimes through in-context learn-
ing [Jin et al., 2023; Yu et al., 2023]. However, while these
models are being increasingly used as ”agentic” controllers,
they have primarily been evaluated as one-shot generators or
static predictors. We propose using LLMs as semantic mu-
tation operators capable of iterative program refinement. By
drawing inspiration from recent breakthroughs in symbolic
discovery such as FunSearch [Romera-Paredes et al., 2024]
and AlphaEvolve [Novikov et al., 2025], as well as the scal-
ing of test-time compute through iterative editing [Ehrlich et
al., 2025], we demonstrate that LLMs can participate in an
iterative evolutionary discovery process, generating and con-
tinually improving executable algorithmic trading strategies.
We introduce AlgoEvolve, a hierarchical framework where
the LLM functions as a semantic mutation operator to dis-
cover executable trading policies. Building upon the ”coding
agent” paradigm established by AlphaEvolve [Novikov et al.,
2025], which orchestrates LLM pipelines for scientific dis-
covery, we propose a specialized bi-level meta-evolutionary
architecture: An inner loop evolves strategies using LLMs
provided with a search prompt, strategy code, and recent per-
formance data. Additionally, an outer loop evolves the search
prompt itself. Unlike existing approaches that rely on static
instructions or unstructured feedback [Fernando et al., 2023;
Yang et al., 2023a], AlgoEvolve treats the prompt as a struc-
tured prompt genome, enabling the system to autonomously
discover and refine its own discovery heuristics across shift-
ing market regimes.
As AlgoEvolve is run continually and iteratively over
time, it exhibits qualitative shifts in strategy logic that sug-
gest a departure from simple historical fitting.
We ob-
serve autonomous transitions in trading paradigms, where
the system independently moves beyond human-provided
trend-following priors, discovering complex, regime-adaptive
rules such as multi-factor scoring and price-action heuristics.
These discovered strategies frequently utilize multi-bar pat-
arXiv:2606.26173v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jun 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Inner Evolutionary Loop (k Generations)
Meta-Instruction
(e.g., "Focus on Volatility")
Market Data
API
Prompt
Construction
LLM Agent
Strategy
Population
Backtester
Ranking &
Selection
Prompt
Genome
Population
Meta-Evolver
Agent
(Crossover & Semantic
Mutation)
Sample Genome
Fitness Update
Evolve Population
In-Context Learning 
(eg. Champion + Contrastive Examples)
Fitness
Learning Curve
Error Rate
Figure 1: The AlgoEvolve Framework. Our hierarchical architecture co-evolves symbolic trading policies and their discovery heuristics.
(A) The Inner Loop utilizes an LLM as a semantic mutation operator to iteratively refine executable Python strategies, evaluated via a rigorous
walk-forward protocol. (B) The Outer Loop performs meta-evolution on the Prompt Genome, discovering superior search instructions that
adapt to market non-stationarity and stabilize the discovery process against common failure modes like ”zero-trade” stagnation.
terns that mirror human-engineered structures, yet are op-
timized for the specific volatility profiles of the target as-
sets. At the outer level, the meta-evolutionary layer discovers
evolved prompts that stabilize reasoning and effectively mit-
igate the ’zero-trade’ failure modes observed in static LLM-
based search.
Our contributions are as follows: (1) we introduce an
end-to-end LLM-driven evolutionary framework for discov-
ering and improving algorithmic trading strategies, resulting
in an annualized Sharpe ratio of 5.60; (2) we demonstrate
that AlgoEvolve independently abandons human-designed
trend-following priors to discover superior, regime-adaptive
logic; (3) we propose a meta-evolutionary Outer Loop that
evolves the inner loop’s Evolver Prompt itself, enabling au-
tonomous refinement of the search heuristic; and (4) we sub-
mit that LLM-based semantic evolution is a viable approach
for program synthesis in noisy, non-differentiable, and high-
dimensional environments such as algorithmic trading.
2
Related Work
LLM-Driven Program Synthesis Program synthesis has in-
creasingly expanded from one-shot autoregressive generation
[Nijkamp et al., 2023] to iterative discovery, where LLMs act
as semantically informed mutation operators within evolu-
tionary architectures [Romera-Paredes et al., 2024]. To man-
age vast program search spaces, current research integrates
LLM reasoning with formal constraints, including syntac-
tic guidance for enumerative synthesis [Li et al., 2024] and
grammar-based structural constraints in hybrid human–LLM
workflows [Barke et al., 2022]. Performance in these frame-
works is increasingly driven by test-time compute, leverag-
ing iterative editing [Ehrlich et al., 2025], population-based
exploration over program proposals [Real et al., 2020], and
execution feedback cycles [Yang et al., 2023a] to resolve
complex logic. Unlike classical Genetic Programming, LLM-
driven evolution better captures semantic intent required for
high-dimensional optimization [Fernando et al., 2023], pro-
viding a foundation for synthesis in noisy, discontinuous en-
vironments such as algorithmic trading.
LLMs for Financial Decision Making Large language
models (LLMs) have been increasingly applied to finan-
cial tasks, ranging from sentiment analysis and domain-
specific modeling [Araci, 2019; Wu et al., 2023] to agentic
trading systems that perform inference-time decision mak-
ing [Yu et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025;
Song et al., 2025]. Recent frameworks further integrate rein-
forcement learning [Xiong et al., 2025] or internal competi-
tion mechanisms [Zhao et al., 2025] to improve robustness in
noisy markets, but rely on continuous model inference during
deployment.
In contrast, AlgoEvolve employs LLMs only at design time
to synthesize explicit, executable trading strategies. By evolv-
ing symbolic Python programs rather than querying an LLM
at runtime, the framework achieves zero inference-time la-
tency, intrinsic interpretability, and improved robustness to
non-stationary market regimes. This formulation reframes
LLMs as symbolic strategy designers rather than real-time
trading agents, better aligning language-based reasoning with
the operational constraints of algorithmic trading.
Evolutionary Computation for Financial Strategy Dis-
covery Evolutionary methods for trading range from Ge-
netic Programming for symbolic rules [Koza, 1992; Potvin
et al., 2004; Brabazon and O’Neill, 2006] to portfolio op-


--- Page 3 ---
timization [Chang et al., 2000; Brabazon et al., 2008] and
neuroevolutionary policies [Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002;
Manahov et al., 2019]. While interpretable, these approaches
rely on stochastic operators that can yield unstable or brit-
tle strategies in noisy financial environments.
Recent co-
evolutionary frameworks jointly optimize rules and risk, but
remain limited to syntactic search without semantic guidance.
AlgoEvolve addresses this gap by replacing random mutation
with reasoning-driven LLM transformations, producing log-
ically consistent modifications informed by execution feed-
back, thus improving stability in non-stationary markets.
Meta-Evolution and Automated Search Beyond evolv-
ing solutions, research explores optimizing the search pro-
cess itself through self-improving frameworks [Real et al.,
2020], meta-learning of optimizers [Andrychowicz et al.,
2016], and co-evolutionary population-based training [Jader-
berg et al., 2017]. More recently, LLM-driven systems such
as PromptBreeder [Fernando et al., 2023] and OPRO [Yang
et al., 2023a] demonstrated prompt optimization via self-
referential loops in static textual domains. AlgoEvolve ex-
tends this paradigm to executable program discovery through
a hierarchical architecture in which an outer loop evolves a
prompt genome. This enables the autonomous discovery of
search heuristics that stabilize exploration and adapt to non-
stationary market regimes, mitigating practical failure modes
such as strategy degeneration or zero-activity collapse.
3
Problem Formulation
We formalize the automated discovery of trading strategies as
a bi-level, non-stationary program synthesis problem. The
goal is to evolve an agent (strategy) that adapts to shifting data
distributions, and simultaneously evolve a search algorithm
(prompt) that improves the efficiency of that adaptation.
3.1
Strategy Representation (The Inner Agent)
A trading strategy is represented as an executable Python pro-
gram f ∈F, where F denotes the space of all syntactically
valid Python programs expressible under the system’s execu-
tion constraints. Formally, let xt ∈Rd be the feature vector
at time t (derived from 5-minute OHLCV bars). The strategy
computes:
f(xt) →ˆyt ∈Y,
Y = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4} × {0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
where ˆyt is a tuple where each component encodes a discrete
trading signal over short and long horizons respectively. Un-
like parametric models (e.g., Neural Networks) where opti-
mization occurs in weight space Θ, here optimization occurs
in the discrete, non-differentiable program space F [Koza,
1992].
3.2
Non-Stationary Objective (Walk-Forward)
Financial markets are non-stationary, meaning the optimal
function f ⋆changes over time. We model this using a Walk-
Forward Validation protocol [De Prado, 2018].
Let the
lifespan of the system be divided into K temporal epochs.
At each epoch k, the system has access to a historical win-
dow D(k)
train. It must produce a strategy fk to be deployed on
the unseen future window D(k)
test.
The performance metric S(f, D) is defined as a composite
fitness score:
S(f, D) = α · R(f, D) + (1 −α) · C(f, D)
where R denotes the Total Return (cumulative Profit and
Loss) generated by the strategy, and C denotes Consistency,
a robustness metric measuring the fraction of assets for which
the strategy outperforms the median market performance.
Here α is a weighting coefficient used to prioritize cross-asset
robustness over single-asset outperformance, mitigating the
risks of non-stationary distribution shifts. This also serves
to avoid the trivial zero-exposure optima observed in prelim-
inary Pareto trials where inactivity satisfies risk constraints
perfectly. The Inner Loop optimization problem at epoch k
is to find:
f ⋆
k = arg max
f∈F S(f, D(k)
train)
The ultimate objective, however, is to maximize the general-
ization to the unseen future: PK
k=1 S(f ⋆
k, D(k)
test).
3.3
Meta-Evolution (The Outer Loop)
The success of the Inner Loop depends on the search heuris-
tic, governed by the Evolver Prompt P. Let A(P, Dtrain)
denote the stochastic optimization procedure (Inner Loop)
driven by prompt P. The Outer Loop treats the prompt P
as a learnable hyper-parameter. Its goal is to find the prompt
P ⋆that maximizes the expected Inner Loop performance:
P ⋆= arg max
P ∈P ED [S (A(P, Dtrain), Dtest)]
This formulation frames the problem as Algorithm Discov-
ery: finding a natural language instruction P that induces an
effective search policy in the discrete program space F. This
formulation explicitly captures both non-stationary adapta-
tion and self-improving search within a unified optimization
framework [Hospedales et al., 2022].
4
Methodology: The AlgoEvolve Framework
We propose AlgoEvolve (Figure 1), a hierarchical evolution-
ary framework designed to discover trading strategies in non-
stationary environments. The system consists of two interact-
ing optimization loops: an Inner Loop that evolves executable
Python strategies (f) and an Outer Loop that evolves the nat-
ural language instructions (P) guiding the search.
4.1
The Inner Evolutionary Loop
The Inner Loop functions as a semantic variation-selection
engine. Its goal is to approximate the optimal strategy f ⋆for
a given temporal window. Inner loop execution is controlled
by two distinct prompts:
• The System Prompt (Fixed): Defines the immutable
computational environment, including the dataset struc-
ture, allowed Python libraries, and strict I/O constraints
(signature enforcement). This prompt is never evolved
to ensure code validity.
• The Evolver Prompt (Evolved): Defines the search
heuristic, reasoning style, and creative constraints. This
prompt (P) is the object of meta-evolution.


--- Page 4 ---
Prompt Construction via In-Context Learning
At generation t, the system constructs the input context. To
ensure the LLM has access to historical performance data, the
system architecture injects the Top-2 Best and Top-2 Worst
strategies (i.e., their python code) from the previous gener-
ation accompanied by their historical fitness scores into the
context window. Contrastive signals from ’Worst’ perform-
ers enable the LLM to prune ineffective logical branches
[Romera-Paredes et al., 2024], preventing logic collapse dur-
ing discovery. Crucially, the Evolver Prompt (P) determines
attention; for example, a prompt might instruct a step-by-step
analysis of the divergence between the Best and Worst strate-
gies (strong utilization), or conversely, disregard local optima
to propose a radically novel paradigm (zero utilization). This
modulates the exploration–exploitation trade-off.
LLM as a Semantic Mutation Operator
Unlike random bit-flipping in Genetic Programming, Algo-
Evolve uses Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [Wei et
al., 2022].
CoT enhances the LLM’s capacity for com-
plex symbolic reasoning by enabling it to decompose high-
dimensional mutation tasks into intermediate logical steps.
The LLM must output a <reasoning> block justifying its
proposed changes before outputting the <code> block(s).
We make this reasoning-action trajectory a fundamental re-
quirement rather than an optional heuristic.
This ensures
mutations are hypothesis-driven (e.g., ”The previous strat-
egy over-traded; I will add a volatility filter”). The func-
tional execution of RunInnerLoop (see Algorithm 1) consists
of N generations of semantic evolution. At each iteration i, a
candidate strategy fi is synthesized via the mutation operator
M(fbest, L, P). The resulting population is then evaluated
on D(k)
train and ranked by the composite fitness S, selecting
the optimal individual as the parent for the subsequent gener-
ation.
Walk-Forward Evaluation
Candidate strategies are evaluated using the sliding-window
protocol defined in Section 3. The selection pressure is driven
by the composite fitness score S(f), balancing Total Return
(R) and Consistency (C). Strategies that trigger runtime er-
rors or violate the System Prompt constraints are assigned a
fitness of −∞.
4.2
The Meta-Evolutionary Outer Loop
While the Inner Loop optimizes the solution, the Outer Loop
optimizes the search itself by evolving the Evolver Prompt P.
The Prompt Genome
We represent the search algorithm as a structured Prompt
Genome G consisting of four mutable genes (θ) represent-
ing a minimal spanning set for autonomous search [Fernando
et al., 2023]. Each gene θi represents a categorical choice
from a curated subspace of natural language instructions. The
function G.build prompt() maps these discrete selections into
a concatenated, coherent executive directive. This formaliza-
tion allows the outer loop to perform targeted optimization
over specific search behaviors:
1. θmutation: The instruction for modifying code (e.g.,
”Propose five MINOR variants” vs.
”Explore BOLD
new paradigms”).
2. θfocus: The creative directive (e.g., ”Focus on combin-
ing momentum with volatility”).
3. θconstraints: Negative search constraints (e.g., ”Do not
use look-ahead bias”).
4. θreasoning: The analytical framework (e.g., ”Analyze
the learning curve”).
Informed Meta-Mutation
Standard meta-learning often treats the optimizer as a black
box. AlgoEvolve employs Informed Meta-Mutation, where
a ”Meta-LLM” acts as a research scientist rewriting the
genome based on empirical evidence. After an Inner Loop
run, the Meta-LLM receives a Performance Report contain-
ing:
• Learning Curve Trajectory: To detect stagnation or
instability.
• Failure Rate: The percentage of candidates that errored
(indicating overly restrictive constraints).
• Champion Anatomy: The breakdown of Return vs.
Consistency.
The Meta-LLM is instructed to rewrite exactly one gene to
address specific deficiencies identified in the report (e.g.,
”The search stagnated; rewrite θmutation to increase explo-
ration”). By grounding mutations in the Performance Re-
port, this mechanism mitigates meta-learning credit assign-
ment challenges. Rather than performing a stochastic random
walk in the prompt space, the Meta-LLM identifies the causal
drivers of search failure—such as gradient stagnation or logic
collapse—and applies a targeted update to the relevant gene.
Meta-Crossover
To combine successful heuristics,
we employ uniform
crossover in the prompt space.
Given two elite genomes,
a child genome is created by independently sampling genes
from either parent, allowing the system to combine, for exam-
ple, the Reasoning Style of a stable parent with the Creative
Focus of a high-return parent.
5
Experiments
5.1
Experimental Setup
Market Environment and Feature Representation
We evaluate AlgoEvolve on the NUMIN 1 platform, a pub-
licly available intraday paper trading environment with open
programmatic access, providing anonymized multi-asset eq-
uity market data and programmatic strategy evaluation via a
Python SDK. The dataset consists of over 200 trading days
of discretized 5-minute data that includes OHLCV candles,
standard technical indicators, as well as 5 and 10 candle re-
turns, normalized by the first close price of each day. Each
trading day is represented by 150 time steps, where rows 0–74
correspond to historical prior-day context and rows 75–149
1https://pypi.org/project/numin/


--- Page 5 ---
Algorithm 1 AlgoEvolve Meta-Learning Procedure
Input:
Initial
Prompt
Population
P0,
Meta-
Generations K Output:
Best Found Prompt Genome
G⋆
1: Initialize population P ←P0
2: for meta-generation k = 1 to K do
3:
F ←∅, L ←∅
4:
for each Genome G ∈P do
5:
Ptext ←G.build prompt()
6:
logs, H ←RunInnerLoop(Ptext, D(k)
train) {H is the
trajectory of candidate programs}
7:
f ⋆←argmaxf∈HS(f, D(k)
train) {Extract strategy
maximizing composite fitness S}
8:
F[G] ←CalculateFitness(f ⋆, D(k)
test)
9:
L[G] ←logs
10:
end for
11:
Pnext ←{argmaxGF[G]} {Elitism}
12:
while |Pnext| < |P| do
13:
p1, p2 ←SelectTop(P, F)
14:
child ←MetaCrossover(p1, p2)
15:
report ←GenerateReport(L[p1])
16:
child ←MetaMutate(child, report)
17:
Pnext.add(child)
18:
end while
19:
P ←Pnext
20: end for
21: return argmaxGF[G]
represent the active trading session. Each day’s data is for
a different set of 5 (obfuscated) stock symbols. Normalized
and obfuscated market data ensures numerical stability and
prevents leakage. The back-testing SDK takes as input a strat-
egy function and computes its returns for a given set of days
as follows: The strategy function is provided data prior to
a given 5-minute tick (omitting returns that are unavailable
at that time), and decides to buy, sell or hold a stock. Each
position exits 10 candles after entry, and a single open po-
sition per stock symbol is enforced. A fixed 0.1% (10bps)
transaction plus slippage cost is enforced to prioritize high-
conviction signals over noise.
Strategy agents are required to output predictions for the
dual multi-horizon targets defined in Section 3.1. We main-
tain the same five-class discrete scale Y for all discovered
logic, ensuring that the semantic mutation process remains
grounded in the established numerical stability constraints.
Model Configuration and Hyperparameters
We employ a heterogeneous LLM architecture to decouple
the high-latency reasoning required for prompt optimization
(Gemini Pro) from the high-throughput generation required
for strategy discovery (Gemini Flash). Critically, since the
Gemini Flash ’generator’ remains constant across all ablation
stages, the performance gains observed in Stage 4 are iso-
lated to the quality of the evolved instructions rather than a
shift in model-tier capacity. The Outer Loop utilizes the Pro
family for its superior reasoning capabilities and long-context
window, while the Inner Loop leverages the Flash family for
rapid iterative refinement. We set the consistency weighting
coefficient empirically as α = 0.7, as defined in Section 3.2.
5.2
Evaluation Metrics and Protocols
To rigorously assess AlgoEvolve,
we utilize a multi-
dimensional evaluation framework that accounts for absolute
profitability, risk exposure, and structural stability across non-
stationary regimes.
Performance Metrics
We evaluate strategies using standard financial performance
measures that jointly assess return potential and downside
risk: Average Daily Profit and Loss (Avg. PnL), the arith-
metic mean of daily portfolio returns; Sharpe Ratio, measur-
ing the consistency of alpha generation via risk-adjusted re-
turns; Return Volatility, representing the variability of port-
folio returns; and Maximum Drawdown (MDD), quantify-
ing the worst-case cumulative capital loss from a local peak
to a subsequent trough. All Sharpe ratios are reported on
a daily basis unless otherwise stated; annualized values use
Sann = Sdaily ×
√
252 for industry-standard comparison.
Temporal Evaluation Protocols
We assess the framework across two paradigms: Fixed (Dis-
joint) Window, where the evaluation window W shifts by its
total length (e.g., 13 days) to establish long-term logic sta-
bility; and Sliding Window, where the window shifts by a
single day. The latter provides high-frequency feedback, en-
abling the mutation operator to adapt to immediate market
regime shifts. Together, these protocols provide a view of
both economic value and robustness.
Unlike static ML benchmarks, intraday markets exhibit fre-
quent regime shifts. We prioritize rapid adaptation under con-
tinual distribution shift over asymptotic convergence, utiliz-
ing high-frequency rolling windows to assess semantic muta-
tion.
5.3
Results and Ablation Study
In this section, we analyze the performance of the Algo-
Evolve framework through an incremental ablation study.
By isolating the impact of temporal windowing, feedback
granularity, and meta-evolutionary optimization, we demon-
strate how the system systematically overcomes market non-
stationarity.
Prior to the longitudinal study, preliminary calibration ex-
periments were conducted to evaluate the impact of tempo-
ral windowing. Comparing 13-day disjoint and 5-day slid-
ing windows, we established that a high-frequency, 1-day
feedback protocol optimizes for recency bias and minimizes
drawdown. This configuration serves as our ’Standard Evol’
baseline (Mean: 0.104%, Daily Sharpe: 0.36, MDD: 0.42%),
representing the limits of inner-loop semantic evolution with-
out the adaptive guidance of the meta-evolutionary outer
loop.
Meta-Evolutionary Optimization
AlgoEvolve successfully navigates non-stationary search
spaces through autonomous self-correction, exhibiting a sig-
nificant selection advantage (Fig. 2). If the synthesis was
unreliable, resulting in incorrect code being generated, our
system treated the prompt genome as having −∞fitness.


--- Page 6 ---
Figure 2: Evolution of the Prompt Genome. Meta-evolutionary se-
lection identifies elite heuristics achieving an annualized Sharpe
of 5.60 against a population mean of 1.21, representing a 363%
improvement in risk-adjusted search efficiency over six meta-
generations.
Figure 3: Equity curves under a rolling walk-forward evaluation. Al-
goEvolve (Outer Loop) maintains a stable upward trajectory, while
static and parametric baselines exhibit high variance and suffer
drawdowns following the regime shift after Day 10.
5.4
Comparative Performance Analysis
To assess robustness under market non-stationarity, we eval-
uate AlgoEvolve against four standardized baselines: a static
Seed heuristic, a single-level Standard Evol ablation, and two
tuned parametric models (RF, LSTM). The parametric base-
lines were trained on a 95-day dataset (June–Oct 2024) uti-
lizing 59 market features: the Random Forest (RF) employs
250 estimators with a depth of 8 over a 30-candle window,
while the LSTM utilizes a 2-layer architecture (128 hidden
units) with a 20-step temporal lookback. Additionally, we
include “Frozen” inner-loop champions (Geni →20) to
measure the rate of strategy decay in the absence of meta-
adaptation (Table 1, Fig. 3).
Performance Benchmarking. Table 1 shows AlgoEvolve
(6 MG) achieves the optimal risk-return profile. The Seed
Heuristic fails catastrophically (−15.65% loss), while the
Standard Evol baseline reveals single-loop limits: high sta-
bility (MDD 0.42%) but muted alpha (0.10% mean); it lacks
the structural verticality required to capitalize on high-alpha
events. Conversely, our bi-level architecture unlocks signifi-
Method
Mean (%) Volatility (%) Ann. Sharpe Max DD (%)
Seed Heuristic
-0.78
1.06
-11.75
17.56
Standard Evol
0.10
0.29
5.71
0.42
LSTM
-0.05
0.68
-1.11
3.79
RF
0.51
1.52
5.24
7.27
AlgoEvolve
0.30
0.94
5.08
1.59
AlgoEvolve (6 MG)
0.31
0.88
5.60
1.59
Table 1:
Comparative performance of strategy discovery meth-
ods across a 20-day benchmark and a 30-day longitudinal (6 MG)
evaluation. AlgoEvolve demonstrates superior risk-adjusted alpha
(Sharpe: 5.60) and autonomous resilience to non-stationarity. While
parametric baselines (RF, LSTM) exhibit high-variance decay and
severe drawdowns (7.27%), our meta-evolutionary framework iden-
tifies elite heuristics that maintain capital preservation (Max DD:
1.59%) while consistently capturing positive mean returns. Algo-
Evolve’s Sharpe here corresponds to the elite Prompt Genome se-
lected under evolutionary pressure, while the population-level mean
Sharpe remains ≈1.21; our claims are therefore comparative and
selection-based rather than reflective of average deployable perfor-
mance.
cant “verticality,” increasing mean daily returns to 0.31%—a
3× improvement—with an institutional-grade 5.60 Sharpe.
Baseline Fragility.
Parametric models exhibit regime-
shift decay: the RF Baseline suffers high volatility and se-
vere drawdown (7.27%), while the LSTM fails to extract sig-
nal from intraday noise. AlgoEvolve’s symbolic, rule-based
heuristics act as a natural regularizer, mitigating the high-
frequency overfitting inherent in black-box models.
Adaptation Dynamics. Superior performance is driven by
the outer loop’s strategic pivots. As seen in Fig. 3, the Stan-
dard Evol curve plateaus, a trend mirrored by Frozen Strat-
egy fossils (Geni →20) which decay as distributions shift.
AlgoEvolve overcomes this “alpha silence” by identifying
the MG 3 drawdown (−1.59%) and autonomously injecting
search diversity. This triggered a V-shaped recovery in MG
4, capturing a 2.53% single-day alpha event, demonstrating
how design-time reasoning can enable structural adaptation
beyond runtime parametric inference.
6
Qualitative Analysis
6.1
Inner-Loop Baseline Analysis
Preliminary calibration (13-day window) established the
framework’s ability to autonomously pivot from failed trend-
following to mean-reversion logic, validating the high-
frequency protocol.
Subsequent ablative analysis of the
“Standard Evol” (Inner-Loop only) trajectory reveals a dis-
tinct three-phase decay pattern.
Phase 1: Rapid Heuristic Convergence (Gens 1–4).
In
the initial generations, the LLM successfully synthesized a
foundational suite of technical indicators.
By Generation
1, the system discovered the utility of RSI/CMO momen-
tum filters and SMA trend confirmation. Reasoning logs
show the model attempting to “create high-granularity sig-
nals” by aggregating multiple binary conditions. However,
the logic remained shallow, relying on fixed thresholds (e.g.,


--- Page 7 ---
Epoch
Discovered Heuristic Logic
Gen 1
if RSI 14 > 70:
return SELL
(Naive
Threshold)
Gen 10
if (RSI 14 > 75 && Close n > SMA 20):
return 2 (Over-filtered/Zero-trade)
Gen 20
score = P(wi
·
ϕi); if score > τ:
return 4 (Multi-factor Confluence)
Table 2: Evolution of symbolic logic. The system autonomously
transitioned from naive thresholds to weighted multi-factor scoring
architectures.
buy threshold = 4.0) that lacked sensitivity to intra-
day volatility regimes.
Phase 2: The “Zero-Trade” Stagnation Trap (Gens 5–12).
The most significant finding in the baseline study was a pro-
longed period of semantic stagnation. During these eight
generations, the system produced a terminal return of 0.0%.
• Logic Collapse: Reasoning traces indicate the LLM at-
tempted to “enhance robustness” by adding increasingly
complex conditional layers. This resulted in uninten-
tional over-regularization of the trading logic.
• Syntactic Over-Smoothing:
Because the Evolver
Prompt remained static, the LLM became trapped in a
loop of minor threshold refinements. The resulting pro-
grams were so conservative that they failed to trigger a
single trade across validation assets, identifying a state
of “Alpha Silence”: when executable logic could not be
generated by the provided instructions.
Analysis:
Threshold Fragility and Bi-Level Necessity.
As illustrated in Table 2, the baseline search eventually
attempts to recover from stagnation through Threshold
Fragility (Gen 20)—performing stochastic parameter tun-
ing on aggressive ’overextension’ rules rather than struc-
tural innovation. This progression confirms that under static
prompts, LLMs as mutation operators are prone to local op-
tima convergence.
A meta-evolutionary layer is therefore
required to mutate the search instructions themselves, forc-
ing the synthesizer to abandon redundant filters and discover
the regime-adaptive architectures seen in the full AlgoEvolve
framework.
6.2
Meta-Evolutionary Dynamics
In contrast, as illustrated in Fig. 2, the AlgoEvolve meta-
trajectory followed three distinct evolutionary phases char-
acterized by initial optimization, a regime crisis, and a strate-
gic recovery breakthrough. This corresponds to three distinct
Prompt Genome Eras:
Era 1: The Refinement Paradigm (MG1–MG2).
In the
initial phase, the meta-population was dominated by “Con-
vergent DNA” (e.g., prompt 12e806c5), characterized by
instructions to “Propose MINOR variants... small, logical
refinements.” This search style was highly effective in sta-
ble regimes, identifying a “Confluence Filter” that success-
fully combined RSI and Bollinger Bands. In MG2, the sys-
tem autonomously discovered the Hierarchical VWAP Fil-
ter (prompt b1c7b1ac). By mandating that all entry logic
Meta-Gen
Evolutionary Breakthrough
Impact (PnL)
MG1
Logical Confluence: Combined momentum/trend.
+0.91%
MG2
Hierarchical Gating: VWAP mandatory filter.
+1.79%
MG3
Regime Shift: Static logic fails in new regime.
−1.59%
MG4
Diversity Portfolio: Non-linear/inverted logic.
+4.82%
MG6
Complexity Ceiling: Synthesizer limits reached.
+2.46%
Table 3: Qualitative Heuristic Evolution. The table maps evolved
search instructions to their quantitative impact, highlighting the au-
tonomous pivot in MG4.
be gated by VWAP, the Meta-LLM synthesized a regime-
aware search instruction. This prevented inner-loop models
from trading against the dominant trend, leading to a cumu-
lative PnL of +1.79%.
Era 2:
The Resilience Pivot (MG3–MG4).
The sys-
tem encountered a performance plateau due to a mar-
ket regime shift in MG3, where previously optimized
logic failed (Champion loss:
−1.59%, Population mean:
−2.90%).
Detailed logs indicate the inner-loop models
were over-fitting to prior volatility. In response, the Meta-
LLM executed a Strategic Diversity Injection in MG4
(prompt 94876739). As shown below, the evolved θfocus
gene shifted the search paradigm to overcome the alpha
plateau: e.g., “Propose structurally diverse archetypes; ex-
plore non-linear indicator combinations and inverse volatil-
ity signals to bypass the current zero-trade stagnation.” This
transition provides empirical evidence of the system’s capac-
ity to autonomously detect heuristic failure and execute a
structural pivot, resulting in a recovery that captured a 2.53%
alpha event in MG4.
Era 3: The Complexity Ceiling (MG5–MG6).
The final
phase of the longitudinal study identifies a complexity satu-
ration point at the frontier of autonomous synthesis. As meta-
instructions evolved toward high-density logic, the frame-
work encountered its first syntactic boundary in the final gen-
eration. Crucilly, this served as a validation of the system’s
robustness-aware selection: while a subset of the population
errored(no valid asset results), the robustness filters success-
fully quarantined these candidates, assigning them −∞fit-
ness. Despite this tail-end complexity, the search remained
productive, with the champion lineage remaining free of in-
valid code and capturing a significant +2.50% alpha event.
This minor blip at the experimental frontier demonstrates that
the framework is capable of safe continual discovery, priori-
tizing execution integrity over speculative complexity.
7
Conclusion and Outlook
AlgoEvolve provides a bi-level evolutionary framework
that reframes LLMs as symbolic architects capable of au-
tonomous strategy discovery. We demonstrated the system’s
ability to navigate non-stationary market regimes, achiev-
ing a peak annualized Sharpe ratio of 5.60.
To address
the constraints identified during our study, future work can
explore Modular Program Synthesis to overcome the ob-
served complexity ceiling by evolving discrete, reusable sub-
routines.


--- Page 8 ---
References
[Andrychowicz et al., 2016] Marcin Andrychowicz, Misha
Denil, Sergio Gomez Colmenarejo, Matthew W. Hoff-
man, David Pfau, Tom Schaul, Brendan Shillingford, and
Nando de Freitas. Learning to learn by gradient descent
by gradient descent. In Proceedings of the 30th Interna-
tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, pages 3988–3996. Curran Associates Inc., 2016.
[Araci, 2019] Dogu Araci.
Finbert:
Financial sentiment
analysis with pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.10063, 2019.
[Arsenault et al., 2025] Pierre-Daniel Arsenault, Shengrui
Wang, and Jean-Marc Patenaude. A survey of explainable
artificial intelligence (xai) in financial time series forecast-
ing. ACM Computing Surveys, 57(10):1–37, 2025.
[Barke et al., 2022] Shraddha Barke, Michael B. James, and
Nadia Polikarpova.
Grounded copilot: How program-
mers interact with code-generating models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.15000, 2022.
[Brabazon and O’Neill, 2006] Anthony
Brabazon
and
Michael O’Neill.
Biologically inspired algorithms for
financial modelling. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2006.
[Brabazon et al., 2008] Anthony
Brabazon,
Michael
O’Neill, and Ian Dempsey.
An introduction to evolu-
tionary computation in finance.
IEEE Computational
Intelligence Magazine, 3(4):42–55, 2008.
[Chang et al., 2000] T.-J. Chang, N. Meade, J. E. Beasley,
and Y. M. Sharaiha. Heuristics for cardinality constrained
portfolio optimisation.
Computers and Operations Re-
search, 27(13):1271–1302, November 2000.
[Chen et al., 2021] Lili Chen,
Kevin Lu,
Aravind Ra-
jeswaran, Kimin Lee, Aditya Grover, Michael Laskin,
Pieter Abbeel, Aravind Srinivas, and Igor Mordatch. De-
cision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.01345, 2021.
[De Prado, 2018] Marcos Lopez De Prado. Advances in fi-
nancial machine learning. John Wiley & Sons, 2018.
[Ehrlich et al., 2025] Ryan Ehrlich, Bradley Brown, Jor-
dan Juravsky, Ronald Clark, Christopher R´e, and Azalia
Mirhoseini. Codemonkeys: Scaling test-time compute for
software engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14723,
2025.
[Fernando et al., 2023] Chrisantha Fernando,
Dylan Ba-
narse, Henryk Michalewski, Simon Osindero, and Tim
Rockt¨aschel.
Promptbreeder:
Self-referential self-
improvement via prompt evolution.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.16797, 2023.
[Hambly et al., 2023] Ben Hambly, Renyuan Xu, and Huin-
ing Yang. Recent advances in reinforcement learning in
finance. Mathematical Finance, 33(3):437–503, 2023.
[Hospedales et al., 2022] Timothy Hospedales, Antreas An-
toniou, Paul Micaelli, and Amos Storkey. Meta-learning
in neural networks: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pat-
tern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(9):5149–5169,
2022.
[Jaderberg et al., 2017] Max Jaderberg, Valentin Dalibard,
Simon Osindero, Wojciech M. Czarnecki, Jeff Don-
ahue, Ali Razavi, Oriol Vinyals, Tim Green, Iain Dun-
ning, Karen Simonyan, Chrisantha Fernando, and Koray
Kavukcuoglu.
Population based training of neural net-
works. arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.09846, 2017.
[Jin et al., 2023] Ming Jin, Shifan Wang, Lintao Ma, Zhix-
uan Chu, James Y Zhang, Xiaoming Shi, Pin-Yu Chen,
and Shirui Pan.
Time-llm: Time series forecasting by
reprogramming large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01728, 2023.
[Koza, 1992] John R Koza. Genetic Programming: On the
Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selec-
tion. MIT Press, 1992.
[Li et al., 2023] Yang Li, Yangyang Yu, Haohang Li, Zhi
Chen, and Khaldoun Khashanah. Tradinggpt: multi-agent
system with layered memory and distinct characters for
enhanced financial trading performance.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.03736, 2023.
[Li et al., 2024] Yixuan Li, Julian Parsert, and Elizabeth Pol-
green. Guiding enumerative program synthesis with large
language models. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Computer Aided Verification, 2024.
[Lim and Zohren, 2021] Bryan Lim and Stefan Zohren.
Time-series forecasting with deep learning:
a sur-
vey. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A,
379(2194):20200209, 2021.
[Manahov et al., 2019] Viktor Manahov, Robert Hudson,
and Andrew Urquhart. High-frequency trading from an
evolutionary perspective: Financial markets as adaptive
systems. International Journal of Finance & Economics,
24(2):943–962, 2019.
[Nijkamp et al., 2023] Erik Nijkamp,
Bo Pang,
Hiroaki
Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio
Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large
language model for code with multi-turn program synthe-
sis.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2023.
[Novikov et al., 2025] Alexander Novikov, Ngan Vu, Mar-
vin
Eisenberger,
Emilien
Dupont,
Po-Sen
Huang,
Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Ko-
zlovskii,
Francisco
J.
R.
Ruiz,
Abbas
Mehrabian,
M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George
Holland, Alex Davies, Sebastian Nowozin, Pushmeet
Kohli, and Matej Balog.
Alphaevolve: A coding agent
for scientific and algorithmic discovery.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.13131, 2025.
[Potvin et al., 2004] Jean-Yves Potvin, Patrick Soriano, and
Maxime Vall´ee. Generating trading rules on the stock mar-
kets with genetic programming. Computers and Opera-
tions Research, 31(7):1033–1047, 2004.


--- Page 9 ---
[Real et al., 2020] Esteban Real, Chen Liang, David R. So,
and Quoc V. Le. Automl-zero: Evolving machine learning
algorithms from scratch. In Proceedings of the 37th Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, pages 8007–
8019. PMLR, 2020.
[Romera-Paredes et al., 2024] Bernardino Romera-Paredes,
Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej
Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco J. R.
Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi,
Pushmeet Kohli, and Alhussein Fawzi. Mathematical dis-
coveries from program search with large language models.
Nature, 625:468–475, 2024.
[Song et al., 2025] Zifan Song, Kaitao Song, Guosheng Hu,
Ding Qi, Junyao Gao, Xiaohua Wang, Dongsheng Li, and
Cairong Zhao. Trade in minutes!: Rationality-driven agen-
tic system for quantitative financial trading. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.04787, 2025.
[Stanley and Miikkulainen, 2002] Kenneth O. Stanley and
Risto Miikkulainen.
Evolving neural networks through
augmenting topologies.
Evolutionary Computation,
10(2):99–127, 2002.
[Wei et al., 2022] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuur-
mans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi,
Quoc V. Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompt-
ing elicits reasoning in large language models.
In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol-
ume 35, pages 24824–24837, 2022.
[Wu et al., 2023] Shijie Wu, Ozan Irsoy, Steven Lu, Vadim
Dabravolski, Mark Dredze, Sebastian Gehrmann, Prab-
hanjan Kambadur, David Rosenberg, and Gideon Mann.
Bloomberggpt: A large language model for finance. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.17564, 2023.
[Wu et al., 2025] Siyi Wu, Junqiao Wang, Zhaoyang Guan,
Leyi Zhao, Xinyuan Song, Xinyu Ying, Dexu Yu, Jin-
hao Wang, Hanlin Zhang, Michele Pak, Yangfan He,
Yi Xin, Jianhui Wang, and Tianyu Shi.
Mountain-
lion: A multi-modal LLM-based agent system for inter-
pretable and adaptive financial trading.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.20474, 2025.
[Xiong et al., 2025] Guojun Xiong, Zhiyang Deng, Keyi
Wang, Yupeng Cao, Haohang Li, Yangyang Yu, Xueqing
Peng, Mingquan Lin, Kaleb E. Smith, Xiao-Yang Liu,
Jimin Huang, Sophia Ananiadou, and Qianqian Xie. Flag-
trader: Fusion llm-agent with gradient-based reinforce-
ment learning for financial trading. In Findings of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025, pages
13921–13934. Association for Computational Linguistics,
2025.
[Yang et al., 2023a] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng
Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
Chen.
Large language models as optimizers.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.03409, 2023.
[Yang et al., 2023b] Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and
Christina Dan Wang. Fingpt: Open-source financial large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031, 2023.
[Yu et al., 2023] Yangyang Yu, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li,
et al.
Finmem: A multimodal agent with hierarchical
memory for financial decision making.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.11300, 2023.
[Yu et al., 2025] Yangyang Yu, Zhiyuan Yao, Haohang Li,
Zhiyang Deng, Yuechen Jiang, Yupeng Cao, Zhi Chen,
Jordan W. Suchow, Zhenyu Cui, Rong Liu, Zhaozhuo
Xu, Denghui Zhang, Koduvayur Subbalakshmi, Guojun
Xiong, Yueru He, Jimin Huang, Dong Li, and Qianqian
Xie.
FinCon: A synthesized LLM multi-agent system
with conceptual verbal reinforcement for enhanced finan-
cial decision making. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, volume 37, pages 137010–137045,
2025.
[Zhang et al., 2020] Zihao
Zhang,
Stefan
Zohren,
and
Stephen J. Roberts. Deep reinforcement learning for trad-
ing. The Journal of Financial Data Science, 2(2):25–40,
2020.
[Zhang et al., 2024] Wentao Zhang, Lingxuan Zhao, Hao-
chong Xia, Shuo Sun, Jiaze Sun, Molei Qin, Xinyi Li,
Yuqing Zhao, Yilei Zhao, Xinyu Cai, Yifan Zhang, Xin-
run Wang, and Bo An. A multimodal foundation agent for
financial trading: Tool-augmented, diversified, and gen-
eralist. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGKDD Con-
ference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages
4314–4325. Association for Computing Machinery, 2024.
[Zhao et al., 2025] Li
Zhao,
Rui
Sun,
Zuoyou
Jiang,
Bo Yang, Yuxiao Bai, Mengting Chen, Xinyang Wang,
Jing Li, and Zuo Bai. Contesttrade: A multi-agent trad-
ing system based on internal contest mechanism. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2508.00554, 2025.
