--- Page 1 ---
Coordinated Scheduling for MoE LLM Serving
Yifan Sun
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Zhexiang Zhang
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Jiantong Jiang
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Gholamreza Haffari
Monash University
Melbourne, Australia
Minxian Xu
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced
Technology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences
Shenzhen, China
Feng Liu
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Rajkumar Buyya
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Adel N. Toosi
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
Abstract
Serving Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) large language models
(LLMs) is challenging because dynamic request workloads in-
teract with sparse expert routing, creating both data-parallel
(DP) engine imbalance and expert-level hotspots. Existing
LLM serving systems typically make these decisions in iso-
lation: frontend schedulers route requests using coarse re-
quest counters, while backend expert balancers rely mainly
on aggregate expert activation counts. This separation pre-
vents the serving system from reacting to fine-grained en-
gine pressure, backend MoE pressure, and source-dependent
expert traffic. To address this gap, we propose Gimbal, a
coordinated cross-level scheduling system for efficient MoE-
based LLM serving. First, Gimbal presents a fine-grained
DP-engine scheduler that uses online backend pressure sig-
nals, including key-value (KV) cache usage, remaining prefill
work, queue backlog, and MoE expert pressure, to dispatch
requests away from overloaded engines. Inside each engine,
Gimbal further applies a lightweight prefill-aware queue
ordering policy with aging to reduce head-of-line blocking
without output-length prediction. Second, Gimbal extends
expert load balancing with online source-DP-to-expert rout-
ing statistics and uses a heuristic guided by a mixed-integer
nonlinear program (MINLP) to place experts while jointly
considering expert load, source-aware communication, and
migration stability. Our evaluation shows that Gimbal re-
duces average Time To First Token (TTFT) by 42.9% and
average Time Per Output Token (TPOT) by 33.3% compared
with the state-of-the-art serving system such as vLLM, while
improving high-load request throughput by 3.0%.
CCS Concepts: • Software and its engineering →Sched-
uling; • Computer systems organization →Distributed
architectures.
Keywords: Mixture of Experts (MoE) Models, Inference sys-
tems, Scheduling
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have rapidly advanced from
generative pretraining to few-shot and conversational sys-
tems [4, 28, 32, 33]. Early advances in LLMs were largely
driven by scaling dense Transformer-based models [40], but
such scaling also increases demands on computational re-
sources, inference latency, and deployment cost. Therefore,
efficiently serving such models in real-world applications
has become a critical problem that warrants immediate atten-
tion [18]. To address this concern, sparse architectures, espe-
cially Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models [10, 11, 17, 21, 35],
have reshaped large-model scaling. DeepSeek-series mod-
els [6–8, 14] show that sparse MoE models can achieve com-
petitive capability while substantially reducing activated
computation. By activating only a small subset of experts
per token, MoE models can scale model capacity while keep-
ing per-token inference cost manageable.
Although MoE architectures hold great promise, they in-
troduce new challenges for system design and serving. MoE
inference systems typically combine data parallelism (DP),
expert parallelism (EP), and often tensor parallelism (TP). DP
replicates inference engines to improve throughput, EP dis-
tributes experts across GPUs or nodes to serve sparse expert
computation, and TP partitions dense model computation
across GPUs [7, 16, 21, 34]. This layered parallelism improves
scalability, but it also makes scheduling decisions tightly
coupled across frontend request dispatching and backend
expert execution. Current LLM serving systems, however,
largely inherit scheduling policies designed for dense mod-
els [1, 2, 20, 47, 52], with these decisions still made mostly
in isolation: frontend schedulers typically rely on coarse
request-level metrics, while backend expert balancers de-
pend primarily on aggregate expert activation counts. In
particular, DP-engine selection often relies on Round-Robin
or request-count-based dispatching. These policies implic-
itly assume that each request has a similar execution cost,
arXiv:2606.15177v1  [cs.DC]  13 Jun 2026


--- Page 2 ---
but this assumption does not hold in real workloads, where
prompt lengths can vary significantly [42, 51].
In MoE serving, DP-level imbalance, sparse expert im-
balance, and cross-DP communication are tightly coupled
rather than independent. A request assigned to a DP engine
not only consumes local prefill computation and KV-cache
resources; its tokens are also routed to a small subset of
experts, creating expert-level hotspots and all-to-all commu-
nication pressure inside MoE layers. Since the assigned DP
engine becomes the source of this token traffic, DP-engine
dispatch decides where MoE all-to-all communication origi-
nates, while expert placement decides whether the selected
experts are local or remote relative to that source. In fact,
request-count-based or Round-Robin DP scheduling cannot
capture token-level load or backend MoE pressure. At the
same time, EPLB-style mechanisms [5, 7] can rebalance ag-
gregate expert computation but do not explicitly optimize
source-dependent cross-DP communication. Therefore, effec-
tive MoE serving requires coordinated cross-level scheduling
rather than separately improving the DP scheduler or the
expert load balancer in isolation.
An ideal MoE scheduler should satisfy two requirements.
First, it needs fine-grained load awareness, capturing runtime
pressure such as prefill work, waiting-queue backlog, KV-
cache pressure, and backend expert pressure, rather than
relying only on request counts. Second, it needs coordinated
expert placement, jointly considering expert load, source-
aware communication cost, and migration overhead so that
expert placement matches the observed request-to-expert
traffic without introducing excessive movement.
To address these challenges, we propose Gimbal, a co-
ordinated cross-level scheduling framework for MoE-based
LLM serving. Gimbal first introduces fine-grained DP-engine
scheduling, which selects DP engines based on running and
waiting prefill tokens, KV-cache usage, and backend MoE
expert pressure. Within each engine, Gimbal further uses
a lightweight Shortest-Job-First (SJF)-style queue ordering
with aging to reduce head-of-line blocking caused by large
prefill requests. Gimbal then incorporates runtime routing
information into MoE expert placement by collecting source-
DP-to-expert activation statistics online and jointly consid-
ering expert load, source-aware communication cost, and
migration overhead.
Overall, Gimbal closes the loop between DP-engine sched-
uling and MoE expert placement. The DP layer mitigates
request-side imbalance before it propagates into the backend,
while the MoE layer performs dynamic, source-aware expert
migration and placement to improve load balance, reduce
expert hotspots, and lower communication cost. Meanwhile,
backend signals such as expert pressure are fed back into
frontend request scheduling decisions, enabling Gimbal to
coordinate request dispatching and expert rebalancing dur-
ing serving. Experimental results show that this coordinated
cross-level design improves serving latency without sacri-
ficing throughput. Across all request rates and workload
distributions, Gimbal reduces average Time To First Token
(TTFT) by 42.9% and average Time Per Output Token (TPOT)
by 33.3% compared with vLLM, while improving high-load
request throughput by 3.0%. It also reduces P99 TTFT by
44.3%. Ablation study results further show that coordinating
DP scheduling with source-aware expert placement outper-
forms simply enabling the two optimizations independently.
2
Background and Motivation
2.1
MoE LLM Serving Stack
Modern LLM inference follows an autoregressive process
with two main phases: (i) prefill, which processes the in-
put prompt, and (ii) decode, which generates output tokens
step by step. Serving systems cache key/value tensors in
the KV cache to avoid recomputing previous context, mak-
ing prompt length, remaining prefill work, and KV-cache
usage important factors in request cost. To serve models at
high throughput, systems such as vLLM [20], SGlang [52],
TGI [15], and Preble [37] typically use a layered architecture
with a frontend router and multiple backend inference en-
gines. In DP serving, the router dispatches requests across
replicated engines, while each replica batches its assigned
requests for prefill and decode execution and maintains the
corresponding per-request KV cache.
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models add another layer of
complexity to this serving stack. Instead of activating all
feedforward parameters, an MoE layer uses a lightweight
router to select top-𝑘experts for each token. These experts
are often distributed across GPUs through EP [7, 16, 21, 34].
During MoE execution, tokens are dispatched to the GPUs
that host their selected experts, and the computed expert
outputs are then combined and returned, typically through
all-to-all communication. As a result, MoE serving combines
DP-engine request dispatching with EP-level expert routing
and communication. This layered design improves scalability,
but it also introduces new coordination challenges between
the DP scheduler, which determines where requests enter the
system, and the MoE layers, which determine how tokens
are routed across experts and devices.
2.2
Observations
2.2.1
Coarse request scheduling causes inter-engine
imbalance. Request-level scheduling treats requests as roughly
equivalent work units, obscuring substantial differences in
computation, communication, and memory costs across re-
quests. In practice, a request’s execution pressure depends
on fine-grained factors, including prompt length, remaining
prefill tokens, decode work, and total KV-cache usage. Fig-
ure 1 shows that real GPT-4 workloads exhibit highly skewed
input lengths: while many requests are short, both BurstGPT


--- Page 3 ---
0
2K
4K
6K
Request input tokens
0.0
0.5
1.0
CDF
BurstGPT GPT-4
0
2K
4K
6K
Request input tokens
0.0
0.5
1.0
LMSYS GPT-4
Figure 1. Empirical CDFs of GPT-4 request input lengths in
BurstGPT [42] and LMSYS-Chat-1M [51]. Real user requests
exhibit substantial length heterogeneity across datasets.
200
2K
Prompt tokens
0
100
200
85.8
173.7
TTFT (ms)
200
2K
Prompt tokens
7.0
7.4
7.8
7.68
7.72
TPOT (ms)
200
2K
Prompt tokens
0
100
200
18.75
187.5
KV Cache (MiB)
200-token request
2K-token request
Figure 2. Single-request cost using Qwen3-80B-INT4 on
an A100 GPU. The same number of requests can result in
completely different engine loads.
and LMSYS-Chat-1M contain long-tail requests with thou-
sands of input tokens. This length heterogeneity translates
into different prefill computation and KV-cache pressure,
making request count a coarse engine-load indicator.
Figure 2 further illustrates this gap with two single-request
examples. Although both cases contain exactly one request,
their serving pressure differs significantly. The 2K-token
request consumes 187.5MiB of KV cache, while the 200-token
request consumes only 18.75 MiB. Their TTFT and TPOT
also differ accordingly. This shows that two DP engines with
the same number of active requests may still experience
very different computation, memory, and latency pressure.
Therefore, DP-engine scheduling should use fine-grained
runtime states rather than request-level counts.
Fine-grained DP scheduling: DP-engine scheduling
should move from request-level counters to token-level run-
time pressure.
2.2.2
Sparse routing causes intra-model expert and
communication imbalance. MoE models activate only a
small subset of experts for each token [6, 11, 35], so token
traffic is not uniformly distributed across experts. A small
number of experts may receive disproportionately high ac-
tivation load, while other experts are rarely used. Figure 3
shows expert activation results from serving 1,000 requests
on Qwen3-80B-INT4 MoE. In some layers, the hottest ex-
perts receive far more tokens than the layer average. When
EP is enabled, if several hotspot experts are placed on the
same GPU, this expert-load imbalance leads to uneven com-
putation across devices and reduces inference efficiency.
Meanwhile, when EP is used together with DP and TP,
each request is assigned to one DP engine, and the tensor-
parallel GPUs in that DP group jointly execute the attention
and dense layers. When execution reaches an MoE layer,
token hidden states are dispatched to the GPUs that host the
selected experts, and the results are later merged through
all-to-all communication. Prior work has shown that MoE
routing is not purely random; expert activations often exhibit
exploitable structure, such as inter-layer expert affinity and
stable expert traffic skew [13, 46]. As shown in Figure 4,
this effect appears in our profiling traces. Under the current
placement, 83.4% of Layer-23 traffic from DP0 and 66.5% of
Layer-36 traffic from DP1 are routed to experts located in
remote DP groups. This source-dependent traffic skew shows
that expert placement can directly affect cross-DP all-to-all
communication, and motivates using source-aware routing
statistics when rebalancing experts.
However, expert migration is not free. In our H100 NVLink
testbed, the first all-layer expert rearrangement takes 1.08 s
on average, and subsequent online rearrangements take
0.72 s on average. This cost is small compared with long-
running serving windows, but it is still large enough that ex-
pert placement should avoid unnecessary movement. There-
fore, source-aware expert placement must balance three
goals: reducing expert hotspots, reducing cross-DP commu-
nication, and limiting migration overhead.
Source-aware expert placement: Dynamic expert place-
ment should jointly consider expert load, observed source-
DP-to-expert traffic skew, and migration cost, placing hot
experts closer to their dominant observed sources when such
skew exists, while preserving load balance and avoiding
unnecessary movement.
2.2.3
Inter-engine and intra-model imbalance are cou-
pled. Inter-engine imbalance and intra-model imbalance are
not independent in MoE serving. DP-engine dispatch de-
termines where a request enters the serving stack, while
sparse routing determines which experts its tokens visit in-
side MoE layers. Although the DP scheduler does not control
the router’s expert choices, it determines the DP source from
which routed tokens enter the all-to-all communication path.
As a result, the same expert traffic can incur different com-
munication pressure depending on the request’s DP source
and the current expert placement.
This coupling is further amplified by DP+TP+EP deploy-
ments. The attention and dense-layer computation of a DP
engine often share physical GPU ranks with MoE expert com-
putation and all-to-all communication. When some ranks
experience high expert load or communication pressure, the
effective capacity of the co-located DP engine can decrease.
Therefore, backend expert pressure should not be treated as


--- Page 4 ---
0
32
64
96
127
Expert ID
1
2
Layer
0
50000
Tokens
Figure 3. Expert heatmap showing activation hotspots in
certain MoE layers.
Figure 4. Expert placement determines whether MoE traffic
stays local or crosses DP groups. Profiling-window examples
show that 83.4% of Layer-23 traffic from DP0 and 66.5% of
Layer-36 traffic from DP1 are routed to remote DP groups
under the current placement.
an isolated MoE-layer signal; it should be fed back to DP-
engine scheduling so that new requests avoid engines whose
underlying ranks are already under high MoE pressure.
Expert-pressure feedback: Backend expert pressure
should be exposed to DP-engine scheduling because it af-
fects effective engine capacity.
2.3
Limitations of Current Systems
Current LLM serving systems mostly address these issues
through component-specific optimizations.
At the DP-engine and request-routing level, systems such
as vLLM [20], SGlang [52], FastServe [43], SeaLLM [50],
BROS [3], and Preble [38] improve dispatching with request-
count-based routing, preemption, priority scheduling, phase-
aware routing, or prefix-aware placement. Other systems
further reorder requests inside each engine using length-
aware, priority-based, or prediction-based policies [12, 31,
43, 50]. These techniques improve request scheduling, but
they mainly operate on request-level or phase-level signals.
They do not directly expose fine-grained online engine pres-
sure, such as remaining prefill work, waiting-token pressure,
KV-cache usage, or backend MoE pressure. As a result, en-
gines that appear balanced by request count may still be
imbalanced in computation, memory use, or expert-side con-
tention. At the MoE layer, EPLB-style mechanisms [5, 7]
collect aggregate expert activation counts and rebalance ex-
perts across EP ranks, while MoETuner [13] uses offline
expert affinity to guide placement. These approaches reduce
expert hotspots or preserve affinity, but they optimize expert
placement largely independently from DP-engine dispatch.
Aggregate expert load also does not distinguish which DP
source generates the traffic, so a placement can balance total
expert load while still increasing cross-DP all-to-all commu-
nication. Sem-MoE [22] combines static expert placement
with semantic-aware routing, but its offline profiling and pre-
diction can become stale as arrivals, prompt lengths, routing
patterns, and expert hotspots change during serving.
These limitations motivate coordinated cross-level sched-
uling rather than independent optimization of components.
A serving system should use fine-grained runtime states to
balance DP-engine pressure, use source-aware routing sta-
tistics to guide expert placement, and feed backend expert
pressure back to DP-engine scheduling. Gimbal is designed
around this feedback loop, coordinating DP-engine dispatch
and source-aware expert placement during online serving.
3
Overall System Design
Source-aware Expert Load Balancer (§5)
layer-wise 
source-DP-expert matrix
DP Engine 0
DP Engine N
Request Pool
Users
...
SJF + Aging Scheduler
r
r
r
Fine-grained DP Engine Scheduler (§4)
Request API
Fine-grained Engine 
Load Monitor
Expert Parallel across GPUs
 Layer n 
 Layer 2 
 Layer 1 
Expert
Expert
Expert
Expert
...
Expert Placement 
Manager
Low-cost Expert Load 
Monitor
...
Runtime Trace 
Collector
Attention
Attention
r
r
r
r
SJF + Aging Scheduler
r
r
r
activation  
collection
expert
migration 
[layer, 
source, 
expert]
[layer, 
source, 
expert]
r
Engine Select Module 
(Async)
engine traces
pressure
score
Request to DP Engine
Request to DP Engine
Source-Expert Profiler
Figure 5. Gimbal system architecture. Gimbal coordinates a
fine-grained DP-engine scheduler and a source-aware expert
load balancer in MoE serving.
This section presents the overall design of Gimbal. As
shown in Figure 5, Gimbal coordinates two main components
during MoE serving: a fine-grained DP-engine scheduler (§4)
and a source-aware expert load balancer (§5). The dark ar-
rows denote the request path, the blue dashed arrows denote
runtime engine traces used by the DP scheduler, the pur-
ple dashed arrows denote source-expert profiling statistics,
the gray dashed arrows denote aggregate expert-load statis-
tics, and the orange dashed arrows denote expert migration
actions.


--- Page 5 ---
Incoming requests first enter the request pool and are
submitted through the Request API. Instead of assigning re-
quests according to request counts, Gimbal uses the Engine
Select Module to choose a DP engine based on fine-grained
runtime pressure. This decision is made asynchronously
from the request path: backend DP engines periodically re-
port engine traces to the Runtime Trace Collector, including
remaining prefill tokens, waiting prefill tokens, KV-cache
usage, and backend MoE pressure. The Fine-grained Engine
Load Monitor converts these traces into a comparable pres-
sure score for each DP engine, and the Engine Select Mod-
ule dispatches new requests to the engine with the lowest
pressure. Inside each DP engine, Gimbal further applies a
lightweight SJF-style queue ordering with aging as a local
optimization to reduce head-of-line blocking.
At the MoE execution layer, Gimbal collects two types
of routing statistics during inference. First, the Low-cost
Expert Load Monitor records aggregate expert activation
counts, which capture how much computation load each
expert receives. Second, the Source-Expert Profiler records a
layer-wise source-expert matrix indexed by layer, DP source,
and expert. This matrix captures which DP sources gener-
ate traffic to which experts, providing a lightweight online
routing profile for source-aware placement. These statistics
are collected along the normal MoE dispatch path, so they
do not require a separate profiling pass or offline warm-up.
The Source-aware Expert Load Balancer consumes both
aggregate expert-load statistics and the layer-wise source-
expert matrix. The Expert Placement Manager uses aggre-
gate expert load to avoid computation hotspots, uses source-
expert traffic to estimate cross-DP communication cost, and
considers migration overhead before applying a new place-
ment. The resulting placement is applied to the expert-parallel
region through online expert migration. In this way, Gimbal
does not optimize DP-engine scheduling and MoE expert
placement independently. Instead, backend expert pressure
is fed back to the DP scheduler, while source-aware rout-
ing statistics guide expert placement, forming a coordinated
feedback loop between request dispatch and MoE execution.
4
Fine-grained DP-engine Scheduling
Gimbal treats DP-engine scheduling as a pressure-aware
admission-control problem. Instead of simply using request
count as a proxy for engine load, Gimbal selects the target
DP engine according to fine-grained runtime states reported
online by backend engines. The scheduler has two levels.
At the inter-engine level, Gimbal assigns each new request
to a suitable DP engine according to the online pressure
of different engines. At the intra-engine level, each engine
further applies a lightweight SJF-style ordering with aging
to reduce head-of-line blocking in the local queue.
4.1
Runtime Trace Collection
Each backend DP engine periodically and asynchronously
reports a compact runtime trace to the global scheduler. This
trace contains four types of state: 1) remaining prefill tokens
from running requests, 2) waiting prefill tokens in the lo-
cal waiting queue, 3) KV-cache usage, and 4) backend MoE
expert pressure. These signals reflect different sources of
engine pressure: remaining prefill tokens reflect ongoing
computation pressure, waiting prefill tokens reflect local
queueing pressure, KV-cache usage reflects memory pres-
sure, and MoE expert pressure reflects backend contention
from the expert-parallel execution path.
We use remaining prefill tokens instead of the original
prompt length because modern LLM serving systems rely
on continuous batching, and prefill execution may be split
across multiple scheduling iterations under chunked prefill
or token-budget constraints. Therefore, a request’s prompt
length at admission time does not always represent the
amount of prefill work that still remains on an engine. Gim-
bal tracks unfinished prefill work from running requests and
separates it from waiting prefill work in the local queue,
allowing the scheduler to distinguish active computation
pressure from queueing pressure.
Gimbal also includes backend MoE expert pressure in
the runtime trace. When reporting runtime states, each DP
engine collects the recent number of tokens processed by ex-
perts on its associated EP ranks. This signal captures the pres-
sure introduced by MoE execution. In common DP+TP+EP
deployments, attention/dense computation and expert com-
putation share physical GPU resources. Therefore, high ex-
pert load or MoE communication on a rank can reduce the
effective capacity available to the co-located DP engine. Feed-
ing this pressure back to the DP scheduler helps avoid as-
signing more requests to engines whose underlying ranks
are already under high MoE pressure.
This MoE pressure signal also serves as a bridge between
the upper-level DP scheduler and the lower-level expert
placement module. Since Gimbal performs online expert
migration, expert placement decisions can change the dis-
tribution of expert load across EP ranks over time. If the
DP scheduler is unaware of these changes, it may continue
assigning requests to co-located engines whose backend
pressure has increased after rebalancing. By feeding back-
end MoE pressure into DP-engine scheduling, Gimbal closes
this feedback loop: expert placement reduces expert-side
hotspots, while the DP scheduler avoids amplifying newly
observed backend pressure through request dispatch.
Runtime trace collection is asynchronous with request
admission. Request submission does not wait for a fresh
trace; instead, the scheduler uses the latest available trace
from each engine. Since each trace only contains a small set
of scalar counters, the collection overhead is low. If traces
are temporarily incomplete, Gimbal falls back to ordered


--- Page 6 ---
dispatch, ensuring that request admission remains reliable
before all backend states become available.
4.2
Pressure-Aware Engine Selection
Gimbal uses the collected traces to compute a comparable
pressure score for each DP engine. The design follows two
principles. First, KV-cache pressure is prioritized because
KV cache is a hard resource constraint in serving. If one
engine already has high KV usage and the KV gap across
engines is clear, sending new requests to the engine with
high KV usage can further worsen memory pressure and
reduce scheduling flexibility. When an inference system ex-
hausts KV cache, it may also trigger more severe problems
such as preemption and recomputation, which can signifi-
cantly degrade performance. Therefore, in this case, Gimbal
directly selects the engine with lower KV usage. Second,
when KV cache does not create a clear cross-engine imbal-
ance, Gimbal falls back to a score-based comparison of overall
engine pressure. This score jointly considers remaining pre-
fill work, waiting-token pressure, lightweight compensation
for recently dispatched requests, KV-cache penalty, and MoE
expert-pressure penalty. This keeps the common scheduling
path simple: each engine is compressed into a comparable
pressure value, while the value still captures computation,
queueing, memory, and backend MoE pressure.
Gimbal also uses a lightweight compensation term because
runtime traces are updated asynchronously. If the scheduler
only trusts the latest trace, it may repeatedly select the same
engine before the next trace update arrives, causing transient
load imbalance. Therefore, after each request assignment,
Gimbal immediately adds a temporary pressure estimate
to the selected engine, allowing the scheduler to account
for recently assigned requests before backend traces are
refreshed.
4.3
Scheduling Workflow
Algorithm 1 summarizes the inter-engine scheduling work-
flow. For each incoming request, Gimbal first checks whether
backend traces are available. If traces are incomplete, it uses
ordered dispatch as a fallback. Otherwise, the scheduler reads
the latest KV usage, remaining prefill tokens, waiting-token
pressure, and MoE pressure from the trace table. The sched-
uler then checks KV-cache pressure. If the maximum KV
usage is high and the KV-usage gap across engines is clear,
Gimbal assigns the request to the engine with the lowest KV
usage. Otherwise, it computes the pressure score for each
engine and selects the engine with the lowest score. When
the scores of different engines are close, Gimbal does not
overreact to small numerical differences and instead falls
back to ordered dispatch. This reduces scheduling oscillation
caused by trace noise while still allowing the scheduler to
react to clear pressure imbalance. This score-based workflow
keeps request admission lightweight: KV cache is prioritized
only when it becomes a clear bottleneck, while compute
Algorithm 1 Global DP Engine Scheduling
Input: incoming request 𝑟, DP engines E,
backend traces T = {𝑘𝑣𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑚
𝑖
,𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖,𝑚𝑜𝑒𝑖}𝑒𝑖∈E,
compensation load 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑖
Output: selected DP engine 𝑒∗
1: if T is incomplete then
2:
return Next(E)
3: else
4:
Load {𝑘𝑣𝑖, 𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑚
𝑖
,𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖,𝑚𝑜𝑒𝑖} from T
5: end if
6: 𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑛←arg min𝑖𝑘𝑣𝑖, 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥←arg max𝑖𝑘𝑣𝑖
7: if HighKV(𝑘𝑣𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥) and LargeGap(𝑘𝑣𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝑘𝑣𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑛)
then
8:
return 𝑒𝑖𝑚𝑖𝑛
9: end if
10: for each engine 𝑒𝑖∈E do
11:
𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖
←𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑟𝑒𝑚
𝑖
+ 𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖+ 𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑖+ 𝑃𝑘𝑣(𝑘𝑣𝑖) +
𝑃𝑚𝑜𝑒(𝑚𝑜𝑒𝑖)
12: end for
13: Δ𝑠←max𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖−min𝑖𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖
14: if Close(Δ𝑠,𝑟) then
15:
return Next(E)
16: end if
17: return 𝑒arg min𝑖(𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒𝑖,𝑘𝑣𝑖,𝑖)
pressure, queue pressure, memory pressure, and backend
MoE pressure are otherwise combined into a unified deci-
sion signal.
4.4
Lightweight Intra-Engine Ordering
After a request is assigned to a DP engine, it enters the lo-
cal waiting queue of that engine. Gimbal uses a lightweight
SJF-style ordering with aging inside each engine. This local
policy can further reduce local head-of-line blocking. Since
prefill length is known when a request arrives and has a
strong impact on early computation cost, Gimbal uses prefill
token count as a simple job-size estimate. Algorithm 2 shows
this local ordering rule. Short prefill requests are scheduled
earlier, approximating shortest-job-first behavior without
predicting output length. To avoid starving long requests,
Gimbal promotes requests whose waiting time exceeds the
aging threshold to high priority. This keeps the policy light-
weight and predictable while improving local queue behavior
under workloads with heterogeneous prompt lengths.
5
Source-aware Expert Load Balancing
The second major component of Gimbal is a source-aware
expert load balancer. Its goal is to reduce both expert-side
computation imbalance and source-dependent all-to-all com-
munication. Existing EPLB-style [5] mechanisms mainly bal-
ance experts according to aggregate expert activation counts,
which is effective for spreading expert computation across


--- Page 7 ---
Algorithm 2 Request Scheduler with SJF and Aging
Input: 𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒, 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑤, threshold 𝜃𝑎𝑔𝑒
Output: re-ordered 𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒′
1: for each request 𝑟∈𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒do
2:
waiting time 𝑤𝑟= 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑜𝑤−𝑟.𝑎𝑟𝑟𝑖𝑣𝑎𝑙_𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒
3:
if 𝑤𝑟≥𝜃𝑎𝑔𝑒then
4:
Assign high priority to 𝑟
5:
else
6:
Assign priority based on request’s prefill length
𝑟.𝑝𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑡
7:
end if
8: end for
9: Sort 𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒by priority ascending
10: return 𝑤𝑎𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔_𝑞𝑢𝑒𝑢𝑒′
EP ranks. However, aggregate expert load alone does not
reveal where the expert traffic comes from. As a result, a
placement may balance total expert load while still sending
many tokens across DP groups.
Prior work [46] has shown that MoE routing often ex-
hibits exploitable expert affinity: tokens that activate certain
experts in one layer may frequently activate related experts
in nearby layers, and colocating affinity-related experts on
the same EP rank can improve locality and reduce cross-
rank MoE communication [13, 46]. Gimbal builds on the
same locality principle for online MoE serving. Instead of
collecting full pairwise expert affinity online, which can
be expensive across layers, requests, and experts, Gimbal
uses a lightweight source-aware approximation: a layer-wise
source-DP-to-expert activation matrix. For each MoE layer,
the matrix records how many tokens from each DP source
are routed to each expert. By stacking these matrices across
layers, Gimbal obtains a lightweight online routing profile
that captures source-conditioned expert traffic skew during
serving. This profile lets Gimbal exploit observed source-
expert traffic structure when possible, while still preserving
aggregate expert-load balance and limiting migration over-
head. Gimbal does not modify the MoE router or assume
fixed expert placement. Instead, it observes expert traffic
over profiling windows and updates expert placement ac-
cordingly. As shown in Figure 5, the Source-aware Expert
Load Balancer contains three logical components: 1) the
Low-cost Expert Load Monitor, 2) the Source-Expert Profiler,
and 3) the Expert Placement Manager. The first two col-
lect runtime placement signals, while the Expert Placement
Manager makes migration decisions based on expert load,
source-aware communication cost, and migration overhead.
5.1
Online Expert Traffic Profiling
Gimbal collects two types of expert-side runtime statistics.
First, the Low-cost Expert Load Monitor records aggregate
expert activation counts. We denote this matrix as 𝐵𝑙,𝑒, where
𝐵𝑙,𝑒is the number of tokens routed to expert 𝑒in layer 𝑙dur-
ing a profiling window. This signal captures the computation
load of each expert and is used to avoid placing an excessive
number of hot experts on the same EP rank.
Second, the Source-Expert Profiler records a layer-wise
source-DP-to-expert activation matrix. We denote this ma-
trix as 𝐴𝑙,𝑠,𝑒, where 𝐴𝑙,𝑠,𝑒is the number of tokens from DP
source 𝑠that are routed to expert 𝑒in layer 𝑙. This matrix
captures the source-aware routing profile of MoE execution.
Compared with aggregate expert load, 𝐴provides one more
dimension: it reveals not only which experts are hot, but
also which DP sources generate the traffic to those experts.
Table 1 gives a concrete example of these two statistics.
Both statistics are collected along the normal MoE dispatch
path. The aggregate expert-load matrix can reuse the expert
activation counting path used by EPLB-style mechanisms.
The source-aware matrix adds the DP-source dimension to
this counting process and records [𝑙𝑎𝑦𝑒𝑟,𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒,𝑒𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑡] sta-
tistics during token dispatch. This avoids a separate profiling
pass and keeps the collection lightweight enough for online
serving. To further reduce collection overhead, Gimbal also
adds a fast path for source-aware statistics collection and im-
plements a dedicated Triton kernel [39], which we describe
in the implementation section.
Table 1. Example slice of Gimbal’s collected expert statistics.
Layer
Expert
𝐵𝑙,𝑒
𝐴𝑙,0,𝑒
𝐴𝑙,1,𝑒
29
18
104526
478
490
29
71
51196
164
128
29
80
92608
464
466
29
82
70630
384
400
5.2
Source-aware Placement Objective
The Expert Placement Manager uses the collected matri-
ces to decide where experts should be placed. The place-
ment objective has three goals. First, it should balance expert
computation load across EP ranks. Second, it should reduce
source-aware communication by placing frequently accessed
experts closer to their dominant DP sources when possible.
Third, it should limit migration overhead, since moving ex-
perts during online serving is not free.
Let 𝑥𝑙,𝑒,𝑔∈{0, 1} indicate whether expert 𝑒in layer 𝑙is
placed on GPU/rank𝑔. Each expert must be placed on exactly
one rank:
∑︁
𝑔
𝑥𝑙,𝑒,𝑔= 1,
∀𝑙,𝑒.
The load assigned to rank 𝑔in layer 𝑙is
𝐿𝑙,𝑔=
∑︁
𝑒
𝐵𝑙,𝑒𝑥𝑙,𝑒,𝑔.


--- Page 8 ---
To balance expert load, Gimbal minimizes the deviation be-
tween each rank load and the average layer load:
𝐶load =
∑︁
𝑙
∑︁
𝑔
 𝐿𝑙,𝑔−¯𝐿𝑙
2 .
To capture source-aware communication, let 𝐷𝑠,𝑔denote the
communication cost between DP source 𝑠and the rank 𝑔
hosting the selected expert. The source-aware communica-
tion cost is
𝐶comm =
∑︁
𝑙
∑︁
𝑠
∑︁
𝑒
∑︁
𝑔
𝐴𝑙,𝑠,𝑒𝐷𝑠,𝑔𝑥𝑙,𝑒,𝑔.
Finally, Gimbal includes a migration cost to avoid excessive
expert movement. Let 𝑥0
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔be the placement before rebal-
ancing. The migration cost is
𝐶mig =
∑︁
𝑙
∑︁
𝑒
∑︁
𝑔
𝑀𝑙,𝑒,𝑔
𝑥𝑙,𝑒,𝑔−𝑥0
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔
,
where 𝑀𝑙,𝑒,𝑔represents the cost of moving expert 𝑒in layer
𝑙to rank 𝑔. The overall objective is
min
𝑥
𝐶load + 𝐶comm + 𝐶mig,
subject to placement and capacity constraints. This formula-
tion captures the desired trade-off: expert placement should
balance total expert load, reduce source-dependent commu-
nication, and avoid unnecessary migration.
5.3
Online Placement Workflow
The above formulation provides a clear optimization objec-
tive; however, directly solving the full MINLP formulation
online is computationally prohibitive for serving. In our
experiments, solving the MINLP placement problem for a
48-layer Qwen3-30B MoE model takes roughly 15 seconds,
which is unacceptable on the inference critical path. There-
fore, Gimbal uses the MINLP formulation as an offline op-
timization reference and calibration target, and adopts a
lightweight online heuristic for runtime placement.
At the end of each profiling window, Gimbal aggregates
the expert-load matrix 𝐵and the source-aware matrix 𝐴. The
Expert Placement Manager first ranks experts by a hotness
signal derived from aggregate expert load and source-aware
activation volume. It then places experts greedily. For each
hot expert, Gimbal enumerates feasible ranks that still have
placement capacity and computes a local placement score:
𝑆𝑙,𝑒,𝑔= 𝛼𝐶comm
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔
+ 𝛽𝐶load
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔+ 𝛾𝐶mig
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔.
Here,𝐶comm
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔
estimates the source-aware communication cost
if expert 𝑒is placed on rank 𝑔, 𝐶load
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔estimates the resulting
rank-load imbalance, and 𝐶mig
𝑙,𝑒,𝑔estimates the migration cost
relative to the current placement. The coefficients 𝛼, 𝛽, and𝛾
control the trade-off among communication reduction, load
balance, and migration stability.
Gimbal assigns each expert to the feasible rank with the
lowest score, breaking ties by preferring placements that
avoid migration and then by choosing less-filled ranks. If
the selected placement differs from the current one, Gimbal
applies it through expert migration. The measured expert
pressure from MoE execution is periodically fed back to the
DP scheduler, closing the loop between expert placement and
request dispatch. Overall, this design avoids two extremes:
balancing only aggregate expert load can ignore cross-DP
communication, while optimizing only source locality can
overload EP ranks or trigger excessive migration. By using
a lightweight source-aware matrix and a calibrated online
heuristic, Gimbal captures the main source-to-expert traf-
fic structure without paying the cost of full online affinity
profiling.
6
Implementation
Prototype overview. We implement Gimbal on top of vLLM
[20]. The prototype replaces the default DP-engine selec-
tion logic and integrates source-aware expert profiling into
the MoE/EPLB runtime, adding approximately 1.7K lines
of Python and Triton code across the frontend scheduler,
scheduler-statistics path, MoE dispatch path, and EPLB re-
arrangement runtime.
Runtime trace path. Each backend engine reports a com-
pact runtime trace through vLLM’s asynchronous engine-
statistics channel. Gimbal augments the original statistics
with remaining prefill tokens, waiting prefill tokens, KV-
cache usage, and backend MoE pressure. MoE pressure is
implemented as a normalized token-equivalent expert load
collected from EPLB expert-load counters, aggregated within
the TP group of each DP engine, and fed back as a relative
penalty in DP-engine selection. The frontend scheduler uses
the latest available trace and applies lightweight compen-
sation after each dispatch to account for newly assigned
requests before the next trace update.
MoE profiling path. Gimbal collects aggregate expert-load
statistics and source-DP-to-expert statistics along the nor-
mal MoE dispatch path. The aggregate expert-load matrix
reuses EPLB’s expert-counting path and is collected over a
rearrangement window used for placement updates, while
the source-aware matrix is accumulated on GPU during rout-
ing and aggregated across EP ranks before rank-aware re-
arrangement. To reduce overhead, Gimbal builds on PPLX
communication kernels [26], which we adopt due to our
earlier vLLM version and limited GPU scale. Gimbal then
reuses expert token-count information exposed by the all-
to-all backend and uses a new Triton kernel to fuse source
counting with expert mapping.
Policy configuration. Gimbal uses a small set of policy
parameters for DP-engine selection, local queue aging, and
source-aware expert placement. For KV-cache protection,
HighKV (Alg. 1) returns true when an engine’s KV-cache
usage exceeds 90%. This follows the common practice of
reserving most GPU memory for KV cache in open-source


--- Page 9 ---
10−3
10−2
10−1
1
101
load weight β
10−3
10−2
10−1
1
migration weight γ
selected
Placement match
10−3
10−2
10−1
1
101
load weight β
10−3
10−2
10−1
1
migration weight γ
selected
Communication gap
30
50
70
80
match (%)
0.0
0.5
1.0
gap (%)
Figure 6. Calibration of Gimbal’s online expert-placement
heuristic against the offline MINLP reference.
LLM serving frameworks and treats high KV usage as a
hard pressure signal. LargeGap (Alg. 1) returns true when
the KV-cache usage difference between the most- and least-
loaded engines exceeds 10%, which avoids reacting to small
fluctuations while still detecting meaningful cross-engine
memory imbalance. For local queue ordering, we set 𝜃𝑎𝑔𝑒
(Alg. 2) to 5 seconds. In our testbed, the P99 TTFT under
high load is below 4.9 seconds; therefore, a request waiting
longer than 5 seconds is promoted to avoid starvation. For
the online expert-placement heuristic, Gimbal scores each
candidate placement using source-aware communication
cost, projected rank-load imbalance, and migration-stability
cost. Since only the relative values of 𝛼, 𝛽, and 𝛾affect rank
selection, we fix 𝛼= 1.0 and calibrate 𝛽and 𝛾against an
offline MINLP reference computed from the dumped expert-
load and source-DP-to-expert matrices. As shown in Figure 6,
the calibrated setting (𝛼, 𝛽,𝛾) = (1.0, 0.0025, 1.0) preserves
more than 80% of the MINLP placement decisions and keeps
source-aware communication within 0.6% of the offline refer-
ence. We evaluate the performance impact of this calibration
in Section 7.2.
7
Evaluation
7.1
Experimental Setup
We introduce our evaluation methodology in this section.
Testbed. All experiments are conducted on a server with
two 32-core Intel Xeon Platinum 8462Y+ CPUs, four NVIDIA
HGX H100 80GB SXM5 GPUs connected by NVLink, and
1 TB of system memory. Following a common deployment
paradigm [22], we use DP=2, TP=2, and EP=4: attention
instances are replicated across two DP groups, attention
computation within each DP group is sharded across two
TP GPUs, and experts are partitioned across all four GPUs.
Figure 4 illustrates this deployment topology.
Experimental Model. We evaluate Qwen3-30B-A3B [45],
a representative medium-scale MoE model.
Datasets and Traces. We use BurstGPT [42], a real-world
LLM serving trace widely used in prior work [19, 48]. Follow-
ing recent studies [27, 44], we reshape the BurstGPT trace
into five representative request-length distributions: Ran-
dom, Central, Descending, Two-end, and Average, as shown in
Figure 7. For each distribution, we sample 1,000 requests and
0-1K
5-6K >=10K
0
100
200
300
Count
Random
0-1K
5-6K >=10K
Central
0-1K
5-6K >=10K
Descending
0-1K
5-6K >=10K
0
100
200
300
Count
Two-end
0-1K
5-6K >=10K
Average
Request tokens
Figure 7. BurstGPT request-length distributions used in our
evaluation.
2
3
4
300
400
500
TTFT (ms)
Random
2
3
4
Central
2
3
4
Descending
2
3
4
300
400
500
TTFT (ms)
Two-end
2
3
4
Average
50
75
100
TPOT (ms)
50
75
100
TPOT (ms)
Request Rate (RPS)
Uncalib. TTFT
MINLP-calib. TTFT
Uncalib. TPOT
MINLP-calib. TPOT
Figure 8. Impact of MINLP calibration on the greedy expert-
placement policy across request rates under five BurstGPT
workload distributions.
repeat each distribution-rate experiment with three random
seeds, reporting averaged results.
Baselines and Our System. We compare Gimbal against
three MoE serving baselines: 1) vLLM [20], a widely adopted
open-source LLM inference engine with rapid community
development and broad use in academic systems. We use its
default request-count-based DP scheduler together with its
aggregate expert-activation-count-based EPLB mechanism
as the production-grade baseline. We disable vLLM’s built-in
prefix-cache matching to reduce experimental bias. 2) MoE-
Tuner [13], which optimizes MoE inference by exploiting
expert affinity and offline traffic profiling for static expert
placement. We implement its placement logic and affinity-
based algorithm in our system and evaluate it under the
same runtime and workload settings. 3) Sem-MoE [22], an
MoE inference framework that includes static Integer Linear
Programming (ILP) expert placement and a model-predicted


--- Page 10 ---
semantic request-routing approach. As its semantic predic-
tion model is unavailable to us, we implement an oracle
variant by profiling the request-to-engine assignment in ad-
vance and replaying this mapping during evaluation, which
assumes perfect knowledge of the semantic routing decision.
Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate several key metrics com-
monly used in LLM serving: TTFT, measuring the latency
from sending a request to receiving the first generated token;
TPOT, representing the average decoding latency per output
token, excluding the first generated token; Throughput, mea-
suring the number of completed requests per second under
a given load.
7.2
Impact of MINLP Calibration
We first evaluate the effect of calibrating the online greedy
expert-placement policy against the offline MINLP reference.
As discussed in Section 5, the uncalibrated greedy policy
places experts in descending hotness order and selects the
locally best feasible rank according to a weighted score. How-
ever, when the weights are not calibrated, the policy can
overreact to short-window load imbalance and move too
many experts, disrupting source-aware locality.
Figure 8 compares the uncalibrated greedy policy with the
MINLP-calibrated policy across five workload distributions
and request rates. The calibrated policy consistently reduces
both TTFT and TPOT. Across all request rates, workload
distributions, and random seeds, MINLP calibration reduces
average TTFT by 10.8% and average TPOT by 9.2% compared
with the uncalibrated greedy policy. This improvement con-
firms that calibration helps preserve the desired trade-off
among source-aware communication, load balance, and mi-
gration stability, instead of aggressively reshuffling experts
based on transient load signals. Therefore, in the remaining
experiments, we use the MINLP-calibrated expert-placement
heuristic as the default Gimbal configuration when compar-
ing against other baselines.
7.3
Performance
End-to-end latency. We first evaluate the overall serving
latency of Gimbal and the baselines across all request rates
and workload distributions. Figure 9 summarizes end-to-end
latency, TTFT, TPOT, and P99 TTFT. Overall, Gimbal consis-
tently achieves the lowest latency across the five BurstGPT
distributions. Across all request rates, workload distributions,
and random seeds, Gimbal reduces mean end-to-end latency
by 32.0% compared with vLLM, 34.7% compared with MoE-
Tuner, and 28.5% compared with Sem-MoE. The improve-
ment becomes larger as the request rate increases: compared
with vLLM, Gimbal reduces end-to-end latency by 23.8%
when request per second RPS=2 and by 36.9% at RPS=4. This
trend shows that Gimbal is most effective when the serv-
ing system is under higher pressure, where coarse request
dispatching and static expert placement are more likely to
amplify queueing delay and MoE execution imbalance.
TTFT. Gimbal also significantly reduces TTFT, which is
mainly affected by request dispatching, prefill work, and
engine-side queueing. Across all settings, Gimbal reduces
average TTFT by 42.9% compared with vLLM, 47.0% com-
pared with MoETuner, and 34.7% compared with Sem-MoE.
The benefit again grows with load: compared with vLLM,
the TTFT reduction increases from 33.1% at RPS=2 to 48.3%
at RPS=4. To understand this behavior, we inspect the RPS=4
Random traces. vLLM’s two engines appear balanced by
request count, but they still carry high in-flight pressure:
on average, the two engines keep about 91 and 90 running
requests, with about 26–27% KV-cache usage. Gimbal re-
duces this pressure to about 58 and 57 running requests, with
about 17% KV-cache usage. Moreover, the average prompt-
throughput gap between the two engines decreases from
1.24K tokens/s in vLLM to 0.74K tokens/s in Gimbal. This in-
dicates that request count alone does not capture token-side
pressure, while Gimbal’s fine-grained engine trace allows
the frontend scheduler to avoid engines that are already busy
in terms of prefill work, KV usage, or backend MoE pressure.
TPOT. Gimbal reduces average TPOT by 33.3% over vLLM,
36.2% over MoETuner, and 29.5% over Sem-MoE. Since TPOT
is dominated by repeated decode iterations, this improve-
ment comes from reducing MoE-layer execution and com-
munication inefficiency. MoETuner and Sem-MoE improve
expert placement through offline affinity or static routing
information, but they cannot adapt to the online source-to-
expert traffic generated by the request stream. In contrast,
Gimbal collects source-DP-to-expert routing statistics during
serving and uses them to guide expert placement. This al-
lows Gimbal to reduce expert hotspots and source-dependent
all-to-all traffic during decode. As load increases, the TPOT
reduction over vLLM grows from 24.1% at RPS=2 to 38.4%
at RPS=4, showing that online expert placement becomes
increasingly important under heavier decode pressure.
Throughput. We further examine whether the latency
reduction comes at the cost of serving capacity. Figure 10
reports both normalized throughput across request rates and
raw throughput at RPS=4. Gimbal achieves higher through-
put than vLLM at every request rate: 0.94% higher at RPS=2,
1.06% at RPS=2.5, 1.52% at RPS=3, 2.05% at RPS=3.5, and
3.04% at RPS=4. At RPS=4, Gimbal improves throughput
over vLLM on all five distributions, with gains ranging from
1.26% on Descending to 4.20% on Random. These results
show that Gimbal does not trade throughput for latency. In-
stead, by reducing avoidable queueing, lowering in-flight
engine pressure, and improving MoE placement, Gimbal al-
lows the system to complete requests faster under the same
offered load.
Overall, Gimbal consistently outperforms all baselines
across average and tail latency. Across all settings, it reduces
mean TTFT/TPOT by 42.9%/33.3% over vLLM, 47.0%/36.2%
over MoETuner, and 34.7%/29.5% over Sem-MoE. Further-
more, high-load throughput is increased by 3%. As shown in


--- Page 11 ---
20
30
40
50
E2E (s)
Random
Central
Descending
Two-end
Average
500
1000
TTFT (ms)
50
100
TPOT (ms)
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
1000
2000
3000
4000
P99 TTFT (ms)
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Request Rate (RPS)
vLLM
MoETuner
Sem-MoE
Gimbal
Figure 9. End-to-end latency, TTFT, TPOT, and P99 TTFT across request rates under five BurstGPT workload distributions.
Each point averages three random seeds.
Figure 9, Gimbal also reduces P99 TTFT by 44.3%, 48.6%, and
33.8% over the three baselines, respectively, confirming that
coordinated cross-level scheduling is especially effective at
reducing long-tail stalls under heterogeneous workloads.
7.4
Ablation Experiment
We conduct an ablation study to isolate the contribution
of each component and, more importantly, the benefit of
coordinated cross-level scheduling. We compare five con-
figurations: 1) vLLM, 2) Gimbal-DP, which enables fine-
grained DP-engine scheduling and local SJF-style ordering;
3) Gimbal-EP, which enables source-aware expert load bal-
ancing; 4) Gimbal-All (No Collaboration), which enables
both DP-side and EP-side optimizations but combines them
independently without feeding backend MoE pressure into
DP scheduling; 5) Gimbal-All, which enables the full coordi-
nated design. Figure 11 reports TTFT and TPOT normalized
against vLLM, averaged across all request rates, workload
distributions, and random seeds.
Both individual components improve latency, but they
target different bottlenecks. Gimbal-DP reduces normalized
TTFT by 25.1% and TPOT by 13.4% by avoiding overloaded
DP engines and reducing local queueing delay. Gimbal-EP
reduces TTFT by 26.2% and TPOT by 22.7% by mitigating ex-
pert hotspots and improving source-aware expert placement.
When both components are enabled without cross-level col-
laboration, Gimbal-All (No collab.) further reduces TTFT by
29.8% and TPOT by 27.3%. This confirms that the two opti-
mizations are complementary, but also shows that simply
adding them together does not fully exploit their interaction.
The full Gimbal design achieves the best result, reducing
TTFT by 41.4% and TPOT by 32.0% over vLLM. Compared
with Gimbal-All (No collab.), coordinated cross-level sched-
uling further reduces TTFT by 16.5% and TPOT by 6.5%. The
key difference is that Gimbal-All feeds backend MoE pres-
sure back to the DP scheduler, so request dispatching can
react not only to frontend queue and KV-cache pressure, but
also to expert-side pressure. This prevents the DP scheduler
from sending more work to engines whose co-located expert
ranks are under high MoE load.
We further investigate how Gimbal-DP, Gimbal-EP, and
their coordinated combination improve serving latency. Fig-
ure 12 reports three runtime signals collected from server
traces at RPS=4: the average number of running requests per
engine, the average KV-cache usage, and the cross-engine
prompt-throughput gap. The prompt-throughput gap re-
flects how evenly prefill-token work is distributed across
DP engines, while running requests and KV-cache usage
capture the resulting engine-side pressure. Gimbal-DP di-
rectly improves frontend dispatching by reducing token-side
prefill imbalance: averaged across all RPS=4 runs, the cross-
engine prompt-throughput gap drops from 1485.66 tokens/s
in vLLM to 768.43 tokens/s. This indicates that prefill work
is distributed more evenly across the two engines, avoiding
the case where one engine is overloaded while the other
remains underutilized. Meanwhile, Gimbal-EP reduces back-
end MoE pressure through source-aware expert placement,
which indirectly accelerates decode execution and lowers
the average number of running requests per engine from
87.56 in vLLM to 71.53. When combined, Gimbal-All coordi-
nates these two effects: DP scheduling reduces prefill-side
imbalance, while EP placement lowers decode-side MoE pres-
sure. Together, by feeding backend MoE pressure back to the
frontend scheduler, they jointly prevent expert-side hotspots


--- Page 12 ---
RPS=2
RPS=2.5
RPS=3
RPS=3.5
RPS=4
1.00
1.02
1.04
Norm.
Throughput
Random
Central
Descending
Two-end
Average
3.30
3.45
3.60
Throughput
(req/s)
vLLM
MoETuner
Sem-MoE
Gimbal
Figure 10. Request throughput comparison. Top: through-
put normalized to vLLM at each request rate from RPS=2
to 4. Bottom: raw request throughput across five workload
distributions at RPS=4.
Random
Central
Descending
Two-end
Average
0.50
0.75
1.00
Norm. TTFT
Random
Central
Descending
Two-end
Average
0.50
0.75
1.00
Norm. TPOT
vLLM
Gimbal-DP
Gimbal-EP
Gimbal-All (No collab.)
Gimbal-All
Figure 11. Normalized latency ablation averaged across re-
quest rates. Lower is better.
vLLM DP
EP
All
0
30
60
90
reqs/engine
Avg. running
vLLM DP
EP
All
0
8
16
24
KV (%)
Avg. KV usage
vLLM DP
EP
All
0
0.5
1
1.5
103 tok/s
Prompt gap
Figure 12. Runtime behavior under high load at RPS=4.
from propagating into DP-engine imbalance, thereby reduc-
ing running requests and KV-cache usage and ultimately
improving serving latency.
7.5
System Overhead Analysis and Optimization
Since Gimbal collects expert activations and source-DP-to-
expert mapping matrices online, this profiling path may in-
troduce additional runtime overhead. We therefore analyze
and optimize the overhead of matrix collection. Figure 13
shows the latency of collecting the source-DP-to-expert ma-
trix. The default collection path introduces noticeable over-
head because it records additional routing statistics outside
the optimized MoE execution path. To reduce this cost, Gim-
bal applies three targeted optimizations. First, after analyzing
the EPLB expert-statistics collection logic in vLLM, we add a
fast collection path in the first EPLB profiling window and at-
tach our collection logic to the existing EPLB execution path.
Second, because Gimbal uses an all-to-all communication
backend, it reuses token-count information exposed by the
vLLM
Default
collect
Fastpath
collect
A2A-assisted
collect
Fused MoE
collect
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Norm.
latency
TTFT
TPOT
Figure 13. Normalized latency overhead of source-aware
matrix collection. The no-collection vLLM serving path is
normalized to 1.0.
MoE communication backend, avoiding redundant expert-
load accounting. Finally, Gimbal fuses the matrix collection
logic into the normal inference path by implementing a ded-
icated Triton GPU kernel [39] that integrates source-aware
counting into the regular MoE mapping path. The optimized
path reduces collection overhead by eliminating extra map-
ping and accounting work, and even achieves lower latency
than the original vLLM baseline.
8
Related Work
Disaggregated LLM serving. Recent systems disaggregate
inference phases to match their resource demands. Split-
wise [29], DistServe [53], and Mooncake [30] separate pre-
fill and decode execution, while TaiChi [41], DOPD [25],
and PPD [23] further adapt the aggregation/disaggregation
policy under different workloads and SLOs. Gimbal is com-
plementary: instead of changing the prefill/decode deploy-
ment topology, it coordinates scheduling inside a standard
DP+TP+EP MoE serving stack. Its pressure signals, such
as KV-cache usage, remaining prefill work, and backend
MoE pressure, could also serve as routing inputs in PD-
disaggregated deployments. Attention/Expert Disaggrega-
tion. Another line of work separates computation by model
component. JANUS [49] disaggregates attention and MoE
layers onto separate GPU pools, while Adrenaline [24] of-
floads part of decoding attention to prefill instances to im-
prove utilization. These systems show that attention and
MoE computation have different bottlenecks. Gimbal targets
a different point: it keeps attention and experts co-located,
and improves performance by coordinating DP-engine sched-
uling with source-aware expert placement. If attention and
experts are physically disaggregated, Gimbal’s feedback loop
can be extended by feeding expert-pool pressure back to
attention-side routing.
Stage-level Scheduling and Heterogeneous Workloads.
Stage-level disaggregation has also been explored for mul-
timodal serving, where encode, prefill, and decode stages
exhibit different compute and memory characteristics [9, 36].
These works reinforce the need for scheduling policies that
understand heterogeneous stages and dynamic workloads.
Gimbal follows the same principle for MoE LLM serving,
using lightweight online signals to react to bursty and long-
context workloads where request length, KV-cache pressure,
and expert routing skew change during serving.


--- Page 13 ---
9
Conclusion
We presented Gimbal, a coordinated cross-level scheduling
system for MoE-based LLM serving. Gimbal coordinates
frontend DP-engine scheduling with backend MoE expert
placement by using fine-grained engine pressure, lightweight
prefill-aware queue ordering, and online source-DP-to-expert
routing statistics. Based on these signals, Gimbal dispatches
requests away from overloaded engines and dynamically
places experts to reduce expert hotspots and source-dependent
communication cost. We prototyped Gimbal on top of vLLM
and evaluated it on a 4-H100 testbed with Qwen3-30B-A3B
and BurstGPT workloads. Experiments show that Gimbal
reduces average TTFT by 42.9% and average TPOT by 33.3%
compared with vLLM, while improving high-load request
throughput by 3.0%. Although evaluated on a single-node
deployment, Gimbal’s coordinated scheduling framework
is not tied to Qwen-specific internals. Its mechanisms rely
on general serving signals, including KV-cache usage, pre-
fill work, expert activation counts, and source-DP-to-expert
routing statistics, which are commonly exposed by MoE
serving systems. As communication and placement costs be-
come increasingly important at scale, we expect cross-level
coordination to provide greater benefits in large multi-node
clusters. Future work includes evaluating Gimbal on addi-
tional MoE models, extending it to multi-node deployments,
and exploring more adaptive expert-placement policies.
References
[1] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in LLM Inference with
Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 24). USENIX Association, Santa Clara, CA,
117–134.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi24/presentation/
agrawal
[2] Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra,
Bhargav S. Gulavani, and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2023. SARATHI: Ef-
ficient LLM Inference by Piggybacking Decodes with Chunked Prefills.
arXiv:2308.16369 [cs.LG] doi:10.48550/arXiv.2308.16369
[3] Wan Borui, Zhao Juntao, Jiang Chenyu, Guo Chuanxiong, and Wu
Chuan. 2025. Efficient LLM Serving on Hybrid Real-time and Best-
effort Requests. arXiv:2504.09590 [cs.AI] https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.
09590
[4] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020),
1877–1901.
[5] DeepSeek-AI. [n. d.]. EPLB: Expert Parallelism Load Balancer. https:
//github.com/deepseek-ai/EPLB. GitHub repository, accessed 2026-
06-01.
[6] DeepSeek-AI. 2024. DeepSeek-V2: A Strong, Economical, and Efficient
Mixture-of-Experts Language Model. arXiv:2405.04434 [cs.CL]
[7] DeepSeek-AI.
2024.
DeepSeek-V3
Technical
Report.
arXiv:2412.19437 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437
[8] DeepSeek-AI. 2026. DeepSeek-V4: Towards Highly Efficient Million-
Token Context Intelligence.
[9] Xianzhe Dong, Tongxuan Liu, Yuting Zeng, Liangyu Liu, Yang Liu, Siyu
Wu, Yu Wu, Hailong Yang, Ke Zhang, and Jing Li. 2025. Hydrainfer:
Hybrid disaggregated scheduling for multimodal large language model
serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12658 (2025).
[10] Nan Du, Yanping Huang, Andrew M. Dai, Simon Tong, Dmitry Lep-
ikhin, Yuanzhong Xu, Maxim Krikun, Yanqi Zhou, Adams Wei Yu,
Orhan Firat, Barret Zoph, Liam Fedus, Maarten P. Bosma, Zongwei
Zhou, Tao Wang, Emma Wang, Kellie Webster, Marie Pellat, Kevin
Robinson, Kathleen Meier-Hellstern, Toju Duke, Lucas Dixon, Kun
Zhang, Quoc Le, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, and Claire Cui. 2022.
GLaM: Efficient Scaling of Language Models with Mixture-of-Experts.
In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162). PMLR, 5547–5569.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/du22c.html
[11] William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. 2022. Switch Trans-
formers: Scaling to Trillion Parameter Models with Simple and Efficient
Sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning Research 23, 120 (2022), 1–39.
http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0998.html
[12] Yichao Fu, Siqi Zhu, Runlong Su, Aurick Qiao, Ion Stoica, and Hao
Zhang. 2024. Efficient llm scheduling by learning to rank. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 59006–59029.
[13] Seokjin Go and Divya Mahajan. 2025. Moetuner: Optimized mixture
of expert serving with balanced expert placement and token routing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.06643 (2025).
[14] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang,
Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025.
DeepSeek-R1 incentivizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement
learning. Nature 645, 8081 (2025), 633–638.
[15] Hugging Face. 2025. Text Generation Inference (TGI). https://github.
com/huggingface/text-generation-inference GitHub repository, com-
mit as of 2025-09-16.
[16] Changho Hwang, Wei Cui, Yifan Xiong, Ziyue Yang, Ze Liu,
Han
Hu,
Zilong
Wang,
Rafael
Salas,
Jithin
Jose,
Prabhat
Ram, HoYuen Chau, Peng Cheng, Fan Yang, Mao Yang, and
Yongqiang Xiong. 2023.
Tutel: Adaptive Mixture-of-Experts at
Scale. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, Vol. 5.
https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/
5616d34cf8ff73942cfd5aa922842556-Abstract-mlsys2023.html
[17] Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine Roux, Arthur Mensch,
Blanche Savary, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las
Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, et al. 2024. Mixtral of
experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088 (2024).
[18] Jiantong Jiang, Peiyu Yang, Rui Zhang, and Feng Liu. 2026. Towards Ef-
ficient Large Language Model Serving: A Survey on System-Aware KV
Cache Optimization. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2026.
[19] Minsu Kim, Seongmin Hong, RyeoWook Ko, Soongyu Choi, Hunjong
Lee, Junsoo Kim, Joo-Young Kim, and Jongse Park. 2025. Oaken: Fast
and Efficient LLM Serving with Online-Offline Hybrid KV Cache Quan-
tization. In Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on
Computer Architecture. 482–497.
[20] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
2023. Efficient memory management for large language model serving
with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the 29th symposium on operating
systems principles. 611–626.
[21] Dmitry Lepikhin, HyoukJoong Lee, Yuanzhong Xu, Dehao Chen,
Orhan Firat, Yanping Huang, Maxim Krikun, Noam Shazeer, and
Zhifeng Chen. 2021.
GShard: Scaling Giant Models with Condi-
tional Computation and Automatic Sharding. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=qrwe7XHTmYb
[22] Yan Li, Zhenyu Zhang, Zhengang Wang, Pengfei Chen, and Pengfei
Zheng. 2026. Semantic Parallelism: Redefining Efficient MoE Inference


--- Page 14 ---
via Model-Data Co-Scheduling. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
[23] Zongze Li, Jingyu Liu, Zach Xu, Yineng Zhang, Tahseen Rabbani, and
Ce Zhang. 2026. Not All Prefills Are Equal: PPD Disaggregation for
Multi-turn LLM Serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.13358 (2026).
[24] Yunkai Liang, Zhangyu Chen, Pengfei Zuo, Zhi Zhou, Xu Chen, and
Zhou Yu. 2025. Injecting adrenaline into llm serving: Boosting resource
utilization and throughput via attention disaggregation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.20552 (2025).
[25] Junhan Liao, Minxian Xu, Wanyi Zheng, Yan Wang, Kejiang Ye, Ra-
jkumar Buyya, and Chengzhong Xu. 2026. DOPD: A Dynamic PD-
Disaggregation Architecture for Maximizing Goodput in LLM Infer-
ence Serving. IEEE Transactions on Services Computing (2026).
[26] Nandor Licker, Kevin Hu, Vladimir Zaytsev, and Lequn Chen. 2025.
pplx-kernels: Perplexity MoE Kernels. https://github.com/perplexityai/
pplx-kernels.
[27] Yanying Lin, Shijie Peng, Chengzhi Lu, Chengzhong Xu, and Kejiang
Ye. 2025. FlexPipe: Adapting Dynamic LLM Serving Through Inflight
Pipeline Refactoring in Fragmented Serverless Clusters. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.11938 (2025).
[28] OpenAI. 2022.
Introducing ChatGPT.
https://openai.com/index/
chatgpt/. Accessed November 2022.
[29] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo
Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2024. Splitwise: Efficient
generative llm inference using phase splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE 51st
Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA). IEEE,
118–132.
[30] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Heyi Tang, Feng Ren,
Teng Ma, Shangming Cai, Yineng Zhang, Mingxing Zhang, et al. 2024.
Mooncake: A kvcache-centric disaggregated architecture for llm serv-
ing. ACM Transactions on Storage (2024).
[31] Haoran Qiu, Weichao Mao, Archit Patke, Shengkun Cui, Saurabh
Jha, Chen Wang, Hubertus Franke, Zbigniew T Kalbarczyk, Tamer
Başar, and Ravishankar K Iyer. 2024. Efficient interactive llm serving
with proxy model-based sequence length prediction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.08509 (2024).
[32] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
2018. Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.
(2018).
[33] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei,
Ilya Sutskever, et al. 2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask
learners. OpenAI blog 1, 8 (2019), 9.
[34] Samyam Rajbhandari, Conglong Li, Zhewei Yao, Minjia Zhang,
Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Ammar Ahmad Awan, Jeff Rasley, and Yux-
iong He. 2022. DeepSpeed-MoE: Advancing Mixture-of-Experts In-
ference and Training to Power Next-Generation AI Scale. In Proceed-
ings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning (Pro-
ceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 162). PMLR, 18332–18346.
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/rajbhandari22a.html
[35] Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis,
Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. 2017. Outrageously Large
Neural Networks: The Sparsely-Gated Mixture-of-Experts Layer. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations. https://openreview.
net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg
[36] Gursimran Singh, Xinglu Wang, Yifan Hu, Timothy Yu, Linzi Xing,
Wei Jiang, Zhefeng Wang, Xiaolong Bai, Yi Li, Ying Xiong, et al. 2024.
Efficiently serving large multimodal models using epd disaggregation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.05460 (2024).
[37] Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dongming Li, and
Yiying Zhang. 2024. Preble: Efficient distributed prompt scheduling
for llm serving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00023 (2024).
[38] Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dongming Li, and
Yiying Zhang. 2025. Preble: Efficient Distributed Prompt Scheduling
for LLM Serving. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations. https://openreview.net/forum?id=meKEKDhdnx
[39] Philippe Tillet, Hsiang-Tsung Kung, and David Cox. 2019. Triton: an
intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural network compu-
tations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Work-
shop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages. ACM, 10–19.
doi:10.1145/3315508.3329973
[40] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. At-
tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing
systems 30 (2017).
[41] Chao Wang, Pengfei Zuo, Zhangyu Chen, Yunkai Liang, Zhou Yu, and
Ming-Chang Yang. 2025. Prefill-decode aggregation or disaggrega-
tion? unifying both for goodput-optimized llm serving. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.01989 (2025).
[42] Yuxin Wang, Yuhan Chen, Zeyu Li, Xueze Kang, Yuchu Fang, Yeju
Zhou, Yang Zheng, Zhenheng Tang, Xin He, Rui Guo, et al. 2025.
Burstgpt: A real-world workload dataset to optimize llm serving sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining V. 2. 5831–5841.
[43] Bingyang Wu, Yinmin Zhong, Zili Zhang, Shengyu Liu, Fangyue Liu,
Yuanhang Sun, Gang Huang, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2023. Fast
distributed inference serving for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.05920 (2023).
[44] Yuxing Xiang, Xue Li, Kun Qian, Yufan Yang, Diwen Zhu, Wenyuan Yu,
Ennan Zhai, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Jingren Zhou. 2025. Aegaeon:
Effective GPU Pooling for Concurrent LLM Serving on the Market. In
Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles. 1030–1045.
[45] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo
Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025.
Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 (2025).
[46] Jinghan Yao, Quentin Anthony, Aamir Shafi, Hari Subramoni, and
Dhabaleswar K DK Panda. 2024. Exploiting inter-layer expert affin-
ity for accelerating mixture-of-experts model inference. In 2024 IEEE
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS).
IEEE, 915–925.
[47] Gyeong-In Yu, Joo Seong Jeong, Geon-Woo Kim, Soojeong Kim, and
Byung-Gon Chun. 2022.
Orca: A Distributed Serving System for
Transformer-Based Generative Models. In 16th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22). USENIX As-
sociation, Carlsbad, CA, 521–538. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
osdi22/presentation/yu
[48] Dingyan Zhang, Haotian Wang, Yang Liu, Xingda Wei, Yizhou Shan,
Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2025. {BlitzScale}: Fast and Live Large
Model Autoscaling with O (1) Host Caching. In 19th USENIX Sym-
posium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25).
275–293.
[49] Zhexiang Zhang, Ye Wang, Yumiao Zhao, Jiayu Xiao, Qianjing Yang,
Xiangyu Wang, Jingzhe Jiang, Qizhen Weng, Ruichuan Chen, Shaohuai
Shi, et al. 2025.
Janus: Disaggregating Attention and Experts for
Scalable MoE Inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.13525 (2025).
[50] Yihao Zhao, Jiadun Chen, Peng Sun, Lei Li, Xuanzhe Liu, and
Xin Jin. 2025. SeaLLM: Service-Aware and Latency-Optimized Re-
source Sharing for Large Language Model Inference. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.15720 (2025).
[51] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang,
Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric. P Xing,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. 2023.
LMSYS-
Chat-1M: A Large-Scale Real-World LLM Conversation Dataset.
arXiv:2309.11998 [cs.CL]
[52] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Livia Sun,
Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica,
Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. 2024. Sglang: Efficient execution of structured
language model programs. Advances in Neural Information Processing


--- Page 15 ---
Systems 37 (2024), 62557–62583.
[53] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. {DistServe}: Disaggregating
prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language model
serving. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 24). 193–210.
