--- Page 1 ---
DiLaServe: High SLO Attainment Serving for Diffusion
Language Models
Tzu-Tao Chang
tchang85@wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA
Benjamin Yuanyang Hong
byhong@wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA
Kiet Pham
kvpham@wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA
Shivaram Venkataraman
shivaram@cs.wisc.edu
University of Wisconsin-Madison
USA
Abstract
Diffusion language models (DLMs) have recently emerged
as a promising alternative to conventional autoregressive
language models. By generating multiple tokens in paral-
lel during each denoising step, they offer higher inference
throughput while maintaining competitive quality. How-
ever, realizing these throughput gains while meeting latency
SLOs in a serving system requires addressing challenges
introduced by DLMs’ unique characteristics. These include
navigating the speed-quality tradeoff created by confidence-
based denoising, choosing appropriate parallelization levels
across model instances under fluctuating load, and coordi-
nating approximate KV caching mechanisms that introduce
non-uniform per-step costs. To address these challenges,
we present DiLaServe, a cluster-level serving system for
DLMs. DiLaServe enables deadline-aware scheduling and
adaptive load control through confidence-threshold adjust-
ment, and dynamically reconfigures the cluster by solving a
quality-aware optimization problem, while explicitly model-
ing the step-level heterogeneity introduced by approximate
KV caching. Across multiple benchmarks and real-world
traces, DiLaServe improves SLO attainment by up to 56.6
percentage points and reduces end-to-end request latency
by up to 46% while incurring less than 1% accuracy drop.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit strong general-purpose
capabilities and are increasingly integrated into services
across domains, such as conversational agents [38], code
generation [5], retrieval-augmented generation [16], and
agentic task execution [58]. As adoption scales, efficiently
serving LLM workloads becomes increasingly important and
challenging. Service providers must sustain high throughput
to handle massive request volumes (billions of queries per
day [42]) while simultaneously meeting strict latency SLOs
to maintain interactive responsiveness.
While many system-level optimizations have been pro-
posed to improve the efficiency of LLM serving [25, 46, 48, 59,
62], the throughput of current deployments is fundamentally
150
200
250
300
Throughput (token/s)
77
78
79
80
Accuracy (%)
LLaDA 8B (0.9)
LLaDA 8B (0.8)
LLaDA 8B (0.7)
LLaMA3 8B
Figure 1. Accuracy and throughput comparison of
LLaMA [50] (autoregressive) and LLaDA [36] (diffusion) on
GSM8K [10], run on a single H100 GPU. Numbers in paren-
theses denote the denoising confidence thresholds.
constrained by the autoregressive nature of these models:
tokens must be generated sequentially, one at a time. This
inherent serialization limits parallelism and makes it diffi-
cult to scale throughput to meet growing request loads. In
response to these limitations, researchers and industry have
explored diffusion language models (DLMs) as a powerful
and promising alternative [17, 26, 36, 45, 55]. These mod-
els generate text through an iterative refinement process:
starting from a fully corrupted sequence containing only
[MASK] tokens, the model repeatedly performs denoising
steps, unmasking all tokens with confidence exceeding a
certain threshold at each step. Because multiple tokens can
be generated in parallel during each iteration, DLMs achieve
higher throughput than classic autoregressive language mod-
els while maintaining comparable generation quality. Prior
industry reports [26] have shown that DLMs can achieve 10×
greater throughput and our own measurements (Figure 1)
show that open-weight DLMs achieve up to 1.75× higher
throughput at equal or better accuracy compared to similarly
sized autoregressive models.
However, realizing DLM throughput gains while meeting
latency SLOs requires addressing several challenges. First,
the use of token confidence in the denoising process (Fig-
ure 2) introduces an explicit speed-quality knob: lowering
the confidence threshold can reduce the number of denois-
ing steps required, at the cost of a modest quality drop. This
1
arXiv:2606.29094v1  [cs.LG]  27 Jun 2026


--- Page 2 ---
means that DLM serving systems should choose the appro-
priate threshold for each request to meet SLOs while ensur-
ing response quality. Second, each denoising step in DLMs
is compute-heavy [53, 54] making end-to-end latency and
throughput sensitive to the degree of parallelization used;
with a fixed number of GPUs, using a higher paralleliza-
tion degree lowers per-request latency but leads to lower
aggregate throughput (Figure 4). This means that DLM serv-
ing systems need to jointly select the confidence threshold
and parallelization degree, taking into account fluctuating
workload conditions.
To address these challenges, we present DiLaServe (Diffusion
Language Model Serving), a cluster-level serving system for
DLMs that achieves high throughput while meeting strict la-
tency SLOs. DiLaServe manages a cluster of model instances
and makes scheduling decisions at the granularity of denois-
ing steps, enabling fine-grained load balancing and deadline-
aware adaptation. For each request, DiLaServe dynamically
adjusts the confidence threshold to balance throughput, la-
tency, and generation quality. It uses SLO-aware threshold se-
lection to identify the highest confidence threshold predicted
to meet the request’s remaining latency budget, thereby max-
imizing quality subject to the deadline. In addition, it applies
adaptive load control to bound the maximum threshold each
request may use so that the aggregate workload remains
within the cluster’s processing capacity. Given the resulting
threshold, DiLaServe schedules the next denoising step on
the instance with the lowest step completion time, account-
ing for per-instance load and tensor parallelism (TP) degree
to minimize execution latency.
To adapt the cluster configuration to changing workloads,
DiLaServe periodically solves a two-stage integer linear pro-
gram (ILP). In the first stage, it determines the number of
model instances at each TP degree to ensure sufficient steady-
state capacity while maximizing average confidence thresh-
old and minimizing latency. If the resulting configuration
differs from the current one, the second stage computes a
reconfiguration plan that minimizes migration overhead,
thereby minimizing disruption to service availability. In ad-
dition, prior work has proposed approximate key-value (KV)
caching for DLMs, which reuses KV states across denoising
steps to reduce redundant computation but requires regular
refreshes to avoid staleness. To account for the non-uniform
computational cost introduced by approximate KV caching,
DiLaServe incorporates this step-level heterogeneity directly
into its scheduling and reconfiguration decisions.
We implement DiLaServe on top of vLLM [25] and Ray [35],
extending them to support DLMs, multi-instance serving,
and approximate KV caching. Evaluation on a real-world
LLM serving trace shows that DiLaServe improves SLO at-
tainment by 30.2 percentage points and reduces latency by
46% with only a 0.09 drop in quality score. Across multiple
accuracy benchmarks, it improves SLO attainment by up to
Mask Predictor
.49
.95
.3
.61
.92
What
is
25
[M]
+
33
?
[M]
[M]
[M]
[M]
Here
answer
a
48
.
answer
.
[M]
[M]
[M]
answer
.
The
is
58
> 0.9
 
 
× N
Confidence 
threshold 
Figure 2. Diffusion language models.
56.6 percentage points with only a 0.9% accuracy drop under
high load.
2
Background and Challenges
2.1
Diffusion Language Models
Diffusion has emerged as a promising alternative paradigm
to autoregressive language modeling [6, 32, 43]. Rather than
generating tokens one-by-one in a left-to-right order, DLMs
initialize generation from a corrupted sequence and progres-
sively refine it through a sequence of denoising steps [6, 21,
43], analogous to diffusion image models. More specifically,
at each denoising step, the prompt, concatenated with a user-
specified number of [MASK] tokens, is fed into the model’s
mask predictor. The mask predictor produces predictions for
all masked tokens in parallel in a single forward pass, after
which the model selectively keeps a subset of tokens and
remasks the rest. The partially unmasked sequence is then
used as input to the next denoising step, and this iterative
refinement continues until no [MASK] tokens remain.
Existing DLMs predominantly use Transformer-based mask
predictors with full bidirectional attention [26, 36, 55]. This
design allows the predictor to condition on both left and right
context when inferring each masked token, and has been
shown to provide stronger capabilities on tasks involving
reversal reasoning [7].
A common and effective strategy for deciding which to-
kens to unmask is based on token confidence [9, 36, 54]. For
each predicted token, the model uses its softmax probability
as a confidence score, and at each denoising step unmasks
only those tokens whose confidence exceeds a predefined
threshold. If no predicted tokens have confidence exceeding
the threshold, the token with the highest confidence is un-
masked to ensure progress. Figure 2 illustrates this process.
This confidence-based refinement progressively resolves
uncertain regions and often produces more coherent text [28].
Moreover, because multiple tokens may exceed the confi-
dence threshold at each step, diffusion models can unmask
several tokens in parallel, achieving higher throughput than
autoregressive models while maintaining comparable qual-
ity. Figure 1 shows that DLMs achieve 1.75× higher through-
put at equal or better accuracy compared to similarly sized
2


--- Page 3 ---
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of denoising steps
65
70
75
80
Accuracy (%)
Confidence threshold
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
(a) Fixed confidence threshold:
each dot corresponds to using
a single threshold throughout
the entire denoising process.
40
50
60
70
80
Number of denoising steps
70
72
74
76
78
80
Accuracy (%)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction of steps using
confidence threshold = 0.6
(b) Dynamic confidence thresh-
old: the default threshold is 0.9;
each point uses a randomly
chosen fraction of steps that
switch to 0.6.
Figure 3. Accuracy-speed tradeoff of LLaDA [36] on GSM8K [10]
autoregressive models. These advantages make DLMs a com-
pelling alternative to traditional autoregressive approaches
and have driven significant recent progress, including both
large open-source models [36, 55, 60, 61] and production-
scale systems [17, 26, 45].
2.2
Challenges and Opportunities for Efficient
Diffusion Language Model Serving
While DLMs offer promising capabilities, their unique char-
acteristics also introduce new challenges and opportunities
for efficient serving. To fully leverage these models in prac-
tice, we outline three key challenges and opportunities that
a DLM serving system must address.
2.2.1
Speed-Quality Trade-off. The iterative denoising
process in DLMs introduces an inherent speed-quality trade-
off. At each denoising step, only tokens whose confidence
exceeds a predefined confidence threshold are unmasked.
With a high threshold, the model only unmasks tokens it is
very confident in, which improves correctness but reduces
the number of tokens unmasked per step, increasing the to-
tal number of denoising steps. With a low threshold, more
tokens can be unmasked per step, reducing the number of
steps needed but increasing the risk of unmasking incorrect
tokens and hurting quality. This is illustrated in Figure 2: if
the threshold is set to 0.6, the token “48” would be unmasked
for the question “What is 25 + 33?”, which is incorrect. Fig-
ure 3a shows this trade-off for LLaDA [36] on the GSM8K [10]
benchmark. Using a lower threshold reduces both accuracy
and the number of steps.
In addition, the confidence threshold does not need to
remain fixed throughout the denoising process; the speed-
quality trade-off can be controlled at the granularity of in-
dividual denoising steps. Figure 3b illustrates this effect by
showing accuracy and total denoising steps when mixing a
high confidence threshold (0.9) with a lower threshold (0.6).
As the fraction of steps using the lower threshold increases,
No Cache Cache (32) Cache (8)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Normalized latency
TP1
TP2
TP4
(a) Latency under different TP
degrees. Numbers in paren-
theses indicate the denoising
block size.
0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50
Requests per second
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Latency (sec)
TP4×2
TP1×8
(b) Latency under 2 TP-4 in-
stances vs. 8 TP-1 instances
across RPS.
Figure 4. Tensor parallelism for DLMs.
both the achieved accuracy and the number of denoising
steps decrease accordingly.
This trade-off creates opportunities for improved serving
performance, both for meeting individual request SLOs and
for system-wide load control. At the request level, this knob
enables deadline-aware adaptation: if a request is predicted to
miss its SLO under the current threshold, the server can tem-
porarily lower the threshold to reduce the remaining number
of denoising steps, then return to a higher threshold when
slack permits. At the system level, a load-aware controller
can lower thresholds during overload to reduce per-request
work and keep the aggregate load within what the cluster
can sustainably handle. This stabilizes queue growth and pre-
vents the tail-latency cascades that otherwise lead to broad
SLO misses. As shown in Figure 3a, reducing the threshold
from 0.9 to 0.7 decreases the number of steps by 38%, sug-
gesting that the system can process 1.61× more requests
with only a 1.5% accuracy drop. In both cases, the quality im-
pact remains bounded as long as the thresholds stay within
an acceptable range, allowing us to trade small, controlled
reductions in quality for meaningful latency improvements.
2.2.2
Cluster-Level Serving. With full bidirectional at-
tention, each denoising step in a DLM is computationally
intensive. As a result, these models benefit substantially from
tensor parallelism. Figure 4a shows that employing tensor
parallelism reduces per-step latency by 25% with 2 GPUs
and by 55% with 4 GPUs. In a cluster-serving setting, this
suggests that high-TP-degree workers can significantly re-
duce end-to-end latency; migrating requests to these workers
can therefore improve the likelihood of meeting SLOs when
requests are close to violating their deadlines.
However, with a fixed cluster size, choosing the TP degree
for workers introduces a fundamental latency-throughput
trade-off. Figure 4b illustrates two cluster configurations:
one with fewer high-TP-degree workers and one with more
low-TP-degree workers. Under low load, the high-TP config-
uration reduces request latency by up to 43% by leveraging
model parallelism. Under high load, however, its limited num-
ber of workers constrains overall throughput, causing the
3


--- Page 4 ---
request queue to grow rapidly. The resulting queueing delay
dominates end-to-end latency, leading to substantial slow-
down. In contrast, the low-TP configuration remains stable
due to its higher throughput capacity. Real-world serving
traces show that request arrival rates and compositions fluc-
tuate significantly over time [23, 51], implying that a single,
static cluster configuration is insufficient.
The ability to adjust confidence thresholds adds another
dimension to this problem. When load increases, the sys-
tem has two levers: it can lower confidence thresholds to
reduce per-request computation at the cost of potential qual-
ity degradation, or it can reconfigure the cluster toward
lower TP degrees to increase throughput at the cost of higher
per-step latency. These interacting trade-offs between la-
tency, throughput, and quality make static policies insuffi-
cient. Serving DLMs effectively therefore requires dynamic
reconfiguration strategies that jointly account for threshold
control, TP-degree allocation, and workload conditions.
2.2.3
Support for Approximate Caching. One widely
used optimization in Transformer-based autoregressive mod-
els is KV caching. With autoregressive models, each newly
generated token attends only to previously generated tokens;
as a result, the key and value tensors for the prefix remain
invariant throughout decoding. These tensors can therefore
be cached and reused exactly across decoding steps, elimi-
nating redundant computation and reducing inference cost.
In contrast, DLMs cannot leverage exact KV caching. Be-
cause they employ bidirectional attention, the key and value
tensors depend on the entire (partially masked) sequence
at each denoising step and thus change as the sequence is
progressively refined. This makes the standard KV-cache
optimization used in autoregressive models inapplicable.
To address this limitation, recent work [31, 54] introduces
approximate KV-caching mechanisms tailored for DLMs.
These approaches partition the output sequence into blocks,
whose size is configured beforehand, and process them se-
quentially. Within each block, the model runs multiple de-
noising steps to gradually unmask tokens. A key empirical
observation is that, during the denoising of a given block, the
key and value activations for the prompt, previously com-
pleted blocks (prefix blocks), and future blocks that remain
fully masked (suffix blocks) change only minimally across
consecutive steps. Leveraging this stability, these methods
cache and reuse the KV tensors for the prefix and suffix
blocks throughout the denoising steps of the current block.
To avoid excessive staleness, the KV tensors for all blocks
are recomputed after the current block is fully unmasked,
before the model processes the next block.
By avoiding redundant computation, approximate KV
caching can reduce latency by up to 2.1× without significant
degradation in generation quality [54]. A practical serving
system for DLMs must therefore support approximate KV
Confidence 
Threshold Controller
SLO-aware Adjustment
Adaptive Load Control
Step Predictor
Scheduler
Workload Monitor
Reconfigurator
TP1 Instance
Remaining 
steps left
Confidence 
threshold
Cluster
TP1 Instance
TP2 Instance
TP4 Instance
Denoising 
steps
Workload 
statistics
New 
config
Figure 5. DiLaServe architecture.
caching while also coordinating it with dynamic confidence-
threshold control and cluster reconfiguration.
3
DiLaServe
DiLaServe is a cluster-level serving system for DLMs that
achieves high SLO attainment by dynamically adjusting the
denoising-step confidence threshold and using an ILP-based
reconfiguration framework tailored to the characteristics
of DLMs. In this section, we first provide an overview of
DiLaServe’s design and architecture in §3.1. We then describe
the scheduling and confidence-adjustment algorithm in §3.2.
§3.3 describes how DiLaServe dynamically reconfigures the
cluster in response to workload changes. §3.4 explains how
these ideas generalize to support approximate KV caching.
We conclude by discussing extensions for more complex
SLOs and priority policies in §3.5.
3.1
Design Overview
Figure 5 shows the architecture of DiLaServe. The system
administrator specifies the request latency SLO (we assume
a homogeneous SLO for simplicity but discuss extensions
in §3.5), the set of supported TP degrees, and the initial
cluster configuration (i.e., the number of model instances
and their TP degrees). The administrator also specifies a set
of candidate confidence thresholds for token unmasking (e.g.,
[0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9]); this set should be chosen per model
and application to provide sufficient control flexibility while
ensuring acceptable quality even at the lowest threshold. The
system performs a one-time latency profiling step to measure
the per-denoising-step latency for each batch size under
every supported TP degree, similar to existing systems [46,
48]. These measurements guide DiLaServe’s scheduling and
reconfiguration decisions.
For each request, the Confidence Threshold Controller
determines the confidence threshold used for future denois-
ing steps to maximize generation quality while ensuring
the request meets its latency SLO. To achieve this, it se-
lects the highest threshold from the candidate set that keeps
the request within its remaining SLO budget. The threshold
is adjusted dynamically throughout the denoising process.
However, making these decisions independently for each re-
quest is insufficient: if all requests select the highest feasible
threshold without accounting for one another, the resulting
4


--- Page 5 ---
aggregate load can exceed cluster capacity, causing queue
growth and system-wide SLO violations. The Confidence
Threshold Controller therefore also applies adaptive load
control that limits the maximum threshold each request may
use so that the aggregate load remains within cluster ca-
pacity while preserving as much flexibility for high-quality
generation as possible.
The Confidence Threshold Controller relies on estimates
of the remaining denoising steps for each request. These
estimates are produced by the Step Predictor, a lightweight
model trained offline to predict the remaining denoising steps
based on the request’s current state, including its unmasking
progress and token-confidence statistics.
Once the confidence threshold is determined for a request,
the Scheduler assigns each denoising step to the model in-
stance that yields the lowest step latency (e.g., higher TP
degree or lower load), and migrates requests when doing
so reduces latency. Each model instance performs denois-
ing asynchronously for its assigned batch of requests using
the confidence threshold selected by the Confidence Thresh-
old Controller. After each step, the newly unmasked tokens
and confidence statistics are returned to and tracked by the
Scheduler, which then makes scheduling decisions for the
next denoising step.
The Workload Monitor tracks request arrivals and their in-
put and output length statistics. The Reconfigurator uses this
information to periodically compute a cluster configuration
suited to the current workload. This is formulated as a two-
stage ILP. In the first stage, the objective is to maximize the
per-token confidence threshold (thereby maximizing genera-
tion quality) while ensuring steady-state capacity sufficiency;
the output of this stage is the desired number of model in-
stances at each TP degree. If the current cluster configuration
does not match this plan, the second stage determines how to
transition to the new configuration with minimal overhead
by identifying which existing model instances to terminate
and on which nodes to launch new ones.
3.2
Dynamic Confidence Threshold Adjustment and
Scheduling
This section describes the core confidence-threshold adjust-
ment and scheduling mechanisms in DiLaServe. We first de-
scribe how the Confidence Threshold Controller selects the
confidence threshold that satisfies each request’s remaining
SLO budget (§3.2.1). We then present the adaptive load con-
trol mechanism that limits the maximum confidence thresh-
old used for each request to keep the aggregate load within
cluster capacity (§3.2.2). Next, we describe the Step Predictor
used to estimate the remaining denoising steps for each re-
quest (§3.2.3). Finally, we present the scheduling algorithm
that assigns denoising steps to model instances based on TP
degree and current load (§3.2.4).
Algorithm 1 SLO-aware Confidence Threshold Adjustment
1: function PredictedTimeLeft(req, 𝛾)
2:
steps ←req.predStepsLeft[𝛾]
3:
tp ←req.instance.tpDegree
4:
batch ←req.instance.numTokens
5:
perStepLatency ←latencyProfile[tp][batch]
6:
return steps × perStepLatency
7: function UpdateConfThreshold(req)
8:
for 𝛾in desc req.allowedConfThresh do
9:
req.confThreshold ←𝛾
10:
if PredictedTimeLeft(req, 𝛾) ≤req.sloLeft then
11:
break
3.2.1
SLO-aware Confidence Threshold Adjustment.
Given a candidate set of confidence thresholds, our goal is
to maximize generation quality while ensuring a request
does not violate its latency SLO. As shown in Figure 3b,
generation quality improves when more denoising steps use
a high confidence threshold. This motivates selecting the
highest allowable threshold whenever doing so does not
violate the request’s SLO.
To determine whether an SLO would be violated, we es-
timate the remaining latency of a request based on (1) the
predicted number of denoising steps left under a given con-
fidence threshold, obtained from the Step Predictor, and (2)
the per-step iteration time of the assigned model instance,
obtained from the latency profile for its TP degree and batch
size. Using this estimation, the system selects the highest
confidence threshold within the allowed range whose es-
timated remaining latency does not exceed the request’s
remaining SLO budget. This procedure is outlined in Algo-
rithm 1. As shown in Section 5.4, this SLO-aware confidence
threshold adjustment improves SLO attainment by up to 70.8
percentage points under high load compared to using a fixed
confidence threshold.
3.2.2
Adaptive Load Control. While SLO-aware thresh-
old adjustment improves each request individually, it lacks
awareness of overall system conditions. If every request in-
dependently chooses the highest threshold that satisfies its
own SLO, the resulting aggregate load can exceed the clus-
ter’s processing capacity, causing long queueing delays and
widespread SLO violations. As shown in Section 5.4, this
could lead to a reduction in SLO attainment by up to 42.4
percentage points. Adaptive load control prevents this by
restricting the maximum confidence threshold each request
may use so that the aggregate load remains within the total
processing capacity of the cluster over the SLO window.
More specifically, the work needed for a request is the
product of its total number of tokens (input plus output)
and its predicted number of remaining denoising steps, and
the aggregate load is the sum of this work across all active
requests. A model instance’s capacity over the SLO window
is the number of tokens it can process per second multiplied
5


--- Page 6 ---
Algorithm 2 Adaptive Load Control
1: function ReqLoad(req, 𝛾)
2:
return req.predStepsLeft[𝛾] × req.numTokens
3: function ClusterCapacity( )
4:
totalCapacity ←0
5:
for each instance do
6:
tp ←instance.tpDegree
7:
capacity ←maxbatch

batch
latencyProfile[tp][batch]

× SLO
8:
totalCapacity ←totalCapacity + capacity
9:
return totalCapacity
10: function UpdateAllowedConfThresholds( )
11:
𝑅←all requests, 𝑛←|𝑅|
12:
Γ ←default allowed confidence thresholds
13:
𝛾min ←lowest value in Γ
14:
minRemainLoad ←array of length 𝑛initialized to 0
15:
for 𝑖= 𝑛−2 downto 0 do
16:
minRemainLoad[𝑖] ←minRemainLoad[𝑖+1] + Re-
qLoad(𝑅[𝑖+1], 𝛾min)
17:
usedLoad ←0, totalCapacity ←ClusterCapacity( )
18:
for 𝑖= 0 to 𝑛−1 do
19:
req ←𝑅[𝑖]
20:
req.allowedConfThresh ←Γ
21:
for 𝛾in desc Γ do
22:
reqLoad ←ReqLoad(req, 𝛾)
23:
remainLoad ←minRemainLoad[𝑖]
24:
if usedLoad + reqLoad + remainLoad ≤totalCa-
pacity or 𝛾= 𝛾min then
25:
usedLoad ←usedLoad + reqLoad
26:
break
27:
else
28:
remove 𝛾from req.allowedConfThresh
by the SLO duration, and the total cluster capacity is the sum
of the capacities of all model instances.
Given a fixed cluster configuration, the total capacity is
constant, whereas the aggregate load depends on the confi-
dence thresholds used. Our goal is thus to give each request
the widest feasible confidence-threshold range by assigning
it the highest allowable maximum threshold, so that the per-
request controller can still choose high thresholds for better
generation quality, while ensuring that the worst-case aggre-
gate load – where every request uses its maximum permitted
threshold – remains within the cluster’s capacity.
Algorithm 2 outlines this adaptive load control mecha-
nism. The algorithm iterates through all active requests in
order of arrival time. For each request, it iterates through
the candidate confidence thresholds in descending order. For
each threshold, it computes the worst-case aggregate load as
the sum of (1) the load already committed to previously pro-
cessed requests, (2) the load of the current request if it were
to use this threshold, and (3) a conservative estimate of the
load from remaining requests, computed under the assump-
tion that all remaining requests use the lowest confidence
1.5x
2x
2.5x
3x
SLO Multiple
60
70
80
90
100
SLO Attain. (%)
0
25
50
75
Pred. Error (%)
Output Len
+ Progress
+ Confidence
Oracle
75.0
35.1
19.3
0.0
Oracle
One-shot
Online (Progress Features)
Online (Progress + Confidence Features)
Figure 6. Serving performance of LLaDA on GSM8K (left)
and step prediction error (right) under different step predic-
tion strategies.
threshold. If this worst-case load exceeds cluster capacity, the
algorithm removes this threshold from the request’s allowed
set and continues to the next lower threshold; otherwise,
it keeps this threshold and moves on to the next request.
By doing so, the algorithm finds the widest range of confi-
dence thresholds for each request that keeps the aggregate
load within cluster capacity, thereby maximizing quality for
individual requests while ensuring overall system stability.
3.2.3
Step Prediction. Both SLO-aware confidence thresh-
old adjustment (§3.2.1) and adaptive load control (§3.2.2) rely
on estimates of how many denoising steps remain for a
request under a candidate confidence threshold. A naive ap-
proach is to make a one-shot estimate when a request arrives
using the request’s output length and the historical average
number of steps required under each confidence threshold.
As shown in Figure 6, this one-shot baseline can be inac-
curate, with prediction error of up to 75%. During serving,
such errors may cause the controller to select suboptimal
confidence thresholds, reducing SLO attainment by up to 15
percentage points compared with an oracle that has exact
knowledge of the remaining steps.
To improve estimation accuracy, we instead update the
estimates online as the request progresses through the de-
noising process. Online updates allow the estimator to use
runtime signals that are unavailable at request arrival, includ-
ing the request’s denoising progress and token-confidence
features. Progress features (i.e. the fraction of tokens un-
masked so far) capture how far a request has advanced in
the denoising process: requests with a larger fraction of un-
masked tokens are typically closer to completion. As shown
in Figure 6, adding these features reduces prediction error by
34.9%. Confidence-based features (i.e. the confidence values
of the output tokens) further captures the uncertainty of
the DLM. Intuitively, when the DLM is more certain about
the predicted tokens, fewer denoising steps are typically
needed to finalize the output. These features further reduce
prediction error by 15.8%. As shown in Figure 6, the resulting
improvement in prediction accuracy translates into better
serving performance, improving SLO attainment by up to
11 percentage points and generation accuracy by up to 1.1%
compared to one-shot estimation.
6


--- Page 7 ---
5
10
15
20
Overhead (%)
20
22
24
26
28
Pred. Error (%)
Granularity
(tokens unmasked)
1
16
2
32
4
64
8
Figure 7. Step prediction error and execution overhead at
different prediction granularities. Here, execution overhead
is measured as the time spent generating predictions using
the predictor relative to the execution time of a denoising
step. The red dashed line marks a 5% relative error upper
bound over the 1-token-granularity.
We use these features to train a Step Predictor that esti-
mates the remaining work of a request under each candidate
confidence threshold. Formally, let 𝑆𝑟(𝑡,𝛾) denote the true
number of remaining steps for request 𝑟at denoising step 𝑡
under confidence threshold 𝛾, and let x𝑟(𝑡) denote the fea-
ture vector used by the predictor. This vector consists of
the output length, denoising progress, and token-confidence
features observed during denoising (the full list of features is
provided in Section A). We train a predictor𝑔that takes as in-
put the request state (𝑡,𝛾, x𝑟(𝑡)) and estimates the number of
remaining denoising steps: ˆ𝑆𝑟(𝑡,𝛾) = 𝑔(𝑡,𝛾, x𝑟(𝑡)). We train
𝑔offline as a gradient boosting machine [14] using a small
training set of 100 requests, where each request is evaluated
under every candidate confidence threshold configured by
the system administrator. This profiling and training process
only needs to be performed once per deployed model.
During deployment, however, updating step estimates af-
ter every denoising step (i.e., every time a token is unmasked)
can be prohibitively expensive. As shown in Figure 7, per-
token updates introduce an execution overhead of 20%. Since
this overhead lies on the execution hot path, it can signifi-
cantly affect serving performance. To reduce this overhead,
we observe that the predicted number of remaining steps
does not change substantially after every token unmask-
ing. As shown in Figure 7, updating the prediction only
after several newly unmasked tokens substantially reduces
scheduling overhead while incurring only a small increase in
prediction error. In our setting, we select the largest update
granularity (i.e., the number of newly unmasked tokens be-
tween updates) whose prediction error remains within 5% of
the per-token baseline. To further reduce overhead, we per-
form predictions in a separate asynchronous worker thread
and batch them across multiple requests and all candidate
confidence thresholds to amortize the cost.
3.2.4
Request Scheduling. Once the confidence thresh-
olds have been determined, the Scheduler decides which
model instance executes each request’s next denoising step.
Algorithm 3 Request Scheduling
1: function FindBestInstance(nTok)
2:
𝐼←{inst | inst.batchSize + nTok ≤inst.maxBatchSize}
3:
if 𝐼= ∅then
4:
return None
5:
return
the
inst
∈
𝐼
minimizing
latencyProfile[inst.tpDegree][inst.batchSize+nTok]
6: function Schedule( )
7:
𝑅←unscheduledRequests
8:
𝑅←𝑅∪finishedStepRequests
9:
for all req in 𝑅do
10:
inst ←FindBestInstance(req.nTok)
11:
if inst ≠None then
12:
req.instance ←inst
13:
for all req in 𝑅such that req.instance ≠None do
14:
if req was migrated then
15:
UpdateConfThreshold(req)
Because the system maintains multiple model instances run-
ning asynchronously, scheduling decisions are triggered
whenever a new request arrives or when any model instance
completes a denoising step. Several such events may occur
in close succession, so the scheduler may handle multiple
requests during a single decision cycle.
The scheduling algorithm is outlined in Algorithm 3. At
each scheduling event, the Scheduler processes unscheduled
requests – either newly arrived requests or requests that
were previously deferred because no model instance could
accommodate them – and requests that have just completed
a denoising step. For each request, the Scheduler assigns it
to the model instance with the lowest denoising-step latency,
favoring instances with higher TP degrees or lighter load
and balancing load across the cluster.
A request may be migrated between model instances be-
tween denoising steps. Because individual denoising steps
are essentially stateless without KV caching, migration is
extremely lightweight: the system only needs to send the
prompt and the current masked/unmasked tokens to the
new executor, a transfer size on the order of tens of kilobytes
even for long sequences. This enables denoising-step-level
migration and fine-grained load balancing, which we show
in Section E can reduce tail latency by up to 19%.
Whenever a request is assigned or migrated to a new
model instance, its confidence threshold is updated to reflect
the change in predicted remaining latency, which is affected
by the new instance’s TP degree and load.
3.3
Reconfiguration
To adjust the cluster configuration in response to chang-
ing workload, the Workload Monitor groups requests by
their input-output sizes and tracks the arrival rate of each
class. This information is then used by the Reconfigurator,
which periodically (e.g., every 5 minutes, at a much coarser
7


--- Page 8 ---
Symbol
Definition
C
Set of possible confidence thresholds
D
Set of possible TP degrees
B
Set of possible batch sizes
N
Set of compute nodes
K
Set of input classes
𝑆𝐿𝑂
Latency SLO
𝑃𝑘
Prompt length of class 𝑘∈K
𝑂𝑘
Output length of class 𝑘∈K
𝑅𝑃𝑆𝑘
Arrival rate of class 𝑘∈K
𝑇𝑐
Average number of tokens unmasked per step
under confidence threshold 𝑐∈C
𝐿𝑑,𝑏
Latency per step for TP-𝑑and batch size 𝑏
|G𝑛|
Number of GPUs on node 𝑛∈N
𝑠𝑘,𝑐∈R≥0 Steps of class 𝑘using confidence threshold 𝑐
𝑠𝑘,𝑑∈R≥0 Steps of class 𝑘using TP degree 𝑑
𝑡𝑘∈R
Latency of class 𝑘
𝑧𝑑,𝑏∈B Whether TP-𝑑machines use batch size 𝑏
𝑥𝑛,𝑑∈N Number of TP-𝑑instances on node 𝑛
Table 1. Notation used in Stage 1 formulation.
granularity than the Scheduler) computes an updated cluster
configuration suited to the current workload. Determining
this configuration is formulated as a two-stage ILP.
Stage 1: Quality-Aware Capacity Planning In the first
stage, the goal is to determine the number of model instances
at each TP degree such that all request SLOs are met and
the cluster has sufficient capacity to sustain the workload in
steady state (i.e., without unbounded queue growth). If the
optimization problem is infeasible under these constraints,
we fall back to using only TP-1 instances, which maximizes
throughput, as discussed in §2.2.2.
A trivial feasible solution is to force all requests to use
the lowest confidence threshold, which minimizes load, but
this severely reduces overall generation quality. Instead, the
optimization seeks a configuration that maximizes the use
of high confidence thresholds while still satisfying SLO and
throughput constraints. Among all configurations achieving
the same average confidence threshold, we further prefer
those that minimize request latency.
Table 1 summarizes the parameters and variables used in
the formulation. Formally, the optimization problem has a
hierarchical two-level objective. The primary objective is to
maximize the average confidence threshold used per output
token: max Í
𝑘∈K 𝑅𝑃𝑆𝑘·
Í
𝑐∈C 𝑐𝑇𝑐𝑠𝑘,𝑐
𝑂𝑘
. The secondary objective,
applied only among solutions that tie on the first criterion,
is to maximize SLO slack: max Í
𝑘∈K 𝑅𝑃𝑆𝑘· (𝑆𝐿𝑂−𝑡𝑘). The
optimization problem is subject to the following constraints:
• Token-Unmasking Completeness: For each request, the
total number of tokens unmasked across all confidence
thresholds must equal the output length: Í
𝑐∈C 𝑇𝑐𝑠𝑘,𝑐=
𝑂𝑘, ∀𝑘∈K.
• Step Allocation Consistency: For each request, the to-
tal number of denoising steps allocated across confidence
thresholds must match the total allocated across TP de-
grees: Í
𝑐∈C 𝑠𝑘,𝑐= Í
𝑑∈D 𝑠𝑘,𝑑, ∀𝑘∈K.
• SLO Satisfaction: For each request, the end-to-end latency
of executing all denoising steps, under the selected TP
degree and batch size, must not exceed its latency SLO:
𝑡𝑘= Í
𝑑∈D
Í
𝑏∈B 𝑧𝑑,𝑏𝐿𝑑,𝑏𝑠𝑘,𝑑≤𝑆𝐿𝑂𝑘, ∀𝑘∈K.
• Batch Size Selection: All model instances of a given TP
degree share a single batch size configuration. This is not
a fundamental requirement of the system but a modeling
simplification that keeps the optimization problem man-
ageable: Í
𝑏∈B 𝑧𝑑,𝑏= 1, ∀𝑑∈D.
• Node GPU Capacity: For each node, the total GPU de-
mand of all model instances placed on it must not exceed
its GPU capacity: Í
𝑑∈D 𝑥𝑛,𝑑𝑑≤|G𝑛|, ∀𝑛∈N.
• System Stability: For each TP degree, the load assigned
to it does not exceed its processing capacity. This ensures
that the system remains stable with bounded queue growth,
according to queueing theory [24]: Í
𝑘∈K 𝑅𝑃𝑆𝑘𝑠𝑘,𝑑(𝑃𝑘+
𝑂𝑘) ≤Í
𝑏∈B 𝑧𝑑,𝑏𝑏

1
𝐿𝑑,𝑏
Í
𝑛∈N 𝑥𝑛,𝑑

, ∀𝑑∈D.
Stage 2: Minimal-Overhead Reconfiguration Planning
The Stage-1 solution specifies a cluster configuration through
the variables 𝑥𝑛,𝑑. Because all nodes are symmetric and there-
fore interchangeable in a homogeneous cluster, only the
total number of TP-𝑑model instances matters. Let 𝑅𝑑:=
Í
𝑛∈N 𝑥𝑛,𝑑denote the required number of TP-𝑑instances. If
the current configuration already matches 𝑅𝑑for all 𝑑∈D,
no reconfiguration is needed. Otherwise, we must terminate
and launch model instances to reach the target configura-
tion, and we solve a second ILP to determine the minimal-
overhead reconfiguration plan.
The objective of Stage 2 is to maximize the number of
model instances that can be preserved (i.e., instances that
continue using the same GPUs on the same node) while
satisfying 𝑅𝑑. Preserving more instances directly reduces
the number of terminations and launches required during
the transition, which in turn limits the temporary reduction
in available processing capacity during reconfiguration and
minimizes the impact on service availability. The full ILP
formulation for Stage 2 is presented in Section B.
Practical Consideration To avoid frequent or unnecessary
reconfiguration, the system triggers reconfiguration only
when the Stage 1 proposal improves sufficiently over the
current configuration (e.g., at least 10% improvement in the
primary or secondary objective). Furthermore, to ensure
robustness against short-term load fluctuations, the request-
class RPS values used in the optimization include a safety
buffer, making them slightly higher than the observed RPS.
If a reconfiguration is deemed necessary, the system exe-
cutes the plan generated by Stage 2 sequentially to prevent
large temporary reductions in cluster processing capacity.
New model instances are launched one at a time, and before
8


--- Page 9 ---
each launch, only the minimum necessary set of old instances
whose GPUs are required for that launch are terminated.
3.4
Supporting Approximate KV Caching
With approximate KV caching, denoising steps split into two
types: cache steps, which reuse previously computed keys
and values, and recompute steps, which recompute the cache.
Although DiLaServe’s core design remains effective, these
two step types have substantially different computational
costs and therefore require several adjustments to support
approximate KV caching.
Request Load, Cluster Capacity, and Predicted Time
Left. Approximate KV caching makes denoising steps het-
erogeneous: cache steps compute only the tokens inside the
current cache block, while recompute steps process all to-
kens in the sequence. Cache steps therefore incur a much
lighter computational load and latency than recompute steps.
To account for this heterogeneity, DiLaServe treats cache
and recompute steps separately when estimating request
load, cluster capacity, and remaining latency. For load con-
trol (§3.2.2, Algorithm 2), the load of a request is computed
as the combined load of its remaining cache and recompute
steps, and cluster capacity is estimated using the correspond-
ing block-level execution pattern. Similarly, when selecting
the highest confidence threshold that still satisfies the SLO
(§3.2.1, Algorithm 1), DiLaServe estimates the remaining la-
tency as the sum of the latency of the remaining cache and
recompute steps. The detailed load, capacity, and remaining-
time estimation algorithms are provided in Section C.
Migration Granularity. During request scheduling (§3.2.4,
Algorithm 3), migrating a request during a cache step would
require rebuilding its KV cache on the destination instance,
effectively adding an additional recompute step. To avoid
this overhead while still allowing migration for load balanc-
ing, we permit migration only at recompute steps. At these
steps, the KV cache must be rebuilt regardless of migration,
so moving the request incurs no additional cost. We show in
Table 6 of Section E that this reduces latency by up to 38%.
Reconfiguration. In deriving the optimal cluster configura-
tion (§3.3), instead of a single step variable𝑠and batch-size se-
lector𝑧, we use recompute steps𝑠and cache steps𝑠′, together
with batch-size choices 𝑧and 𝑧′ for recompute and cache
steps, respectively. Most constraints remain unchanged af-
ter substituting these variables. The primary modification is
the System Stability constraint, which now accounts for the
different computational costs of recompute and cache steps:
Í
𝑘𝑅𝑃𝑆𝑘
h
𝑠𝑘,𝑑(𝑃𝑘+ 𝑂𝑘) 𝛼𝑑+ 𝑠′
𝑘,𝑑𝐵𝛽𝑑
i
≤Í
𝑛𝑥𝑛,𝑑, ∀𝑑∈D.
Here, 𝛼𝑑= Í
𝑏𝑧𝑑,𝑏𝐿𝑑,𝑏/𝑏is the per-step cost of recompute
steps and 𝛽𝑑= Í
𝑏𝑧′
𝑑,𝑏𝐿𝑑,𝑏/𝑏is the per-step cost of cache
steps, and 𝐵denotes the cache block size.
3.5
Extensions
In this section, we discuss several extensions that DiLaServe
can support with minimal modification.
Non-homogeneous SLOs Service providers may assign dif-
ferent latency SLOs to different requests – for example, based
on prompt/output length or service tier – rather than using a
single global SLO. Supporting heterogeneous SLOs requires
only minor changes to DiLaServe. For capacity estimation
(Algorithm 2), one can use an average SLO across request
classes, or a minimum SLO if prioritizing tighter-latency
classes when estimating cluster capacity. In Stage 1 recon-
figuration, each request class simply carries its own SLO.
Importantly, the confidence-threshold selection and sched-
uling logic already operates on a per-request basis and uses
each request’s remaining SLO budget. Thus, these compo-
nents naturally extend to the non-homogeneous SLO setting
without modification.
Request Priority Some deployments may prioritize certain
requests, such as premium-tier users or quality-critical tasks,
by ensuring they receive consistently higher generation qual-
ity. When determining the allowed confidence thresholds for
each request (Algorithm 2), priority can be incorporated by
ordering requests so that high-priority ones are processed
first, giving them the widest feasible range of confidence
thresholds. In the extreme, the system may guarantee that
high-priority requests always retain access to the full range
of confidence thresholds, while lower-priority requests adapt
to keep the overall load within system capacity.
4
Implementation
DiLaServe is built on top of vLLM, with approximately 9,500
lines of additional Python code. Model instances are launched
as Ray [35] actors, and the Scheduler issues execution com-
mands to them as Ray tasks. Each command contains the
metadata required for a denoising step, including the request
prompt and output length (if not already present), the set
of tokens unmasked in the previous denoising step, and the
selected confidence threshold.
With multiple model instances running concurrently, the
Scheduler executes an asynchronous event loop, making
scheduling decisions whenever new requests arrive or when-
ever any model instance completes a denoising step and
returns control. The Workload Monitor continuously tracks
workload statistics over a user-specified time window, and
the Reconfigurator uses Gurobi [20] as the underlying solver
to compute an updated cluster configuration periodically.
To support approximate KV caching, FlashAttention [13]
is configured to use full bidirectional attention without causal
masking. KV caches are stored in GPU memory and rebuilt
during recompute steps as needed.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Avg
P50
P90
P99
Prompt Length
140
28
344
1698
Output Length
264
224
544
928
Table 2. ShareGPT statistics. Samples are filtered to exclude
cases where prompt + output exceeds the models’ 4096-token
limit. Output lengths are rounded up to the nearest multiple
of 32 to match the denoising block size used for KV caching.
Benchmark
Domain Samples Prompt Len.
GSM8K (5) [10]
Math
1,319
1,020
MMLU-Pro (0) [52] General
12,032
261
MBPP (3) [37]
Coding
474
737
Table 3. Benchmarks used for evaluation. The number in
parentheses denotes the number of few-shot examples.
5
Evaluation
We evaluate DiLaServe on 16-GPU clusters using a real-world
LLM serving trace and diverse accuracy benchmarks. The
evaluation shows that DiLaServe improves SLO attainment
by up to 56.6 percentage points and reduces the end-to-end
latency by 46%, with less than 1% quality degradation com-
pared to state-of-the-art serving systems that use a fixed
confidence threshold.
5.1
Experimental Setup
Compute Platforms Experiments were conducted on two
clusters. Experiments in §5.2 and §5.4 were run on Cluster 1,
while experiments in §5.3 were run on Cluster 2. Cluster 1
consists of NVIDIA GH200 nodes. Each node contains four
GH200 superchips, each equipped with one H100 GPU (96
GB HBM3) and one Grace CPU (72 cores), for a total of 4
GPUs, 288 CPU cores, 480 GB LPDDR5 system memory per
node. Nodes are connected via a 200 Gbps interconnect. Clus-
ter 2 consists of NVIDIA H100 nodes. Each node contains
four H100 GPUs (96 GB HBM3), 96 vCPU cores, 1 TB DDR5
memory. Nodes are connected via a 100 Gbps interconnect.
Models We evaluate our system on LLaDA [36] and Dream [55],
two of the largest open-source DLMs with 8 billion and 7
billion parameters, respectively. Unless otherwise noted, we
enable approximate KV caching with a denoising block size
of 32 tokens and use a default confidence threshold of 0.9,
following the configurations described in prior work [54].
Benchmark and Workloads To evaluate DiLaServe in a
realistic deployment setting, we use real-world LLM serving
workloads derived from ShareGPT [49] and BurstGPT [51].
The ShareGPT dataset provides real conversational prompts
and outputs but lacks arrival timestamps. In contrast, Burst-
GPT is a production LLM serving trace that contains request
arrival timestamps but does not include prompts or outputs.
We therefore combine the two: we use arrival timestamps
from BurstGPT and sample prompt text and output lengths
from ShareGPT (Table 2). BurstGPT contains two months of
request arrivals. From this trace, we construct an “average-
day profile” by averaging the requests-per-second (RPS) for
each hour across the two months, which preserves the di-
urnal pattern of the workload. Following prior work [41],
we retain this shape but compress it into a 2-hour trace,
where each 5-minute interval corresponds to one hour in the
average-day profile. Within each 5-minute interval, arrivals
are generated using a Poisson process with mean equal to
the RPS of the corresponding hour. Finally, we scale the RPS
(which peaks at 20) to match the capacity of our cluster. The
final trace consists of 63,736 requests.
For conversational workloads, there is no ground-truth an-
swer for computing accuracy metrics. We therefore adopt an
LLM-as-a-judge approach [30, 57]. We use a strong LLM,
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct, as the judge model. For each
prompt-response pair, it produces a quality score from 0
to 10. We report the average score across all requests as the
generation-quality metric for a given serving system. The
evaluation prompt for the judge is provided in Section D.
We also evaluate DiLaServe using three standard accuracy
benchmarks spanning different domains, as shown in Table 3.
For each benchmark, we use the same few shot settings as in
prior work [36, 54, 55] and set the output length to 256. For
each sample in the benchmarks, we send a corresponding
request to the serving system. Although MBPP is a relatively
large coding benchmark, its size is still insufficient for gen-
erating meaningful load at our cluster scale. To address this,
we replicate each sample twice (three copies total) to create
a request set large enough for load testing. Request arrivals
follow a Poisson process [48, 59] with varying request rates.
For each benchmark, by default we set the SLOs to 5× the
average latency of a single request running in isolation on a
TP-1 model instance, similar to prior work [22, 29, 46]. We
also vary this SLO multiple to evaluate the system’s ability
to operate under stricter latency budgets.
Baselines To the best of our knowledge, DiLaServe is the
first cluster-level serving system designed specifically for
DLMs. We adapt two state-of-the-art model and LLM serving
systems to support DLMs and use them as baselines. Both
baseline systems use a fixed confidence threshold.
• INFaaS [41]: INFaaS is a general, multi-instance ML model
serving system. Upon request arrival, INFaaS dispatches
the request to the least-loaded worker for load balancing.
We adapt it for DLM serving by using the number of tokens
– rather than the number of requests – as the measure of
load, which better reflects the computational demand of
language model workloads.
• Llumnix [48]: Llumnix is a multi-instance serving system
for autoregressive language models. It uses efficient migra-
tion techniques to perform iteration-level load balancing
while avoiding the eviction and preemption overheads
10


--- Page 11 ---
0
10
20
RPS
0
5
10
15
# Instances
TP-1
TP-4
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Conf.
Max Confidence Threshold
Confidence Threshold Used
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time (min)
0
25
50
75
100
SLO (%)
INFaaS
Llumnix
DiLaServe
Figure 8. RPS of the trace, DiLaServe’s cluster configuration
and confidence threshold, and SLO attainment over time for
all three systems on the real-world trace.
System
SLO
Score
Avg. Latency (s)
Attain.
Overall Low-load High-load
DiLaServe 91.13%
6.80
5.75
2.26
6.33
Llumnix
60.98%
6.89
10.64
3.23
11.30
INFaaS
70.03%
6.89
8.80
2.71
9.34
Table 4. Experimental results on the real-world trace. “Score”
denotes the average evaluation score generated by the LLM
judge. The low-load period corresponds to minutes 0 – 45,
and the high-load period corresponds to minutes 45 – 120.
caused by growing KV-cache memory. For DLMs, the out-
put length (and thus the KV-cache size) is user-specified
and known in advance, so this issue does not arise; however,
Llumnix’s fine-grained load-balancing approach remains
relevant. We adapt Llumnix for DLMs by restricting migra-
tion to only happen at recompute steps, which avoids the
high overhead of recomputing KV-cache.
5.2
Real-World Workload
To validate DiLaServe’s effectiveness in a realistic deploy-
ment setting, we evaluate it by serving LLaDA using a trace
constructed from the real-world ShareGPT and BurstGPT
datasets on a 16-GPU cluster. As shown in the top figure of
Figure 8, the request load fluctuates over time, reflecting the
diurnal pattern and the bursty nature of service usage. This
allows us to evaluate the effectiveness of DiLaServe’s recon-
figuration mechanism in responding to changing workload
patterns. Since INFaaS and Llumnix do not support reconfig-
uration, we run both baselines with a fixed configuration of
16 TP-1 workers, which maximizes throughput and is best
suited for handling peak loads. The generated response for
each request is evaluated by the LLM judge on a scale of 0
to 10, with higher scores indicating better response quality.
The evaluation results are shown in Table 4. DiLaServe
achieves 21.1 percentage points and 30.2 percentage points
higher SLO attainment and 34.7% and 46.0% lower latency,
with only a 0.09-point drop in quality score compared to
INFaaS and Llumnix, respectively. Figure 8 shows that Di-
LaServe adapts both the cluster configuration and the maxi-
mum confidence threshold in response to fluctuating work-
load. At lower loads, requests can be served comfortably at
the highest confidence threshold, and DiLaServe selects con-
figurations with higher TP-degree model instances to reduce
latency, yielding 16.6% and 30.0% lower latency compared
to INFaaS and Llumnix, respectively. As the load increases,
DiLaServe reconfigures to use more low TP-degree model
instances for higher throughput, while lowering the maxi-
mum confidence threshold to keep effective load manageable.
Under high load, more requests risk violating their latency
SLOs, so they are assigned lower confidence thresholds to re-
duce the number of required denoising steps. Together, these
adaptations lower the average confidence threshold during
high-load periods and allow DiLaServe to maintain low la-
tency and thus high SLO attainment, while the baselines
suffer from significant queueing delays and increased load
per model instance, leading to higher latency and significant
drop in SLO attainment. In the high-load period, DiLaServe
achieves 32.2% and 44.0% lower latency compared to INFaaS
and Llumnix, respectively.
5.3
Accuracy Benchmarks
To further evaluate DiLaServe’s ability to maintain high SLO
attainment while preserving accuracy, we evaluate it by serv-
ing LLaDA and Dream on three accuracy benchmarks span-
ning different application domains – GSM8K [10] for math,
MMLU-Pro [52] for general understanding, and MBPP [37]
for coding. To ensure a fair comparison with the baselines,
all three systems are run with a fixed cluster configuration
of 16 TP-1 workers and no reconfiguration, allowing us to
assess their scheduling effectiveness under high request load.
Figure 9 shows the experimental results. As the request
rate increases, request latency grows due to longer queue-
ing delays and increased load per model instance, causing
more requests to violate their SLOs. By dynamically adjust-
ing the confidence threshold, DiLaServe effectively balances
the trade-off between speed and quality, leading to consis-
tently better serving performance across request rate and
benchmarks. Under high request rates, DiLaServe achieves
up to 55 percentage points higher SLO attainment with only
a 0.7% accuracy drop compared to INFaaS, and 56.6 percent-
age points higher SLO attainment with only a 0.9% accuracy
drop compared to Llumnix.
We also vary the SLO to evaluate each system’s ability
to maintain performance under a fixed RPS but tighter la-
tency requirements. DiLaServe consistently achieves higher
11


--- Page 12 ---
0
25
50
75
100
SLO (%)
0
25
50
75
100
0
25
50
75
100
1.6
1.8
75
76
77
78
Acc. (%)
5x
4x
3x
2x
1.0
1.2
1.4
33
34
35
36
5x
4x
3x
2.3
2.5
2.7
30
31
32
33
5x
4x
3x
2x
0
25
50
75
100
SLO (%)
0
25
50
75
100
0
25
50
75
100
1.7
1.8
1.9
RPS per GPU
69
70
71
72
Acc. (%)
5x
4x
3x
2x
SLO Multiple
1.7
1.9
RPS per GPU
33
34
35
36
5x
4x
3x
2x
SLO Multiple
1.9
2.1
2.3
RPS per GPU
35
36
37
38
5x
4x
3x
SLO Multiple
GSM8K
MMLU-Pro
MBPP
LLaDA
Dream
DiLaServe
Llumnix
INFaaS
Figure 9. Experimental results for serving LLaDA (top) and Dream (bottom) on the three accuracy benchmarks.
1.88
2
2.12 2.25
RPS per GPU
0
25
50
75
100
SLO Attain. (%)
1.88
2
2.12 2.25
RPS per GPU
70
72
74
76
78
Accuracy (%)
Fixed thresh.
Dynamic thresh.
Dynamic thresh.
+ Load control
Figure 10. Confidence threshold control ablation serving
LLaDA with GSM8K.
SLO attainment as the SLO becomes stricter. In the mod-
erately tight SLO regime (≥3×), DiLaServe achieves up to
33.9 percentage points higher SLO attainment with only a
0.1% accuracy drop compared to INFaaS, and 42.3 percent-
age points higher SLO attainment with only a 0.1% accuracy
drop compared to Llumnix. Under extremely tight SLOs, Di-
LaServe can further trade off quality for latency, allowing it
to maintain higher SLO attainment.
5.4
Ablation Studies
Confidence Threshold Control. Figure 10 shows an ab-
lation of DiLaServe’s confidence-threshold control serving
GSM8K requests with LLaDA. Compared to the fixed-threshold
baseline, enabling SLO-aware dynamic threshold adjustment
(§3.2.1) substantially improves SLO attainment across in all
settings, by up to 70.8 percentage points, while incurring at
most a 1.9% drop in accuracy. Incorporating aggregate-load-
aware system-wide control (§3.2.2) further improves SLO
attainment by up to 42.4 percentage points over dynamic
threshold adjustment alone, while changing accuracy by at
most 1.7%. These results show that dynamically adjusting
thresholds based on per-request SLOs significantly improves
0
8
16
Peak RPS 2
Peak RPS 6
0
30
60
90
120
0
8
16
Peak RPS 4
0
30
60
90
120
Peak RPS 8
0
30
60
90
120
RPS
Num Instances
Time (min)
TP-1
TP-2
TP-4
Figure 11. Derived cluster configuration over time under
different peak RPS of the real-world workload.
SLO attainment, and that adding system-wide load control
provides additional gains by preventing the aggregate work-
load from exceeding cluster capacity under higher load.
Reconfiguration. Figure 11 evaluates DiLaServe’s reconfig-
uration scheme under different load levels. In §5.2, we scale
the real-world trace so that its peak RPS matches the capac-
ity of our 16-GPU cluster. Here, we vary that peak RPS and
simulate feeding the resulting trace into the Workload Mon-
itor, while the Reconfigurator periodically uses the collected
workload statistics to compute a new cluster configuration.
The results show that the derived configurations adapt to
both the overall load level and the temporal fluctuation in
RPS. At low load, the reconfigurator favors fewer high-TP
instances, which provide lower per-request latency. As the
peak RPS increases, it shifts toward more low-TP instances
to increase throughput and maintain SLO satisfaction under
heavier demand. Across all settings, the chosen configura-
tion also changes over time to track the changing request
12


--- Page 13 ---
0
25
50
75
100
SLO (%)
2-shot
8-shot
Output 64
Output 1024
2.0
2.5
3.0
60
65
70
75
80
Acc (%)
0.5
1.0
1.5 5.5
6.0
6.5
0.40
0.45
RPS per GPU
DiLaServe
INFaaS
Figure 12. Input and output length ablation. For the input
length ablation (left two columns), output length is fixed
to 256. For the output length ablation (right two columns),
number of few-shot examples is fixed to 5.
rate in the underlying trace.
Input and Output Length. Figure 12 shows DiLaServe
serving GSM8K requests with LLaDA under varying input
lengths (number of few-shot examples) and output lengths.
Across all settings, DiLaServe consistently outperforms the
fixed-threshold baseline (INFaaS) in SLO attainment regard-
less of input or output length. For varying input length, it
improves SLO attainment by up to 81.0 percentage points
with at most a 1.0% accuracy drop. For varying output length,
DiLaServe improves SLO attainment by up to 82.3 percent-
age points while incurring at most a 0.8% accuracy drop.
These results show that DiLaServe remains effective across
a wide range of request sizes.
6
Related Work
Model Serving There has been a long line of work for
ML model serving, from general DNN serving [3, 11, 18,
19, 29, 41, 44, 56], to more specialized systems tailored for
LLM [22, 25, 40, 46–48, 59, 62] and diffusion image mod-
els [2, 4, 27]. DiLaServe draws inspiration from these works
on exploiting execution predictability [18, 56], request sched-
uling [41, 48], dynamic cluster reconfiguration [8, 33] to
design a high throughput language model serving system
tailored for the unique characteristics of DLMs.
Speed-Quality Tradeoff The speed-quality trade-off is
widely exploited across systems, including index search [34],
video streaming [15], and online advertising [1]. In model
serving, systems such as Apparate [12] and 𝐸3 [39] focus on
this trade-off with early-exit DNN models, while Clipper [11],
Proteus [3], and Sommelier [19] select among models to bal-
ance accuracy and efficiency. DiLaServe adopts a similar
principle but departs from these prior work by controlling
the speed-quality trade-off within a single model’s execution,
enabling high throughput and improved SLO attainment.
7
Conclusion
We presented DiLaServe, a cluster-level serving system for
diffusion language models that achieves high throughput
while meeting strict latency SLOs. DiLaServe dynamically
adjusts the confidence threshold used during denoising for
both aggregate load control and deadline-aware adaptation.
It further adapts the cluster configuration to changing work-
loads and supports approximate KV caching. Our evaluation
shows that DiLaServe improves SLO attainment by up to
56.6 percentage points with only 0.9% quality degradation
across diverse benchmarks and real-world workload.
References
[1] Deepak Agarwal, Bo Long, Jonathan Traupman, Doris Xin, and
Liang Zhang. 2014. LASER: a scalable response prediction platform
for online advertising. In Proceedings of the 7th ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (New York, New York,
USA) (WSDM ’14). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 173–182. doi:10.1145/2556195.2556252
[2] Shubham Agarwal, Subrata Mitra, Sarthak Chakraborty, Srikrishna
Karanam, Koyel Mukherjee, and Shiv Kumar Saini. 2024. Approxi-
mate caching for efficiently serving text-to-image diffusion models. In
Proceedings of the 21st USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems
Design and Implementation (Santa Clara, CA, USA) (NSDI’24).
USENIX Association, USA, Article 65, 17 pages.
[3] Sohaib Ahmad, Hui Guan, Brian D. Friedman, Thomas Williams,
Ramesh K. Sitaraman, and Thomas Woo. 2024.
Proteus: A
High-Throughput Inference-Serving System with Accuracy Scal-
ing. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating
Systems, Volume 1 (La Jolla, CA, USA) (ASPLOS ’24). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 318–334. doi:10.1145/
3617232.3624849
[4] Sohaib Ahmad, Qizheng Yang, Haoliang Wang, Ramesh K. Sitaraman,
and Hui Guan. 2025. DiffServe: Efficiently Serving Text-to-Image Diffu-
sion Models with Query-Aware Model Scaling. In Eighth Conference
on Machine Learning and Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?
id=1N3ShLfcTf
[5] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code. https://claude.com/product/claude-
code. Accessed: 2025-12-10.
[6] Jacob Austin, Daniel D. Johnson, Jonathan Ho, Daniel Tarlow, and
Rianne van den Berg. 2021.
Structured denoising diffusion mod-
els in discrete state-spaces. In Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS ’21).
Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 1376, 13 pages.
[7] Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Maximilian Kaufmann, Mikita Balesni,
Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Korbak, and Owain Evans. 2024. The
Reversal Curse: LLMs trained on “A is B” fail to learn “B is A”. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=GPKTIktA0k
[8] Tzu-Tao Chang and Shivaram Venkataraman. 2025. Eva: Cost-Efficient
Cloud-Based Cluster Scheduling. In Proceedings of the Twentieth
European Conference on Computer Systems (Rotterdam, Nether-
lands) (EuroSys ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA, 1399–1416. doi:10.1145/3689031.3717483
[9] Shuang Cheng, Yihan Bian, Dawei Liu, Linfeng Zhang, Qian Yao,
Zhongbo Tian, Wenhai Wang, Qipeng Guo, Kai Chen, Biqing Qi, and
Bowen Zhou. 2025. SDAR: A Synergistic Diffusion-AutoRegression
Paradigm for Scalable Sequence Generation. arXiv:2510.06303 [cs.LG]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.06303
13


--- Page 14 ---
[10] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Hee-
woo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser, Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton,
Reiichiro Nakano, Christopher Hesse, and John Schulman. 2021. Train-
ing Verifiers to Solve Math Word Problems. arXiv:2110.14168 [cs.LG]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.14168
[11] Daniel Crankshaw, Xin Wang, Guilio Zhou, Michael J. Franklin,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2017. Clipper: A Low-Latency
Online Prediction Serving System. In 14th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 17).
USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 613–627. https://www.usenix.org/
conference/nsdi17/technical-sessions/presentation/crankshaw
[12] Yinwei Dai, Rui Pan, Anand Iyer, Kai Li, and Ravi Netravali. 2024. Ap-
parate: Rethinking Early Exits to Tame Latency-Throughput Tensions
in ML Serving. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles (Austin, TX, USA) (SOSP ’24). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 607–623.
doi:10.1145/3694715.3695963
[13] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher
Ré. 2022. FLASHATTENTION: fast and memory-efficient exact at-
tention with IO-awareness. In Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (New Orleans,
LA, USA) (NIPS ’22). Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA, Ar-
ticle 1189, 16 pages.
[14] Jerome H Friedman. 2001. Greedy function approximation: a gradient
boosting machine. Annals of statistics (2001), 1189–1232.
[15] Aditya Ganjam, Faisal Siddiqui, Jibin Zhan, Xi Liu, Ion Stoica, Junchen
Jiang, Vyas Sekar, and Hui Zhang. 2015. C3: Internet-Scale Control
Plane for Video Quality Optimization. In 12th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 15).
USENIX Association, Oakland, CA, 131–144.
https://www.usenix.
org/conference/nsdi15/technical-sessions/presentation/ganjam
[16] Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi
Bi, Yixin Dai, Jiawei Sun, Haofen Wang, and Haofen Wang. 2023.
Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 2, 1 (2023).
[17] Google DeepMind. 2025. Gemini Diffusion. https://deepmind.google/
models/gemini-diffusion/. [text diffusion model].
[18] Arpan Gujarati, Reza Karimi, Safya Alzayat, Wei Hao, Antoine
Kaufmann, Ymir Vigfusson, and Jonathan Mace. 2020.
Serving
DNNs like Clockwork: Performance Predictability from the Bottom
Up. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI 20). USENIX Association, 443–462.
https:
//www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/gujarati
[19] Peizhen Guo, Bo Hu, and Wenjun Hu. 2022.
Sommelier: Cu-
rating DNN Models for the Masses. In Proceedings of the 2022
International Conference on Management of Data (Philadelphia, PA,
USA) (SIGMOD ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1876–1890. doi:10.1145/3514221.3526173
[20] Gurobi Optimization, LLC. 2025. Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual.
https://www.gurobi.com
[21] Zhengfu He, Tianxiang Sun, Qiong Tang, Kuanning Wang, Xuanjing
Huang, and Xipeng Qiu. 2023. DiffusionBERT: Improving Genera-
tive Masked Language Models with Diffusion Models. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-
Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational
Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 4521–4534. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.acl-
long.248
[22] Ke Hong, Xiuhong Li, Lufang Chen, Qiuli Mao, Guohao Dai, Xuefei
Ning, Shengen Yan, Yun Liang, and Yu Wang. 2025. SOLA: Optimizing
SLO Attainment for Large Language Model Serving with State-Aware
Scheduling. In Eighth Conference on Machine Learning and Systems.
https://openreview.net/forum?id=ubIvpetAd6
[23] Junhao Hu, Jiang Xu, Zhixia Liu, Yulong He, Yuetao Chen, Hao
Xu, Jiang Liu, Jie Meng, Baoquan Zhang, Shining Wan, Gengyuan
Dan, Zhiyu Dong, Zhihao Ren, Changhong Liu, Tao Xie, Dayun Lin,
Qin Zhang, Yue Yu, Hao Feng, Xusheng Chen, and Yizhou Shan.
2025. DEEPSERVE: serverless large language model serving at scale.
In Proceedings of the 2025 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual
Technical Conference (Boston, MA, USA) (USENIX ATC ’25). USENIX
Association, USA, Article 4, 16 pages.
[24] Leonard Kleinrock. 1975.
Theory, Volume 1, Queueing Systems.
Wiley-Interscience, USA.
[25] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin
Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica.
2023.
Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model
Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles (Koblenz, Germany) (SOSP ’23). As-
sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 611–626.
doi:10.1145/3600006.3613165
[26] Inception Labs, Samar Khanna, Siddhant Kharbanda, Shufan Li,
Harshit Varma, Eric Wang, Sawyer Birnbaum, Ziyang Luo, Yanis Mi-
raoui, Akash Palrecha, Stefano Ermon, Aditya Grover, and Volodymyr
Kuleshov. 2025. Mercury: Ultra-Fast Language Models Based on Dif-
fusion. arXiv:2506.17298 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.17298
[27] Suyi Li, Lingyun Yang, Xiaoxiao Jiang, Hanfeng Lu, Dakai An, Zhipeng
Di, Weiyi Lu, Jiawei Chen, Kan Liu, Yinghao Yu, Tao Lan, Guodong
Yang, Lin Qu, Liping Zhang, and Wei Wang. 2025.
KATZ: effi-
cient workflow serving for diffusion models with many adapters.
In Proceedings of the 2025 USENIX Conference on Usenix Annual
Technical Conference (Boston, MA, USA) (USENIX ATC ’25). USENIX
Association, USA, Article 61, 16 pages.
[28] Tianyi Li, Mingda Chen, Bowei Guo, and Zhiqiang Shen. 2025. A
Survey on Diffusion Language Models. arXiv:2508.10875 [cs.CL] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2508.10875
[29] Zhuohan Li, Lianmin Zheng, Yinmin Zhong, Vincent Liu, Ying Sheng,
Xin Jin, Yanping Huang, Zhifeng Chen, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gon-
zalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023.
AlpaServe: Statistical Multiplexing
with Model Parallelism for Deep Learning Serving. In 17th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 663–679. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/osdi23/presentation/li-zhouhan
[30] Yen-Ting Lin and Yun-Nung Chen. 2023. LLM-Eval: Unified Multi-
Dimensional Automatic Evaluation for Open-Domain Conversations
with Large Language Models. In Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on
NLP for Conversational AI (NLP4ConvAI 2023), Yun-Nung Chen and
Abhinav Rastogi (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics,
Toronto, Canada, 47–58. doi:10.18653/v1/2023.nlp4convai-1.5
[31] Zhiyuan Liu, Yicun Yang, Yaojie Zhang, Junjie Chen, Chang Zou,
Qingyuan Wei, Shaobo Wang, and Linfeng Zhang. 2025. dLLM-Cache:
Accelerating Diffusion Large Language Models with Adaptive Caching.
arXiv:2506.06295 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.06295
[32] Aaron Lou, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. 2024.
Discrete
diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data distri-
bution. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on
Machine Learning (Vienna, Austria) (ICML’24). JMLR.org, Article
1333, 30 pages.
[33] Jayashree Mohan, Amar Phanishayee, Janardhan Kulkarni, and Vijay
Chidambaram. 2022. Looking Beyond GPUs for DNN Scheduling
on Multi-Tenant Clusters. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22). USENIX Association,
Carlsbad, CA, 579–596. https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/
presentation/mohan
[34] Jason Mohoney, Devesh Sarda, Mengze Tang, Shihabur Rahman
Chowdhury, Anil Pacaci, Ihab F. Ilyas, Theodoros Rekatsinas, and
Shivaram Venkataraman. 2025. Quake: adaptive indexing for vector
search. In Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Conference on Operating
14


--- Page 15 ---
Systems Design and Implementation (Boston, MA, USA) (OSDI ’25).
USENIX Association, USA, Article 9, 17 pages.
[35] Philipp Moritz, Robert Nishihara, Stephanie Wang, Alexey Tu-
manov, Richard Liaw, Eric Liang, Melih Elibol, Zongheng Yang,
William Paul, Michael I. Jordan, and Ion Stoica. 2018. Ray: A Dis-
tributed Framework for Emerging AI Applications. In 13th USENIX
Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
18). USENIX Association, Carlsbad, CA, 561–577. https://www.usenix.
org/conference/osdi18/presentation/moritz
[36] Shen Nie, Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Xiaolu Zhang, Jingyang Ou, Jun Hu,
Jun Zhou, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and Chongxuan Li. 2025. Large
Language Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09992 (2025).
[37] Augustus Odena, Charles Sutton, David Martin Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin, Maarten Paul Bosma, Maxwell
Nye, Michael Terry, and Quoc V. Le. 2021. Program Synthesis with
Large Language Models. In n/a. n/a, n/a. n/a.
[38] OpenAI. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv (2024). https://arxiv.
org/abs/2303.08774
[39] Anand Padmanabha Iyer, Mingyu Guan, Yinwei Dai, Rui Pan, Swapnil
Gandhi, and Ravi Netravali. 2024. Improving DNN Inference Through-
put Using Practical, Per-Input Compute Adaptation. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGOPS 30th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
(Austin, TX, USA) (SOSP ’24). Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 624–639. doi:10.1145/3694715.3695978
[40] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Aashaka Shah, Íñigo
Goiri, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2024. Splitwise: Efficient
Generative LLM Inference Using Phase Splitting. In 2024 ACM/IEEE
51st Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA). 118–132. doi:10.1109/ISCA59077.2024.00019
[41] Francisco Romero, Qian Li, Neeraja J. Yadwadkar, and Christos
Kozyrakis. 2021. INFaaS: Automated Model-less Inference Serving.
In 2021 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 21).
USENIX Association, 397–411. https://www.usenix.org/conference/
atc21/presentation/romero
[42] Emma Roth. 2025. OpenAI says ChatGPT users send over 2.5 billion
prompts every day. The Verge (2025). https://www.theverge.com/
news/710867/openai-chatgpt-daily-prompts-2-billion Accessed: 2025-
12-10.
[43] Subham Sekhar Sahoo, Marianne Arriola, Aaron Gokaslan, Edgar Mar-
iano Marroquin, Alexander M Rush, Yair Schiff, Justin T Chiu, and
Volodymyr Kuleshov. 2024. Simple and Effective Masked Diffusion
Language Models. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems. https://openreview.net/forum?id=
L4uaAR4ArM
[44] Haichen Shen, Lequn Chen, Yuchen Jin, Liangyu Zhao, Bingyu Kong,
Matthai Philipose, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Ravi Sundaram. 2019.
Nexus: a GPU cluster engine for accelerating DNN-based video
analysis. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM Symposium on Operating
Systems Principles (Huntsville, Ontario, Canada) (SOSP ’19). Asso-
ciation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 322–337.
doi:10.1145/3341301.3359658
[45] Yuxuan Song, Zheng Zhang, Cheng Luo, Pengyang Gao, Fan Xia,
Hao Luo, Zheng Li, Yuehang Yang, Hongli Yu, Xingwei Qu, Yuwei
Fu, Jing Su, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, Mingxuan Wang, Lin Yan,
Xiaoying Jia, Jingjing Liu, Wei-Ying Ma, Ya-Qin Zhang, Yonghui Wu,
and Hao Zhou. 2025. Seed Diffusion: A Large-Scale Diffusion Language
Model with High-Speed Inference. arXiv:2508.02193 [cs.CL] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2508.02193
[46] Jovan Stojkovic, Chaojie Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Josep Torrellas, and Esha
Choukse. 2025. DynamoLLM: Designing LLM Inference Clusters
for Performance and Energy Efficiency. In 2025 IEEE International
Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA).
1348–1362. doi:10.1109/HPCA61900.2025.00102
[47] Foteini Strati, Sara Mcallister, Amar Phanishayee, Jakub Tar-
nawski, and Ana Klimovic. 2024. DéjàVu: KV-cache Streaming for
Fast, Fault-tolerant Generative LLM Serving. In Proceedings
of
the
41st
International
Conference
on
Machine
Learning
(Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
Vol.
235),
Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria
Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp (Eds.). PMLR,
46745–46771. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v235/strati24a.html
[48] Biao Sun, Ziming Huang, Hanyu Zhao, Wencong Xiao, Xinyi Zhang,
Yong Li, and Wei Lin. 2024. Llumnix: dynamic scheduling for large lan-
guage model serving. In Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Conference
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (Santa Clara, CA,
USA) (OSDI’24). USENIX Association, USA, Article 10, 19 pages.
[49] ShareGPT Team. [n. d.]. ShareGPT. https://sharegpt.com/.
[50] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric
Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient
Foundation Language Models. arXiv:2302.13971 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2302.13971
[51] Yuxin Wang, Yuhan Chen, Zeyu Li, Xueze Kang, Yuchu Fang, Yeju
Zhou, Yang Zheng, Zhenheng Tang, Xin He, Rui Guo, Xin Wang,
Qiang Wang, Amelie Chi Zhou, and Xiaowen Chu. 2025. BurstGPT:
A Real-World Workload Dataset to Optimize LLM Serving Systems
(KDD ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
5831–5841. doi:10.1145/3711896.3737413
[52] Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chan-
dra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan
Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi Fan, Xiang
Yue, and Wenhu Chen. 2024. MMLU-Pro: a more robust and challeng-
ing multi-task language understanding benchmark. In Proceedings of
the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (NIPS ’24). Curran Associates Inc.,
Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 3018, 25 pages.
[53] Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Shizhe Diao, Yonggan Fu,
Zhijian Liu, Pavlo Molchanov, Ping Luo, Song Han, and Enze Xie. 2025.
Fast-dLLM v2: Efficient Block-Diffusion LLM. arXiv:2509.26328 [cs.CL]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.26328
[54] Chengyue Wu, Hao Zhang, Shuchen Xue, Zhijian Liu, Shizhe Diao,
Ligeng Zhu, Ping Luo, Song Han, and Enze Xie. 2025. Fast-dLLM:
Training-free Acceleration of Diffusion LLM by Enabling KV Cache
and Parallel Decoding. arXiv:2505.22618 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/
2505.22618
[55] Jiacheng Ye, Zhihui Xie, Lin Zheng, Jiahui Gao, Zirui Wu, Xin Jiang,
Zhenguo Li, and Lingpeng Kong. 2025. Dream 7B: Diffusion Large
Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.15487 (2025).
[56] Hong Zhang, Yupeng Tang, Anurag Khandelwal, and Ion Stoica.
2023.
SHEPHERD: Serving DNNs in the Wild. In 20th USENIX
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation
(NSDI 23). USENIX Association, Boston, MA, 787–808. https://www.
usenix.org/conference/nsdi23/presentation/zhang-hong
[57] Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhang-
hao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P.
Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Judging
LLM-as-a-judge with MT-bench and Chatbot Arena. In Proceedings of
the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (NIPS ’23). Curran Associates Inc.,
Red Hook, NY, USA, Article 2020, 29 pages.
[58] Yuxiang Zheng, Dayuan Fu, Xiangkun Hu, Xiaojie Cai, Lyuman-
shan Ye, Pengrui Lu, and Pengfei Liu. 2025. DeepResearcher: Scal-
ing Deep Research via Reinforcement Learning in Real-world En-
vironments. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical
15


--- Page 16 ---
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Christos Christodoulopou-
los, Tanmoy Chakraborty, Carolyn Rose, and Violet Peng (Eds.). As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 414–431.
doi:10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.22
[59] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu,
Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: disaggre-
gating prefill and decoding for goodput-optimized large language
model serving. In Proceedings of the 18th USENIX Conference on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (Santa Clara, CA,
USA) (OSDI’24). USENIX Association, USA, Article 11, 18 pages.
[60] Fengqi Zhu, Rongzhen Wang, Shen Nie, Xiaolu Zhang, Chunwei Wu,
Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Jianfei Chen, Yankai Lin, Ji-Rong Wen, and Chongx-
uan Li. 2025. LLaDA 1.5: Variance-Reduced Preference Optimiza-
tion for Large Language Diffusion Models. arXiv:2505.19223 [cs.LG]
https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.19223
[61] Fengqi Zhu, Zebin You, Yipeng Xing, Zenan Huang, Lin Liu, Yihong
Zhuang, Guoshan Lu, Kangyu Wang, Xudong Wang, Lanning Wei,
Hongrui Guo, Jiaqi Hu, Wentao Ye, Tieyuan Chen, Chenchen Li,
Chengfu Tang, Haibo Feng, Jun Hu, Jun Zhou, Xiaolu Zhang, Zhen-
zhong Lan, Junbo Zhao, Da Zheng, Chongxuan Li, Jianguo Li, and
Ji-Rong Wen. 2025. LLaDA-MoE: A Sparse MoE Diffusion Language
Model. arXiv:2509.24389 [cs.CL] https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24389
[62] Kan Zhu, Yufei Gao, Yilong Zhao, Liangyu Zhao, Gefei Zuo, Yile Gu,
Dedong Xie, Tian Tang, Qinyu Xu, Zihao Ye, Keisuke Kamahori, Chien-
Yu Lin, Ziren Wang, Stephanie Wang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and
Baris Kasikci. 2025. NanoFlow: towards optimal large language model
serving throughput. In Proceedings of the 19th USENIX Conference
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (Boston, MA, USA)
(OSDI ’25). USENIX Association, USA, Article 41, 17 pages.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Symbol
Definition
N
Set of compute nodes
I
Set of old model instances
D
Set of TP degrees
G𝑛
Set of GPUs on node 𝑛∈N
L𝑛,𝑑
Set of slots for TP-𝑑on node 𝑛(L𝑛,𝑑
=
{1, 2, ..., ⌊|G𝑛|/𝑑⌋})
G𝑖
Set of GPUs originally used by old instance 𝑖
(𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖)
Node and TP degree of model instance 𝑖
𝑅𝑑
Required number of TP-𝑑instances (𝑅𝑑
=
Í
𝑛∈N 𝑥𝑛,𝑑)
𝑢𝑛,𝑑,ℓ∈B
Whether slot ℓfor TP-𝑑on node 𝑛is activated
𝑎𝑛,𝑑,ℓ,𝑔∈B Whether GPU 𝑔∈G𝑛is assigned to slot
(𝑛,𝑑, ℓ)
𝑚𝑖,ℓ∈B
Whether executor 𝑖is preserved by mapping
to slot (𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖, ℓ)
Table 5. Notation used in Stage 2 formulation.
A
Step Predictor Features
The Step Predictor uses 11 scalar features:
• confidence_threshold: the confidence threshold for the
next denoising step.
• output_length: the request’s output length.
• Progress features:
– full_progress: the completed denoising steps divided by
the output length.
– full_unmask_progress: the number of unmasked tokens
divided by the output length.
– block_progress: the current block index divided by the
total number of blocks.
– block_unmask_progress: the number of unmasked to-
kens in the current block divided by the block length.
• Confidence features:
– output_min_confidence: minimum confidence among all
output tokens.
– output_q25_confidence: lower-quartile token confidence.
– output_median_confidence: median confidence among
all output tokens.
– output_avg_confidence: average confidence among all
output tokens.
– output_q75_confidence: upper-quartile token confidence.
B
Details for Stage 2 Reconfiguration
With 𝑅𝑑produced by Stage 1, the goal of Stage 2 is to maxi-
mize the number of model instances that can be preserved
(i.e., instances that continue using the same GPUs on the
same node). Preserving more instances directly reduces the
number of terminations and launches required during the
transition, which in turn limits the temporary reduction in
available processing capacity while reconfiguration is taking
place.
To express this problem cleanly, we introduce the notion
of slots. For each node𝑛and TP degree𝑑, we define a set L𝑛,𝑑
of potential TP-𝑑slots, where each slot represents a feasible
placement location for a TP-𝑑model instance. A node with
|G𝑛| GPUs can host at most ⌊|G𝑛|/𝑑⌋such slots. These slots
serve as fixed candidate containers to which GPUs may be
assigned and old instances may be matched.
Table 5 summarizes the parameters and variables used in
this formulation. The objective is to maximize the number
of preserved model instances:
max
∑︁
𝑖∈I
∑︁
ℓ∈L𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖
𝑚𝑖,ℓ.
Subject to the following constraints:
• Stage 1 Compliance: For each TP degree 𝑑, the number of
slots activated for TP-𝑑is equal to 𝑅𝑑, the plan generated
by Stage 1.
∑︁
𝑛∈N
∑︁
ℓ∈L𝑛,𝑑
𝑢𝑛,𝑑,ℓ= 𝑅𝑑,
∀𝑑∈D.
• Slot GPU Assignment: If a slot of TP-𝑑is activated on a
node, it must be assigned exactly 𝑑GPUs from that node.
∑︁
𝑔∈G𝑛
𝑎𝑛,𝑑,ℓ,𝑔= 𝑑· 𝑢𝑛,𝑑,ℓ,
∀𝑛∈N, ∀𝑑∈D, ∀ℓ∈L𝑛,𝑑.
• GPU Exclusivity: Each GPU on a node can only be as-
signed to one slot.
∑︁
𝑑∈D
∑︁
ℓ∈L𝑛,𝑑
𝑎𝑛,𝑑,ℓ,𝑔= 1,
∀𝑛∈N, ∀𝑔∈G𝑛.
• Preservation Uniqueness: If a model instance is pre-
served, it can only be assigned to one slot.
∑︁
ℓ∈L𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖
𝑚𝑖,ℓ≤1,
∀𝑖∈I.
• Preservation Implies Slot Activation: If a model in-
stance is preserved, the corresponding slots need to be
activated.
𝑚𝑖,ℓ≤𝑢𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖,ℓ,
∀𝑖∈I, ∀ℓ∈L𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖.
• Preservation Implies Same GPU Set: If a model instance
is preserved, all the GPUs it previously occupied must be
exactly the GPUs assigned to its new slot.
𝑚𝑖,ℓ≤𝑎𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖,ℓ,𝑔,
∀𝑖∈I, ∀ℓ∈L𝑛𝑖,𝑑𝑖, ∀𝑔∈G𝑖.
From the variables 𝑢𝑛,𝑑,ℓand 𝑎𝑛,𝑑,ℓ,𝑔, we reconstruct the final
cluster configuration by identifying which TP-𝑑slots are ac-
tivated on each node and which GPUs are assigned to them.
This determines how many TP-𝑑model instances will run on
each node after reconfiguration. For any activated slot where
𝑚𝑖,ℓ= 1, the corresponding old model instance 𝑖is preserved
and continues to use its original GPUs. For all remaining
activated slots, a new model instance must be launched; con-
sequently, any old instance currently occupying the GPUs
assigned to that slot must be terminated.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Algorithm 4 Load and Capacity Calculation with KV Caching
Note: LP is short for LatencyProfile. cacheBlockSize and
maxNumSeqPerBatch are fixed system parameters.
1: function ReqLoad(req, 𝛾)
2:
totalSteps ←req.predStepsLeft[𝛾]
3:
cacheSteps ←totalSteps - req.recompStepsLeft
4:
return
cacheSteps
×
cacheBlockSize
+
req.recompStepsLeft × req.numTokens
5: function ClusterCapacity(numTokenPerReq)
6:
totalCapacity ←0
7:
for each instance do
8:
tp ←instance.tpDegree
9:
cacheStepLoad ←cacheBlockSize × maxNumSe-
qPerBatch
10:
cacheStepLat ←LP[tp][cacheStepLoad]
11:
recompStepLat ←LP[tp][numTokenPerReq]
12:
tput ←cacheStepLoad×(cacheBlockSize-1)+numTokenPerReq
cacheStepLat×(cacheBlockSize-1)+recompStepLat
13:
capacity ←tput × SLO
14:
totalCapacity ←totalCapacity + capacity
15:
return totalCapacity
C
Algorithm for Supporting Approximate
KV Caching
This section provides the detailed procedures to support ap-
proximate KV caching.
Request Load and Cluster Capacity Calculation. In
the no-cache setting, throughput is approximated by
maxbatch

batch
latencyProfile[tp][batch]

. With KV caching, however,
this substantially overestimates throughput, because most
steps are lightweight cache steps rather than compute-heavy
recomputations. To address this, we estimate throughput
at the block level, assuming that each block consists of
(cacheBlockSize −1) cache steps and one recompute step.
The load of a cache step accounts for batching effects via the
maximum number of sequences per batch, while the load of
a recompute step corresponds to the average request length,
obtained empirically. This block-based throughput estimate
more accurately reflects the actual execution pattern under
KV caching and provides a more reliable basis for capacity
planning. The changes to load and capacity calculation are
formalized in Algorithm 4.
Predicted Time Left. Selecting the highest confidence
threshold that still satisfies the SLO also depends on dis-
tinguishing cache and recompute steps. With KV caching,
the remaining latency is the sum of the latency of all re-
maining cache steps and recompute steps. We estimate this
conservatively by assuming that cache steps across requests
are batched together and recompute steps are batched to-
gether, yielding worst-case latencies. This is formalized in
Algorithm 5.
Algorithm 5 Remaining Time Estimation with KV Caching
1: function PredictedTimeLeft(req, 𝛾)
2:
inst ←req.instance
3:
tp ←inst.tpDegree
4:
steps ←req.predStepsLeft[𝛾]
5:
cacheStepsLeft ←steps - req.recompStepsLeft
6:
cacheBatchSize ←cacheBlockSize × inst.numReqs
7:
recompBatchSize ←inst.numTokens
8:
cacheStepLat ←LP[tp][cacheBatchSize]
9:
recompStepLat ←LP[tp][recompBatchSize]
10:
return
cacheStepsLeft
×
cacheStepLat
+
req.recompStepsLeft × recompStepLat
D
LLM Judge Prompt
We use the following prompt for the LLM-based judge that
scores assistant responses:
You are grading an assistant response to a user request.
### USER REQUEST:
{prompt}
### ASSISTANT ANSWER:
{response}
---
Assign one integer score from 0 to 10 using this rubric:
- 10: Fully correct, directly answers the request, complete,
clear, and safe.
- 7-9: Mostly correct and useful, with minor omissions or
small inaccuracies.
- 4-6: Partially correct or helpful, but missing important
content or containing notable mistakes.
- 1-3: Mostly incorrect, off-topic, or seriously incomplete.
- 0: Dangerous, nonsensical, or fails to answer the request.
Evaluate only these criteria:
1. Correctness
2. Relevance
3. Completeness
4. Clarity
5. Safety
Rules:
- Judge only the assistant answer.
- Prefer factual accuracy over style.
- Penalize unsafe or harmful advice heavily.
- If the request does not provide enough information to
fully verify facts, score based on likely usefulness
and internal consistency.
- Return only valid JSON matching the required schema.
- The score must be an integer from 0 to 10.
- The explanation must be one short sentence.
Return JSON only.
{{"score": <0-10>, "explanation": "<one short sentence>"}}.
18


--- Page 19 ---
1.5
2.0
2.5
Mean latency (s)
Output Len = 256
3
4
5
6
Output Len = 512
10
20
30
Output Len = 1024
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
RPS
1.5
2.0
2.5
P99 latency (s)
0.6
0.8
RPS
3
4
5
6
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
RPS
10
20
30
Without Migration
With Migration
Figure 13. Migration effectiveness. Enabling denoising-step-
level migration reduces P99 latency. Input length is set to
256 for all cases.
# Model Instances
4
8
12
16
Normalized latency
(vs. recompute-only)
1.17
1.28
1.33
1.38
Table 6. Migration granularity. Shown is the request latency
when migration is allowed at any step, normalized to Di-
LaServe’s design where it is permitted only at recompute
steps.
E
Experimental Results: Migration
Granularity
DiLaServe performs migration at the denoising-step level
to enable fine-grained load balancing beyond the initial dis-
patch. Figure 13 shows that enabling migration reduces tail
latency by up to 19% across different RPS values and output
lengths, as requests can opportunistically move to model
instances that become idle or lightly loaded as other re-
quests complete. However, naively performing migration
introduces non-negligible overhead when approximate KV
caching is enabled, since migrating at non-recompute steps
requires the KV cache to be rebuilt. As shown in Table 6,
allowing migration at arbitrary steps increases request la-
tency by up to 17% with 4 model instances. This overhead
grows with cluster size as more instances create more mi-
gration opportunities, reaching 38% with 16 instances. As a
result, DiLaServe only migrates a request at recompute steps,
avoiding migration overhead while preserving the benefits
of fine-grained load balancing.
F
Experimental Results: Serving without
Caching
Although DiLaServe includes support for approximate KV
caching, its core design remains applicable regardless of
whether caching is enabled. Figure 14 shows the results of
serving LLaDA without KV caching. In this setting, each de-
noising step becomes more computationally expensive; as a
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
SLO Attainment
0.25
0.30
0.35
RPS per GPU
0.77
0.78
0.79
0.80
Accuracy
5×
4×
3×
2×
SLO Multiple
DiLaServe
Llumnix
INFaaS
Figure 14. GSM8K without KV Caching.
result, without adjusting confidence thresholds for load con-
trol, the queue grows quickly once the request rate exceeds
cluster capacity, causing Llumnix and INFaaS to experience
significant drops in SLO attainment. In contrast, DiLaServe
maintains high SLO attainment without sacrificing accuracy.
Under tight SLOs, it continues to perform robustly, achieving
25.5% higher SLO attainment than Llumnix and INFaaS with
no accuracy drop.
19
