--- Page 1 ---
1
Meta-Reinforcement Learning via Evolution for Multi-Objective
Combinatorial Supply Chain Optimisation
Rifny Rachman
The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
Bahrul Ilmi Nasution
The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
bahrul.nasution@manchester.ac.uk
Josh Tingey
Peak AI, Ltd, United Kingdom
josh.tingey@peak.ai
Richard Allmendinger
The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
richard.allmendinger@manchester.ac.uk
Pradyumn Shukla
The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
pradyumn.shukla@manchester.ac.uk
Wei Pan
The University of Manchester, United Kingdom
wei.pan@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract—Meta-reinforcement learning is a promising ap-
proach to multi-objective optimisation because it enables rapid
policy adaptation across changing environments and preference
settings. However, conventional few-shot methods usually fine-
tune from a single shared meta-policy, which can reduce solution
diversity and limit exploration of the Pareto front, especially in
high-dimensional combinatorial problems such as supply chain
optimisation. We propose a population-based Meta-reinforcement
learning framework that combines decomposition with evolu-
tionary search in scalarisation weight space. The framework
maintains a population of weight vectors, each associated with
a distinct meta-policy trained through gradient-based meta-
learning, and iteratively refines this population through elitist
selection, crossover, and mutation guided by hypervolume and
entropy contributions. We evaluate the method in a multi-
objective supply chain setting with conflicting economic, envi-
ronmental, and social goals, and further test its generality on
standard reinforcement learning problems. The results show that
the proposed approach yields more diverse, better distributed
Pareto front approximations, improves cross-task adaptation,
increases hypervolume by up to 32% over Meta-multi-objective
reinforcement learning in the complex case, and attains the lowest
average Hausdorff distance among all compared methods.
Index Terms—Reinforcement learning, meta-learning, few-shot
learning, multi-objective, combinatorial optimisation
I. INTRODUCTION
M
ULTI-OBJECTIVE combinatorial supply chain (SC)
optimisation is inherently complex, involving many
interconnected facilities, routes, and competing objectives.
This complexity is amplified by uncertainties, operational
fluctuations, and disruptions, which require rapid, adaptive
Corresponding author. Email: rifny.rachman@manchester.ac.uk
decisions. Traditional methods, from classical optimisation
and metaheuristics to hybrid models [1], struggle with scal-
ability, adaptability, and responsiveness. More recently, multi-
objective reinforcement learning (MORL), which uses sequen-
tial decision-making [2], has shown promise by leveraging
agent–environment interactions for dynamic, feedback-driven
learning and convergence [3], [4]. Yet, MORL methods remain
computationally intensive and often overfit to specific SC
configurations, making them brittle when SC structures change
(e.g., fluctuating costs, demand, and network disruptions).
Meta-learning offers a compelling solution by enabling
models to “learn how to learn” across a distribution of SC
tasks, where each task corresponds to a distinct SC configura-
tion, such as varying demand patterns or network topologies.
It facilitates rapid adaptation and strong generalisation [5],
allowing policy reuse in previously unseen environments with
minimal retraining. Unlike multi-task settings, where a sin-
gle model is trained across heterogeneous problem instances
sharing the same objective, multi-objective settings require
simultaneously optimising conflicting criteria such as profit,
emissions, and service-level (SL) inequality, and remain un-
derexplored in SC contexts. Combining meta-learning with
MORL (i.e., Meta-MORL) yields a flexible and scalable
framework that efficiently adapts to dynamic environments
while reducing computational overhead.
Recent work by Rachman et al. [6] showed that Meta-
MORL can match conventional MORL performance in SC
settings while adapting substantially faster. However, most
Meta-MORL methods use a single shared meta-policy for
adaptation, which reduces solution diversity and limits explo-
ration of the Pareto front (PF), especially in complex, high-
arXiv:2606.22146v1  [cs.LG]  20 Jun 2026


--- Page 2 ---
2
dimensional problems requiring diverse trade-offs.
We propose MERLION (Meta-Reinforcement Learning via
Evolution), a population-based Meta-MORL framework in-
spired by multi-objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs)
such as MOEA based on decomposition (MOEA/D) [7] and
Non-dominated Sorting Genetic Algorithm (NSGA-II) [8].
MERLION initialises a population of weight vectors, each
defining a scalarisation of the multi-objective space. A meta-
policy is meta-trained via gradient adaptation for each weight
vector. The population is then refined using fitness scores
based on marginal hypervolume and entropy to capture diver-
sity, optimality, and density. These scores drive evolutionary
operations (i.e., mutation and crossover of weight vectors) that
guide learning across task-conditioned objective regions.
By decentralising learning across multiple objective neigh-
bourhoods, MERLION trains diverse meta-policies specialised
for different regions of the PF approximation. Fine-tuning
then starts from multiple well-initialised policies that map SC
states (e.g., inventory levels, outstanding orders) to actions
(e.g., production and shipment quantities), improving both
exploration and exploitation. This leads to more robust policy
adaptation, greater diversity, and broader Pareto coverage with-
out significant additional online adaptation cost. To our knowl-
edge, MERLION is the first method to combine population-
based evolutionary search over scalarisation weights with
gradient-based meta-learning for multi-objective combinatorial
SC optimisation. Our key contributions are:
1) Methodology. We propose MERLION, a population-based
Meta-MORL framework that incorporates a MOEA-
inspired strategy into meta-training. Unlike conventional
meta-learning, which yields a single shared meta-policy,
MERLION maintains and updates multiple meta-policies
to enhance solution diversity, balance exploration and ex-
ploitation, and enable efficient fine-tuning. During meta-
training, an evolutionary procedure operates on scalarisa-
tion weight vectors, followed by local perturbation during
fine-tuning (Section IV-B).
2) Problem adaptation. We extend the existing multi-
objective Markov decision process (MOMDP) formula-
tion of the SC optimisation, specifically the SC network
design and inventory management problem, to the pro-
posed population-based Meta-MORL setting. In particu-
lar, we adapt the formulation to support multiple meta-
policies, each conditioned on a scalarisation weight vector
sampled from the preference simplex, and the associated
meta-training and fine-tuning procedures (Section III).
3) Theoretical analysis. We provide an analytical motivation
for the use of population-based meta-policies in MER-
LION. In particular, we show how maintaining multiple
meta-policies can increase the probability of hypervolume
improvement, and we explain how preference speciali-
sation can reduce cross-preference gradient interference
during meta-training (Section IV-B4).
4) Empirical evaluation and case implementation. We eval-
uate MERLION on three SC problems of increasing
complexity, characterised by growing action and observa-
tion spaces and tighter operational constraints, mimicking
our industrial partner’s topologies and parameter settings.
These instances are representative rather than exhaustive,
and we benchmark MERLION against five methods:
Meta-MORL, a population-based MORL approach, and
three metaheuristic baselines. We analyse the operational
impact and perform an ablation study to assess robustness
to parameter changes (Sections V-B and V-C).
5) Cross-domain evaluation. To assess the generalisability of
MERLION, we benchmark it beyond SC problems on five
commonly used artificial RL problems varying in reward,
action, and observation spaces, and compare it against
Meta-MORL and five MORL baselines (Section V-D).
6) Open-source benchmark framework. We extend several
existing RL problems from mo-gymnasium-based en-
vironments [9] and provide reusable environments for
SC, enabling randomised task generation and multiple-
environment sampling for meta-training and adaptation
in Meta-MORL settings. In addition, we release the
MERLION implementation to support reproducible eval-
uation of population-based Meta-MORL methods across
heterogeneous tasks.1
Section II reviews relevant literature. Section III formu-
lates the SC optimisation problem using MOMDP within
a population-based Meta-MORL framework. Section IV
presents our proposed method. Section V-B details our ex-
periments and their results. Finally, Section VI summarises
the study and outlines future research directions.
II. RELATED WORKS
This section reviews previous work related to (i) Population-
based methods for SC optimisation, (ii) evolutionary frame-
works in RL, and (iii) meta-learning for MORL.
A. Population-based Optimisation for SC Problems
MOEAs are population-based multi-objective optimisation
methods that approximate the PF by evolving a set of non-
dominated solutions through selection, mutation, crossover,
and elitist replacement [10], [11]. Their ability to maintain
diverse trade-off solutions makes them popular for multi-
objective SC optimisation, which is often NP-hard, high-
dimensional, and characterised by conflicting economic, en-
vironmental, and social objectives [12], [13].
Multi-objective genetic algorithm [14] uses non-dominance
ranks and sharing functions, and has been applied to produc-
tion planning and partner selection [15], [16], although its
non-elitist design can reduce quality and diversity. NSGA-
II [8] improves this through elitist non-dominated sorting and
crowding distance, and remains widely used in SC network
design [17]–[19]. Strength Pareto evolutionary algorithm II
(SPEA-II) [20] further emphasises elitism using dominance
strength and an external archive with k-nearest-neighbour
density estimation, showing competitive performance in green
SC design [18]. MOEA/D [7] shifts from dominance-based
selection to decomposition by solving scalar subproblems in
parallel, and has performed well on large-dimensional SC
network instances [21].
1The implementation is available upon acceptance.


--- Page 3 ---
3
Recent SC studies also adopt related Pareto-based swarm
and evolutionary variants. MOPSO [22] extends particle
swarm optimisation using Pareto dominance and an exter-
nal repository, and has been applied to vaccine supply–
production–distribution planning [23]. Multi-objective grey
wolf optimizer [24] similarly maintains an external archive
and has been used in healthcare and vaccine SC design [23],
[25]. NSGA-III [26] extends NSGA-II with reference-point-
based niching for many-objective settings, and has been com-
bined with sparrow search for green SC coordination [27].
Nevertheless, NSGA-II remains an appropriate main evolu-
tionary benchmark in this study: beyond its wide adoption
and interpretability, empirical evidence suggests it consistently
delivers competitive PF approximations in large-dimensional
SC problems [19], [28], making it a robust and directly
comparable baseline for our three-objective SC settings.
B. Evolutionary Framework in RL
Evolutionary
reinforcement
learning
(ERL)
combines
gradient-based policy optimisation with population-based evo-
lutionary search, leveraging evolutionary operators to improve
exploration, diversity, and robustness while retaining the learn-
ing efficiency of policy gradients [29].
Recent work has extended ERL to multi-objective settings.
For example, multi-objective cooperative evolutionary deep
reinforcement learning [30] integrates deep RL, evolutionary
search, Pareto archives, and hypervolume-based optimisation
to improve convergence and diversity. Other studies com-
bine evolutionary search with policy-gradient RL for multi-
objective load balancing [31], integrate Q-learning into multi-
objective differential evolution for feature selection [32],
and employ population-based training to generate behaviour-
diverse game agents that outperform conventional RL base-
lines [33]. Related work has also incorporated evolutionary
search into PPO to improve safety and policy stability [34].
Despite these advances, ERL remains relatively under-
explored for SC optimisation. Existing examples include
the combination of RL with MOEA for inventory manage-
ment [35] and the integration of a genetic algorithm with
Q-learning to support interpretable SC decision-making [36].
Moreover, most ERL studies focus on optimising policy popu-
lations within a fixed problem setting and do not address rapid
adaptation across varying network structures, operational con-
ditions, and stakeholder preferences that characterise practical
SC environments.
C. Meta-Learning for RL
MORL methods can be effective but often require extensive
interaction data and retraining when deployed in new or
shifting environments. In SC contexts, where disruptions and
parameter changes are common, this limits practicality. Meta-
learning addresses this by learning a transferable initialisation
across a task distribution, enabling rapid adaptation with few
samples. The early foundations were discussed by [37] and
later formalised in learning-to-learn frameworks [38]. Unlike
conventional deep learning, meta-learning targets generali-
sation from limited task samples, supporting settings with
constrained data and compute [39], [40].
Meta-RL combines meta-learning with RL by optimising
meta-parameters during an outer loop (meta-training) while
adapting a base policy within the inner loop. Fast RL via
slow RL (RL2) [41] performs inner-loop adaptation using
an RNN that conditions on past states, actions, and rewards,
enabling within-episode adaptation under partial observability.
In contrast, model-agnostic meta-learning (MAML) [5] learns
an initialisation that can be adapted to a task with a small
number of gradient steps. MAML typically provides stronger
cross-task generalisation (including to unseen tasks), whereas
RL2 can be more sample-efficient within the inner loop due
to its recurrent memory.
D. Meta-MORL Framework
To extend Meta-RL to multi-objective optimisation, [42]
proposed Meta-MORL, which samples preference weight vec-
tors to scalarise objectives during inner-loop adaptation and
updates a meta-policy across tasks in the outer loop. At
deployment, fine-tuning under multiple weights generates a
PF approximation set. However, PF quality depends heavily
on task and weight sampling, and diversity is not explicitly
encouraged.
To improve weight selection, PG-MORL [43] uses a pre-
diction model to select weights expected to improve the
PF, although the resulting policy updates are not directly
incorporated into the meta-policy. Beyond weight selection,
[44] combines Reptile and generalised policy improvement
(GPI) to support few-shot adaptation, where a policy adapts
to a new task using only a small number of interactions or
gradient updates. Similarly, [45] applies MAML-based Meta-
MORL to vehicular networks by decomposing a task into
subproblems and learning an initialisation that can be rapidly
fine-tuned.
Overall, Meta-MORL can efficiently generate multiple
trade-off solutions through fine-tuning, but most approaches
rely on a single meta-policy and prioritise rapid adaptation
over diversity preservation. As a result, PF coverage may be
limited, particularly in complex problems. Moreover, existing
Meta-MORL studies focus primarily on continuous-control
and communication-network domains, with limited attention
to combinatorial optimisation problems such as SC network
design. To the best of our knowledge, no prior work combines
population-based evolutionary search with meta-learning for
multi-objective SC optimisation, despite the need for both
diverse Pareto solutions and rapid adaptation to changing
operating conditions and preferences.
III. PROBLEM DEFINITION
We model the combinatorial SC optimisation problem as a
finite-horizon MOMDP [46]. In standard RL, an agent learns
a policy πθ(at|st) that maximises the expected cumulative
reward obtained through interactions with an environment. The
underlying Markov decision process is defined by the tuple
⟨S, A, ST, γ, µ, R⟩, where S denotes the state space, A the
action space, ST : S × A →S the state transition function,
γ ∈[0, 1] the discount factor, µ the initial-state distribution,
and R a scalar reward function.


--- Page 4 ---
4
In MORL, the scalar reward is replaced by a vector-
valued reward function R : S × A →RB representing B
potentially conflicting objectives. The resulting MOMDP is
defined by the tuple ⟨S, A, ST, γ, µ, R⟩. In our SC setting, the
objectives correspond to profit, emissions, and SL inequality.
A scalarisation weight vector w ∈∆B−1, where
∆B−1 =
(
w ∈RB : wb ≥0,
B
X
b=1
wb = 1
)
,
(1)
denotes the (B −1)-dimensional simplex. The weight vector
converts the reward vector into a scalar objective, enabling
exploration of different trade-offs among objectives.
Meta-MORL extends MORL by learning across a distri-
bution of tasks rather than a single environment. A task T
corresponds to a specific SC instance, such as a particular
network configuration, demand profile, or operating condition.
Within a task, different scalarisation weight vectors define
preference-specific optimisation subproblems. For example,
two subproblems may optimise the same SC network while
prioritising profit and sustainability differently. Meta-training
aims to learn policy initialisations that can rapidly adapt to
new tasks and preferences.
In conventional Meta-MORL, meta-training is organised
over a set of subtasks. We use subtask as a generic adap-
tation unit because it may correspond to a task instance, a
scalarisation preference, or both. In MERLION, this decom-
position is made explicit: i indexes scalarisation subproblems
(equivalently, population members), j indexes sampled tasks,
and t indexes time steps within an episode of horizon T.
To generalise across a distribution of SC tasks, we adopt a
gradient-based Meta-RL framework that learns a set of initial
policy parameterisations θi for rapid adaptation. During meta-
training, each scalarisation subproblem i is associated with a
weight vector wi ∈∆B−1 and is trained on its own batch of
sampled tasks {Tij}J
j=1, where
Tij = ⟨S, A, STij, γ, µij, Rij⟩∼p(T ).
(2)
Here, STij, µij, and Rij denote the transition dynamics,
initial-state distribution, and vector reward function of task
instance Tij, respectively.
For task j, the realised vector reward at time step t is
rijt = Rij(sijt, aijt),
(3)
where sijt ∈S and aijt ∈A denote the state and action
visited under subproblem i on task j at time step t. For the
SC problem, we define
rijt = {Profitt, −Emissiont, −Inequalityt} · ρt,
(4)
where objectives to be minimised are sign-flipped, and ρt
is a penalty applied whenever inventory falls below zero (see
Eq. 49 in Appendix A). All objectives are normalised to
[0, 1] to ensure comparable learning signals across objectives.
The agent learns task-adapted policies πθ′
ij(aijt | sijt) that
approximate the PF in terms of expected cumulative vector
returns. For clarity, the detailed SC formulations adopted
from [4] are restated in Appendix A.
Following Finn et al. [5], we define a scalarised RL loss for
each task–weight pair Tij as
LTij(πθi) = −EDij∼πθi, µTij
"T −1
X
t=0
γtw⊤
i rijt
#
,
(5)
where Dij denotes a trajectory collected on task Tij under
policy πθi and scalarisation weight vector wi.
IV. METHODS
MOEA-based methods use population-based parallel search
to explore the search space efficiently and generate diverse
solutions. This helps overcome the limitation of typical Meta-
MORL methods, whose search space is often restricted to local
regions [47]. This section presents the existing Meta-MORL
algorithm and its integration with MOEA for parallel search.
A. Background
MERLION builds on three foundations: MAML’s inner–
outer
optimisation
principle,
Meta-MORL’s
preference-
conditioned adaptation, and evolutionary search in the scalari-
sation weight space [5], [42]. We first recall the standard def-
initions of dominance, nondominated sets, and hypervolume
that underpin both the evolutionary fitness score and the per-
formance metrics used throughout this work. These definitions
are also used in the analytical motivation in Section IV-B4.
Definition 1. For u, v ∈RB, we say that u weakly domi-
nates v (denoted u ⪰v) if ub ≥vb, ∀b ∈{1, . . . , B}.
Definition 2. We say that u dominates v (denoted u ≻v) if
u ⪰v and ∃b ∈{1, . . . , B} such that ub > vb.
Definition 3. For a finite solution set H ⊂RB, let ND(·)
denote nondominated subset, so that:
ND(H) := {x ∈H | ∄h ∈H such that h ≻x} .
(6)
Definition 4. The region weakly dominated by H is defined
as
Dom(H) :=

x ∈RB  ∃h ∈H such that h ⪰x
	
.
(7)
Definition 5. Fix a reference point xref ∈RB that is dom-
inated by all attainable objective vectors. The hypervolume
(HV ) of a set H ⊂RB is defined as the B-dimensional
volume, i.e. the Lebesgue measure ν(·), of the region weakly
dominated by the nondominated points in H relative to xref,
which is calculated by:
HV (H; xref) = ν


[
x∈N D(H)
[xref, x]

,
(8)
where
[xref, x] :=
B
Y
b=1
[xref
b , xb].
(9)


--- Page 5 ---
5
1) Meta-MORL for SC Optimisation: Let Ty
∼p(T )
denote a task sampled from a task distribution, πθ a policy
parameterised by θ, and wy ∈∆B−1 a scalarisation weight
vector for B objectives, where γ ∈[0, 1] is the discount factor
and ryt is the vector reward at time t. The expected scalarised
discounted return on task Ty is
J(θ; Ty, wy) = Eπθ,Ty
"T −1
X
t=0
γtw⊤
y ryt
#
,
(10)
with corresponding RL loss
LTy,wy(πθ) = −J(θ; Ty, wy).
(11)
MAML [5] learns an initialisation θ that adapts quickly via
a small number of inner gradient steps. Chen et al. [42]
extended this to MORL by treating each task–preference pair
(T , w) as a scalarised subproblem, so that meta-training seeks
an initialisation that adapts efficiently across both task and
preference variation.
At deployment, each meta-parameter θi is fine-tuned in-
dependently on a new, unseen task T new. For each θi, a
set of M local scalarisation weight vectors {wim}M
m=1 is
constructed around its associated preference vector. Starting
from θi, independent fine-tuning under each wim produces
M preference-conditioned adapted policies {θ′
im}M
m=1. Since
Pareto optimality is defined in the original multi-objective
space, each adapted policy is evaluated by its expected dis-
counted vector return:
F(θ′
im; T new) = Eπθ′
im,T new
"T −1
X
t=0
γtrt
#
∈RB.
(12)
The PF approximation bP is then obtained by extracting the
nondominated subset of these vector returns. Hence, conven-
tional Meta-MORL learns a single good starting point for
preference-conditioned adaptation rather than directly learning
a diverse Pareto set during meta-training.
2) MOEA-inspired Techniques: MOEAs maintain a pop-
ulation of candidate solutions and refine it through three
operators [8], [14], [20]: (i) selection, which favours indi-
viduals by fitness or rank; (ii) crossover, which recombines
two parents, for weight vectors on the simplex, arithmetic
crossover ˜z = λzi+(1−λ)zh (λ ∈[0, 1]) preserves feasibility;
and (iii) mutation, which adds random perturbations ˆz = ˜z+ϵ,
ϵ ∼Mmut, to maintain exploration. Almost all MOEAs
also apply elitist replacement, retaining the best individuals
from the combined parent–offspring pool. In MERLION, these
operators act directly in the scalarisation weight space, driving
the preference distribution toward better convergence and
broader Pareto coverage.
B. Proposed Algorithm: MERLION
In this study, we propose MERLION, an evolutionary Meta-
MORL framework that maintains a population of meta-policies
and updates them through two coupled processes. Policy
parameters are learned via gradient-based meta-updates (in
the spirit of MAML), while evolutionary operators act in the
weight space to adapt the preference vectors that condition
each meta-policy. This co-evolution of weights and meta-
policies aims to encourage both convergence and diverse
coverage of the trade-off surface.
Our proposed MERLION algorithm consists of three pri-
mary stages: meta-training, evolutionary procedure, and fine-
tuning phase. In meta-training, the Meta-MORL framework
is predominantly used with an extension into a population-
based strategy. For the evolutionary procedure, an MOEA-
based strategy is used, and the fine-tuning phase adopts actor-
critic RL with modifications to align with the evolutionary
framework.
1) Meta-training: Algorithm 1 is initialised with P meta-
parameters {θi}P
i=1 and a corresponding set of weight vec-
tors {wi}P
i=1 sampled uniformly from the simplex ∆B−1,
ensuring broad initial coverage of the preference space. An
empty archive is also created to store meta-parameters and
their associated weight vectors throughout training. Each pair
(θi, wi) defines a scalarised subproblem, where θi is the meta-
parameter specialised for preference region wi and serves as
the initialisation point for fast adaptation under that preference.
For each subproblem i, a batch of tasks {Tij}J
j=1 is sampled
from p(T ) and trajectories Dij are collected under πθi. These
trajectories are used to compute the inner adaptation update:
θ′
ij = θi −α∇θiLTij(πθi),
(13)
where α is the inner-loop step size and θ′
ij is the task-adapted
parameter for task Tij under subproblem i. In this study, our
meta-objective for each θi is as follows:
min
θi
X
Tij∼p(T )
LTij(πθ′
ij) =
X
Tij∼p(T )
LTij(πθi−α∇θiLTij (πθi)).
(14)
After completion of the adaptation on the batch of tasks,
each meta-parameter θi is further updated in the meta-learning
phase using the D′
ij that uses πθ′
ij. The meta-parameters θi are
calculated based on the aggregated post-adaptation losses over
scalarised tasks Tij drawn from p(T ). Hence, the meta-policy
update that considers the meta step size β follows:
θi ←θi −β∇θi
J
X
j=1
LTij(πθ′
ij).
(15)
Once all meta-policies πθi associated with the weight vectors
wi are updated, the pairs (θi, wi) are stored in the archive
to perform the evolutionary update in the next stage.
2) Evolutionary Procedure: In Meta-MORL, each meta-
policy is associated with a fixed scalarisation weight vector
generated during meta-training, with no mechanism to re-
fine the preference distribution over time. In MERLION, we
propose to apply MOEA-inspired operators to these weight
vectors so that the preference distribution evolves across
generations toward better convergence and broader coverage
of the trade-off space.
After each meta-update, the archive stores a population
of tuples (θi, wi), where θi denotes the meta-parameters
and wi denotes the associated scalarisation weight vector.
Following Algorithm 2, MERLION first evaluates the current
population using a scalar fitness score, then generates P


--- Page 6 ---
6
Algorithm 1 Meta-training phase of MERLION (population-
based meta-learning).
Require: population size P, task distribution p(T ), weight
distribution p(w), step sizes α, β
1: Initialise: meta-parameters {θi}P
i=1, weights {wi
∼
p(w)}P
i=1, archive ←∅
2: while not done do
3:
for i = 1, 2, . . . , P do
4:
Sample a batch of tasks {Tij}J
j=1 ∼p(T )
5:
for j = 1, 2, . . . , J do
6:
Collect trajectories Dij using πθi on task Tij with
weight wi
7:
Compute inner loss LTij(πθi) from Dij
8:
Inner adaptation update, see Eq. (13)
9:
Collect trajectories D′
ij using πθ′
ij on task Tij with
weight wi
10:
end for
11:
Meta-update, see Eq. (15)
12:
archive ←Update(archive, (θi, wi))
13:
end for
14:
archive ←EvolveWeights(archive)
15: end while
16:
17: return archive containing {(θi, wi)}P
i=1
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
...
A batch of task
inner adaptation
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
...
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
...
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
S0
S1
ST
...
episode
...
...
 Meta-update 
 Meta-update 
Repeated inner
adaptation over 
and 
Meta-
updated
...
...
Evolution after
meta-update for all
 at each meta-
iteration
Meta-
updated
A batch of task
inner adaptation
A batch of task
inner adaptation
A batch of task
inner adaptation
meta-iteration 1
final meta-iteration
Fig. 1: Meta-training and adaptation phases in MERLION
as given in Algorithm 1. Initial meta-policies θi are trained
independently in the inner adaptation phase using wi on a
batch of tasks Tij. Outer meta-update applies to each θi with
the evolutionary procedure to all wi after each meta-iteration.
offspring through selection, crossover or mutation, assigns
each offspring the meta-parameters of the fitter parent, and
finally recomputes fitness over the combined parent-offspring
population before retaining the top P individuals. In this
way, the evolutionary routine updates the weight vectors while
preserving strong solutions through elitist survival selection.
a) Selection: We adopt rank-based parent selection over
a scalar fitness score that combines convergence and diversity.
Let ri ∈RB denote the objective vector associated with
individual i, and let wi denote its scalarisation weight vector.
The fitness of individual i is defined as
Qi = κ ∆HVi + (1 −κ) ∆Ei,
(16)
where fitness-mixing coefficient κ ∈[0, 1] balances conver-
gence and diversity. The convergence term is the marginal
hypervolume contribution in objective space,
∆HVi = HV (H) −HV (H \ {ri}) ,
(17)
where H = {r1, . . . , rP } is the set of population objective
vectors. The diversity term is computed from an average log-
distance score in the weight space,
∆Ei =
1
P −1
X
h̸=i
log(∥wi −wh∥2 + ϵ) ,
(18)
where ϵ > 0 is a small constant for numerical stability.
While marginal hypervolume contribution is a standard MOEA
metric [8], its combination with a weight-space diversity term
in Eq. (16) is specific to MERLION, as it jointly accounts for
objective-space quality and preference-space coverage during
meta-training.
After computing {Qi}P
i=1, parent-i is selected according to
rank-based probabilities. Let τi ∈{0, . . . , P −1} denote the
rank of individual i after sorting in descending order of Qi,
where τi = 0 is the best rank. Then parent-i is sampled with
probability
psel(i) =
P −τi
PP
h=1(P −τh)
.
(19)
This gives higher-fitness individuals a greater chance of
reproduction while maintaining stochasticity in the search.
After P offspring are generated and added to the archive,
MERLION recomputes fitness scores on the combined parent-
offspring population and retains the top P individuals via
elitist survival selection.
b) Crossover:
After
selecting
parent-i,
MERLION
chooses the second parent as the farthest weight vector from
wi in Euclidean space:
wh = arg
max
wk∈W, wk̸=wi ∥wi −wk∥2,
(20)
where W denotes the current population of weight vec-
tors. This departs from standard nearest-neighbour mating
used in decomposition-based MOEAs [7] and instead pro-
motes recombination across well-separated preference regions,
thereby encouraging broader coverage of trade-off directions.
Crossover is then applied with probability ηcross using arith-
metic interpolation, which preserves feasibility on the simplex:
wchild = λwi + (1 −λ)wh,
λ ∼Uniform(0, 1).
(21)
Arithmetic crossover generates offspring as convex combi-
nations of parent preferences, thereby preserving feasibility
without requiring repair operators and naturally interpolating
between neighbouring trade-off directions. The offspring in-
herits the meta-parameters of the fitter parent according to the
fitness score Q.


--- Page 7 ---
7
c) Mutation: If crossover is not applied, the offspring is
generated through mutation. The selected parent weight vector
is perturbed by additive uniform noise,
˜wchild = wi + ϵ,
ϵ ∼Uniform(−δ, δ)B,
(22)
where δ > 0 controls the mutation strength. The perturbed
vector is then repaired by clipping negative components and
renormalising to satisfy simplex constraints:
wchild =
max( ˜wchild, 0)
PB
b=1 max( ˜wchild,b, 0)
.
(23)
As in the crossover case, the offspring inherits the meta-
parameters of the fitter parent before being inserted into the
archive.
d) Operator design in the weight space: In MERLION,
evolutionary search acts in the scalarisation weight space,
while policy parameters are updated by gradient-based meta-
learning. Each meta-policy is paired with a weight vector that
conditions scalarisation of the vector reward before PPO-style
optimisation. Because near-duplicate offspring in weight space
provide little additional coverage of the preference simplex,
each offspring is generated by exactly one operator: arithmetic
crossover with probability ηcross, and mutation otherwise, i.e.,
ηmut = 1 −ηcross.
This complementary scheme reduces operator control to a
single exploration–exploitation parameter: larger ηcross favours
exploitation by recombining existing trade-offs, whereas
smaller ηcross favours exploration by allowing mutation to
discover new preference regions. Importantly, local improve-
ment in policy space is not lost: after each evolutionary step,
gradient-based meta-updates refine each θi under its updated
wi, providing implicit exploitation in policy space. Additional
local exploitation is performed explicitly during fine-tuning,
where local weight perturbations around each archived wi
are followed by independent gradient-based policy updates,
ensuring that exploration in preference space is always coupled
with policy-level exploitation.
3) Fine-tuning: After meta-training, the archive contains
a population of meta-policies and their associated scalarisation
weight vectors, {(θi, wi)}P
i=1. Fine-tuning is then performed
independently for each meta-policy on a target task, as shown
in Algorithm 3. To improve local coverage during fine-tuning,
MERLION applies local perturbations around each archived
weight vector. For every archived pair (θi, wi), we construct a
local weight set consisting of the original weight vector wi and
M perturbed weight vectors sampled from its neighbourhood
using perturbation scale δpert. Let θim denote the policy
parameters obtained after fine-tuning the i-th archived meta-
policy under local weight wim, and let its evaluated vector
return on the target task T new be
rim := F(θim; T new) = Eπθim, T new
"T −1
X
t=0
γtrt
#
∈RB.
(24)
Each perturbed weight is projected back onto the simplex
before use. For each local weight vector, the corresponding
archived meta-policy is loaded and used to initialise an inde-
pendent fine-tuning run. Then a fresh policy is trained under
Algorithm 2 Evolutionary procedure in MERLION
Require: archive, population size P, crossover probability
ηcross, mutation strength δ, fitness-mixing coefficient κ
1: Extract {(θi, wi)} and compute fitness scores {Qi}P
i=1
from archive
2: for offspring = 1, . . . , P do
3:
Select parent 1: (θi, wi) with rank-based selection ac-
cording to {Qi}P
i=1
4:
Select parent 2: (θh, wh) using distance-aware mating
using Eq. (20)
5:
if rand() < ηcross then
6:
Perform crossover to obtain wchild using Eq. (21)
7:
else
8:
Apply mutation to wchild using Eq. (22)
9:
end if
10:
θchild = θi if Qi ≥Qh, else θh
11:
Add (θchild, wchild) to archive
12: end for
13: Recompute Q for all individuals in archive
14: Retain the P individuals with the highest Q in archive
15:
16: return updated archive
the selected scalarisation weight for a fixed fine-tuning budget,
with periodic evaluation every fixed number of environment
steps, resulting in K fine-tuning intervals. After all local fine-
tuning runs have been completed, non-dominated sorting is
applied to the collected candidate solutions to obtain the final
PF approximation. In this way, fine-tuning preserves the good
initialisations learned during meta-training while increasing
the density of candidate solutions around promising preference
regions.
Algorithm 3 Fine-tuning phase in MERLION
Require: archive containing {(θi, wi)}P
i=1, fine-tuning in-
tervals K, local perturbation strength δpert, local pertur-
bation size per meta-policy M
1: Initialise candidates ←∅
2: for i = 1, 2, . . . , P do
3:
Construct local weight set Wi ←{wi} ∪{wim}M
m=1
4:
for all wim ∈Wi do
5:
if wim̸ = wi then
6:
wim ←wi+ϵim, ϵim ∼Uniform(−δpert, δpert)B
7:
Repair wim using Eq. (23)
8:
end if
9:
Clone meta-parameters: θim ←θi
10:
for k = 1, 2, . . . , K do
11:
Update πθim under wim
12:
Evaluate updated πθim and record rim
13:
end for
14:
Add final (θim, wim, rim) to candidates
15:
end for
16: end for
17: PF ←NonDominated(candidates)
18:
19: return fine-tuned solution set PF


--- Page 8 ---
8
f1
f2
(a) Meta-Learning and adaptation trajectory
f1
f2
more diverse
(b) Evolutionary effect on task-adapted policies
f1
f2
(c) Fine-tuning with local perturbation
Fig. 2: Meta-policies and task-adapted policies movement along the training. Subfig. 2a shows the population-based meta-policy
trajectories (black lines) that are independent to each other, where each meta-policy is adapted to a batch of tasks (dotted blue
lines) for next meta-update. Subfig. 2b shows the evolving weights (i.e., w1 and w2 become w′
1 and w′
2) tend to encourage
solutions to move away. Subfig 2c shows local perturbation in fine-tuning phase, followed with non-dominated sorting to form
PF approximation (solutions that are crossed by dotted red line).
4) Analytical Motivation for the Population-based Meta-
Policies: We provide a simple analytical motivation for MER-
LION’s population-based design. Rather than giving a full
convergence guarantee, we relate multiple meta-policies to
standard hypervolume properties (see Definitions 1 to 5) and
to a plausible optimisation mechanism under conflicting pref-
erences. Under limited fine-tuning steps, conventional meta-
learning methods may produce concentrated solution sets, as
adaptation tends to explore only a narrow portion of the objec-
tive space. Such concentration restricts the coverage of the PF
and can reduce the resulting improvement in hypervolume.
To formalise this, we ground the argument in two standard
properties of the hypervolume indicator: its monotonicity
under set expansion and the strict gain it yields when a
nondominated point is added. These properties are important
because they allow us to reason about when and why adding
more diverse candidates to an archive is guaranteed to improve
solution quality, providing a theoretical basis for MERLION’s
population-based design.
We now introduce two standard lemmas that characterise
the monotonic behaviour [48] (Lemma 1) and gain [49]
(Lemma 2) of hypervolume under set expansion. These lem-
mas do not yet depend on the specifics of MERLION, but
they provide the basic foundation for interpreting how archive
updates may affect hypervolume. We refer the reader to the
original source for the full proof.
Lemma 1. The monotonicity occurs if K ⊆H, then
HV (K; xref) ≤HV (H; xref).
(25)
Proof. See Appendix B-A.
Lemma 2. A new nondominated point yields a strict hyper-
volume gain. Let H be any finite set, and let x /∈Dom(H),
i.e., x is not dominated by any point in H. Assume further
that x is strictly better than the reference point xref in every
objective. Then
HV (H ∪{x}; xref) = HV (H; xref) + ∆HV (x | H),
(26)
with
∆HV (x | H) > 0.
(27)
Proof. See Appendix B-B.
Lemmas 1 and 2 are generic properties of hypervolume and
do not yet depend on the specifics of MERLION. To relate
them to our population-based setting, we next formalise the
event that a newly generated candidate improves the current
archive.
a) Population advantage via improvement probability:
Assumptions in MERLION. To keep the discussion trans-
parent, we used the following assumptions to interpret why a
population of meta-policies {θi}P
i=1 (each paired with a scalar-
isation weight wi) is intended to yield higher hypervolume
than a single meta-policy.
(A1) Fixed reference point and direction. Maximisation is
used for all objectives and the reference point xref is
fixed.
(A2) Nondominated retention (archive/elitist retention). Eval-
uations are retained in an external nondominated archive
or, equivalently, the procedure does not discard previ-
ously found nondominated objective vectors. In partic-
ular, for any current archive H and newly evaluated set
K, the retained set includes ND(H ∪K).
(A3) Preference diversity. The population weights {wi}P
i=1
are sufficiently spread over the simplex (i.e., not all
concentrated around a single preference), so that the
resulting candidates are not perfectly correlated.
(A4) Non-trivial
objective
conflict.
There
exist
weights
wj, wk such that their induced update directions can
disagree.


--- Page 9 ---
9
These assumptions aim to interpret the role of population-
based search in our setting. On the other hand, since Lemma 2
implies that a strict hypervolume gain occurs whenever a
generated candidate is not dominated by the retained archive,
we define the corresponding archive-improvement event as
follows.
Definition 6. Let H denote the current retained set (archive),
and let
K(P ) = {x1, . . . , xP },
xi := f(θi),
(28)
be the P candidate objective vectors produced by P meta-
policies, where θi is associated with the preference vector wi.
Define the archive-improvement event
Xi := {xi /∈Dom(H)}.
(29)
Thus, Xi denotes the event that candidate i is not weakly
dominated by the current archive H and therefore improves
the retained set. Consequently, SP
i=1 Xi denotes the event that
at least one candidate improves the archive, while Xc
i denotes
the event that candidate i does not improve the archive.
Proposition 1 (Population improvement probability). Let
X1, . . . , XP be the archive-improvement events defined above.
Suppose these events are independent and satisfy Pr(Xi) ≥ρ
for all i, where ρ ∈(0, 1). Then
Pr
 P[
i=1
Xi
!
= 1 −Pr
 P\
i=1
Xc
i
!
≥1 −(1 −ρ)P .
(30)
Moreover, for P = 1,
Pr(any improvement) = Pr(X1) ≥ρ,
(31)
whereas for P > 1,
Pr(any improvement) ≥1 −(1 −ρ)P > ρ.
(32)
Proof. See Appendix B-C.
Interpretation. Under independence, the probability that at
least one candidate improves the archive increases with the
population size. Together with Lemma 1, Lemma 2, and
Assumption (A2), this suggests that a population of meta-
policies may be more likely than a single meta-policy to
produce a strict hypervolume increase. However, this argument
does not explain why different meta-policies should generate
complementary rather than redundant candidates. We therefore
next consider how preference specialisation may reduce cross-
preference gradient interference.
b) Why specialisation helps: When a single shared meta-
policy is trained across heterogeneous preference vectors,
the resulting gradients may interfere. By contrast, assigning
different preferences to different meta-policies allows each
member of the population to specialise, which may reduce
cross-preference gradient cancellation.
Given a task T , let F(θ, T ) ∈RB denote the expected dis-
counted vector return induced by policy πθ. For a scalarisation
weight vector w ∈∆B−1, define the scalarised objective
J(θ; T , w) := w⊤F(θ, T ),
g(θ; T , w) := ∇θJ(θ; T , w).
(33)
A single meta-policy trained to serve multiple preferences
drawn from a distribution p(w) therefore follows
∇θ Ew∼p(w)[J(θ; T , w)] = Ew∼p(w)[g(θ; T , w)] .
(34)
Let gj := g(θ; T , w(j)) and gk := g(θ; T , w(k)).
By using the above information, we can formalise the
specialisation using Proposition 2.
Proposition 2 (gradient interference). If two preferences
w(j), w(k) ∈∆B−1 induce conflicting gradients:
g⊤
j gk < 0,
(35)
then gradient conflict implies cancellation in the combined
direction.
∥gj + gk∥2 = ∥gj∥2 + ∥gk∥2 + 2g⊤
j gk
< ∥gj∥2 + ∥gk∥2.
(36)
In contrast, a population {θi}P
i=1 can specialise updates by
assigning one preference vector wi to each meta-policy:
θi ←θi + β g(θi; T , wi),
i = 1, . . . , P.
(37)
Equivalently, since LT ,w(πθ) = −J(θ; T , w), this can be
written in the loss-minimisation form used earlier as
θi ←θi −β ∇θiLT ,wi(πθi).
(38)
Proof. See Appendix B-D.
This suggests that specialisation across preferences can
reduce cross-preference gradient cancellation and, together
with preference diversity, encourage the discovery of com-
plementary nondominated solutions that expand the PF set
and increase hypervolume. Although both Meta-MORL and
MERLION sample task variation during meta-training, the
key distinction is that Meta-MORL aggregates all preference-
conditioned
gradients
into
a
single
shared
meta-policy,
whereas MERLION assigns each preference vector wi to
its own meta-parameter θi. Hence, MERLION decentralises
optimisation across preferences, which can mitigate cross-
preference gradient interference even though each meta-policy
still learns over a batch of tasks.
C. Performance Measurements
Let H = {v(n)}NH
n=1 ⊂RB denote the finite nondominated
approximation set obtained on the target task, where each
v(n) is an expected discounted vector return as in Eq. (12),
B is the number of objectives, and all objectives are treated
in maximisation form. Let xref ∈RB denote a fixed refer-
ence point dominated by all attainable objective vectors. For
distance-based evaluation, let Y = {y(m)}NY
m=1 ⊂RB denote
the empirical reference PF, estimated by pooling all solutions
across runs and extracting the nondominated subset.
We assess each method using complementary indicators,
as no single metric fully captures both convergence and
diversity [50]–[52].


--- Page 10 ---
10
a) Hypervolume.: Hypervolume measures the Lebesgue
measure of the region dominated by H with respect to xref (see
Eq. (8)). A larger hypervolume indicates a better approxima-
tion in terms of both convergence and coverage [53], [54]. In
this study, we use a standardised hypervolume with reference
point xref = (0, 0, 0), which is valid since all objectives are
normalised to [0, 1] prior to evaluation, ensuring the reference
point is dominated by all attainable objective vectors.
b) Expected Utility Metric (EUM).: EUM evaluates pref-
erence coverage under linear scalarisation:
EUM(H) = Ew∼p(w)

max
v∈H w⊤v

,
(39)
where w ∈∆B−1 is a preference vector sampled from an
evaluation distribution p(w) over the (B −1)-simplex. Larger
EUM indicates that the approximation set better supports a
wide range of user preferences [55].
c) Sparsity.: Sparsity characterises the spacing between
neighbouring solutions along each objective:
S(H) =
1
NH −1
B
X
b=1
NH−1
X
i=1
 ˜vb,(i+1) −˜vb,(i)
2 ,
(40)
where ˜vb,(1) ≤· · · ≤˜vb,(NH) are the objective-b values of the
points in H after sorting in ascending order along objective b.
Smaller sparsity indicates a denser approximation set, whereas
excessively small values may also suggest concentration in a
narrow region of the front [56].
d) Average Hausdorff Distance (AHD).: AHD measures
the discrepancy between the approximation set H and the
reference front Y:
∆p(H, Y) = max
( 
1
NH
X
v∈H
d(v, Y)p
!1/p
,

1
NY
X
y∈Y
d(y, H)p


1/p)
.
(41)
where d(z, A) = mina∈A∥z −a∥2 and we use p = 2.
Lower AHD indicates a closer approximation to the reference
front [57]. Here, Y is constructed by pooling all solutions from
all methods and extracting the nondominated subset.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
This section evaluates the proposed algorithm against sev-
eral benchmark methods on three SC problems varying in
complexity [4] and various popular RL-based problems [9].
We conduct our experiments using Python 3.11.2 on Jupyter-
Lab with 128 GB RAM and a 16-core CPU. The SC exper-
iments are representative rather than exhaustive: the selected
simple, moderate, and complex instances are non-trivial and
capture increasing operational coupling, dimensionality, and
constraint complexity. We train our main experiment on SC
problems using three configurations that mimic the problems
our industrial partner typically encounters in real life, as shown
in Table I, using a customisable SC simulator [58].
TABLE I: SC environments used in our experiment, where
complexity levels are defined by the sizes of the action and
observation spaces and by the counts of nodes and edges.
Complexities
Action
Observation
Nodes
Edges
Simple
8
20
7
8
Moderate
21
49
13
21
Complex
59
131
24
59
A. Algorithm Settings
This section presents the experiment settings of our pro-
posed algorithm along with its benchmark methods. Each
instantiation runs across 10 seeds and obtains 10 PF approxi-
mation sets. Further detailed parameters and hyperparameters
used in these experiments are given in Appendix C.
1) Meta-training settings: We implement MAML [5] with
PPO [59] in Ray RLlib 2.3.1 [60], extending it to handle both
Meta-MORL and MERLION. For Meta-MORL, meta-training
runs for 106 environment steps on randomly generated SC
tasks. We use four inner steps for simple tasks and eight for
moderate or complex ones, trading off rapid adaptation against
task-specific learning. A meta-environment wrapper supports
dynamic task sampling to better mirror realistic task variation.
MERLION uses a comparable total step budget to Meta-
MORL, distributed across the P subproblems rather than mul-
tiplied by P. Preference weights w are drawn uniformly from
the 3D simplex via Dirichlet(1, 1, 1), and linear scalarisation is
adopted for its simplicity and smooth optimisation landscape
when training many subproblems in high-dimensional combi-
natorial domains. Training stability is enhanced through PPO
clipping, Kullback–Leibler regularisation, and generalised ad-
vantage estimation. Although maintaining P meta-policies
increases meta-training cost, the subproblems are independent
and can in principle be trained in parallel. Moreover, this
is a one-time offline investment: at deployment, MERLION
requires only 5,000–25,000 fine-tuning steps per subproblem
(∼3.3% of conventional training), amortising the upfront over-
head across repeated deployments on new SC configurations.
2) Fine-tuning settings: Fine-tuning uses the Messiah SC
simulator [4] for 5,000, 15,000, and 25,000 steps on simple,
moderate, and complex tasks, respectively, which is substan-
tially fewer than training-from-scratch RL baselines (typically
∼500,000 steps in our SC setup). Similar fine-tuning steps
are applied in the MERLION setup for each individual within
the population. The number of shots matches meta-training.
The observation and action spaces are normalised. We fine-
tune using PPO and apply non-dominated sorting [58]. To
reduce variance, we employ generalised advantage estimation
with advantage normalisation and adopt a standard multilayer
perceptron policy. We set local perturbation sizes M = [5, 2, 2]
for simple, moderate, and complex problems and a fixed
perturbation strength δpert = 0.05 across all settings.
3) MORL-based method settings: We adopt MORL/D [61]
as the representative conventional MORL approach because its
underlying mechanism closely matches that of our proposed
method, namely a population-based framework with problem
decomposition. The MORL/D implementation is equipped
with a reward normalisation wrapper so that all components


--- Page 11 ---
11
of the reward vector lie on a comparable scale. It is trained
under the scalarised expected returns objective [46], where
expected values are first estimated from multiple runs and sub-
sequently used to compute the utility. In this study, MORL/D
is instantiated with a multi-policy soft actor–critic [62], which
proceeds in two phases: it first employs MORL/D to learn a
collection of policies and then applies an evolutionary strategy
to further explore the solution space using these previously
learned policies as a starting point.
4) Population-based metaheuristic method settings: Com-
paring RL with optimisation-based methods requires careful
consideration because RL learns policies through sequen-
tial environment interactions, whereas population-based meta-
heuristics search directly in the decision space by improving
a set of candidate solutions. Nevertheless, this comparison is
useful for positioning RL methods against established multi-
objective SC optimisation approaches.
We use the NSGA-II implementation in Pymoo [63], and
MOEA/D and MOPSO from Pygmo [64]. Parameter settings
are selected to promote convergence and diversity within our
computational budget. For NSGA-II, mutation and crossover
distribution indices control the exploration–exploitation trade-
off, with smaller values encouraging broader search and larger
values favouring local refinement [8]. MOEA/D guides the
search through scalarised subproblems, whereas MOPSO up-
dates particles using individual and global best positions.
Empirical trials showed that population sizes greater than
300 repeatedly caused system-level memory failures. We
therefore set the population size to 300 for all population-
based metaheuristics, which is the largest feasible value under
our computational constraints.
5) Standard MORL benchmarks: To extend MERLION
performance outside of SC (see Section V-D), we adopt
several additional traditional RL methods as baselines. To
ensure a fair and rigorous comparison of sample efficiency, we
carefully control the environmental interaction budgets across
all algorithms. The conventional MORL baselines were trained
from scratch for a total of 3 × 106 timesteps per environment
to allow sufficient convergence. In contrast, the meta-learning
approaches (Meta-MORL and the proposed MERLION) un-
dergo a meta-training phase consisting of 3 × 106 cumula-
tive timesteps distributed across the diverse task distribution.
However, during the crucial adaptation phase on unseen tar-
get environments, both Meta-MORL and MERLION were
restricted to a fine-tuning budget of only 100, 000 timesteps
per scalarisation weight. This experimental design explicitly
highlights the core advantage of our approach: amortising the
high 3 × 106 computational cost during offline meta-training,
thereby enabling rapid, sample-efficient policy adaptation (re-
quiring only ∼3.3% of the conventional training budget) when
deployed in new scenarios.
B. Experiment Results
In this section, we compare MERLION against several
baseline algorithms, including Meta-MORL [42], which ex-
tends MAML-style [5] Meta-RL via a scalarisation approach;
MORL/D [61], which exemplifies MORL methods based on
decomposition; and NSGA-II [8], a widely used evolutionary
algorithm for combinatorial optimisation [19]. For additional
comparison, we also include MOEA/D [7] and MOPSO [22]
in our experiments.
We assess significance using a non-parametric pipeline:
the Kruskal–Wallis test identifies overall differences, followed
by Dunn’s test with Bonferroni correction for pairwise com-
parisons against MERLION. This controls the family-wise
error rate more conservatively than uncorrected tests. In all
result tables, markers denote a significant difference from
MERLION (p < 0.05).
1) Convergence analysis: Figure 3 illustrates the hyper-
volume achieved by MERLION and the baseline algorithms
over the course of fine-tuning. For simple and moderate SC
settings, our method attains the largest hypervolume within
5,000 and 15,000 fine-tuning steps, respectively, whereas
MORL/D requires 500,000 steps to reach its performance.
Furthermore, for the complex SC case with 25,000 steps, the
hypervolume obtained by our approach remains on par with
MORL/D, with no substantial difference. Across all levels of
problem complexity, our algorithm consistently outperforms
Meta-MORL and the metaheuristic approaches in terms of
hypervolume (see Table II).
2) Overall performance: Table II summarises the overall
performance across the three SC complexities. MERLION
achieves the best hypervolume in the simple and moderate SC
cases, while being competitive against MORL/D in complex
SC, and the best AHD in all cases. This indicates that MER-
LION generally provides strong PF approximation quality,
balancing dominated objective-space coverage with closeness
to the estimated reference PF. The difference between hyper-
volume and AHD also explains why some methods obtain
relatively high hypervolume but poor AHD such as shown
in MORL/D. Hypervolume rewards the volume dominated by
the obtained solutions with respect to a reference point, so a
method can score highly if it finds a few extreme or widely
spread solutions that dominate a large region. In contrast, AHD
measures the distance between the obtained approximation
set and the estimated reference PF, so it penalises solutions
that are far from the true trade-off surface even when their
dominated volume is large.
Sparsity further characterises the distribution of solutions.
MERLION produces relatively less concentrated fronts in the
simple and moderate complex cases, while in the complex
case, its sparsity becomes comparable to that of other methods,
reflecting the increased difficulty of maintaining a broad spread
under tighter operational constraints. EUM is reported only
for preference-conditioned meta-learning methods. MERLION
achieves the best EUM in simple SC, but Meta-MORL is
higher in moderate and complex SC, suggesting that MER-
LION prioritises PF approximation quality and diversity rather
than explicitly optimising uniform preference coverage.
For MOPSO, constraint violations occur across all SC set-
tings, but their effect differs by complexity. In the simple and
moderate cases, MOPSO can still identify feasible candidates,
whereas in the complex case, no feasible solutions are found,
leading to zero hypervolume and indicating that the swarm
search fails to locate operationally valid solutions under tightly


--- Page 12 ---
12
(a) Simple SC
(b) Moderate SC
(c) Complex SC
Fig. 3: Hypervolume convergence plots across SC environments. Our proposed algorithm consistently shows higher hypervolume
than Meta-MORL and NSGA-II at convergence in all problem complexities, while showing higher hypervolume than MORL/D
in simple and moderate SC.
TABLE II: Hypervolume (Hv), sparsity (Spar), Expected Utility Metric (EUM), and AHD summary across problem
complexities. MERLION consistently presents the best AHD values in all complexities, and the best hypervolume in simple
and moderate SC.
Problem
Algorithm
Hv Mean ↑
Hv Std
Spar Mean ≈
Spar Std
EUM Mean ↑
EUM Std
AHD Mean ↓
AHD Std
Simple
MOEA/D
0.2740 ▲
0.0115
0.0008 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.4673 ▼
0.0174
MOPSO*
0.2071 ▲
0.0228
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.4501 ▼
0.0190
NSGA-II
0.2682 ▲
0.0376
0.0022 ◦
0.0010
-
-
0.5976 ▼
0.0145
MORL/D
0.4126 ◦
0.0185
0.0245 ◦
0.0142
-
-
0.5813 ▼
0.0177
Meta-MORL
0.4333 ◦
0.0170
0.0056 ◦
0.0011
0.7075 ▲
0.0070
0.2237 ◦
0.0418
MERLION (ours)
0.5356
0.0179
0.0607
0.0504
0.7229
0.0808
0.1008
0.0043
Moderate
MOEA/D
0.3046 ▲
0.0172
0.0012 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.3648 ▼
0.0209
MOPSO*
0.0592 ▲
0.0067
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.7033 ▼
0.0172
NSGA-II
0.2115 ▲
0.0374
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.6500 ▼
0.0372
MORL/D
0.6849 ◦
0.0193
0.0082 ◦
0.0047
-
-
0.8527 ▼
0.0157
Meta-MORL
0.6737 ◦
0.0190
0.0015 ▲
0.0006
0.8308 ▼
0.0073
0.3092 ◦
0.0378
MERLION (ours)
0.7402
0.0353
0.0178
0.0075
0.7778
0.0309
0.0779
0.0115
Complex
MOEA/D
0.0516 ▲
0.0202
0.0025 ◦
0.0004
-
-
0.7243 ▼
0.0250
MOPSO*
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.7991 ▼
0.0192
NSGA-II
0.0384 ▲
0.0096
0.0000 ▲
0.0000
-
-
0.4623 ◦
0.0147
MORL/D
0.3619 ◦
0.0274
0.0322 ◦
0.0121
-
-
0.5879 ▼
0.0614
Meta-MORL
0.2658 ◦
0.0099
0.0022 ◦
0.0006
0.6127 ▼
0.0030
0.2894 ◦
0.0541
MERLION (ours)
0.3513
0.0334
0.0100
0.0065
0.6091
0.0552
0.1779
0.0061
Note: ↑and ↓indicate metrics to be maximised or minimised, respectively. For sparsity (≈), balanced values are preferred; too high implies poor coverage,
while too low indicates excessive concentration of solutions. ▲, ▼, or ◦signifies that ours is significantly higher, significantly lower (p < 0.05), or not
significantly different from the appointed value, respectively.
*Constraint violations occur in all MOPSO runs, but only the complex case results in zero feasible solutions.
coupled SC constraints.
3) PF approximation: We compare the solution sets of
the PF approximations produced by representative algorithms
using the run that achieves the highest hypervolume. Figure 4
illustrates the solution spread obtained by each algorithm,
consistent with Table II, where our proposed algorithm shows
the highest hypervolume in simple and moderate complex SC
settings, indicating more diverse and closer-to-optimal solu-
tions. Moreover, the AHD values of our proposed algorithm
consistently show the least, indicating that the resulting PF
approximation sets are the closest to the true PF values.
We highlight that the PF approximation set produced by
MERLION exhibits diversity comparable to that of MORL/D,
a traditional MORL method, while requiring substantially
fewer time steps (5,000–25,000 for MERLION versus 500,000
for MORL/D). Furthermore, the integration of evolutionary
mechanisms is proven to be effective in significantly spreading
out solution sets. This is signified when comparing the sets
with Meta-MORL, which uses similar fine-tuning time steps.
Meanwhile, the traditional evolutionary method alone (i.e.,


--- Page 13 ---
13
(a) Simple SC
(b) Moderate SC
(c) Complex SC
Fig. 4: PF plots for the SC problems. Overall, the solution set generated by our proposed algorithm exhibits the highest diversity
in simple and moderate SC instances,while comparable with MORL/D in complex SC.
TABLE III: Hypervolume (Hv), sparsity (Spar), Expected Utility Metric (EUM) across parameters. Defaut setting follows
simple SC configuration, i.e., P=10, ηcross = 0.6, M=4, except for time steps.
Parameters
Settings
Hv Mean ↑
Hv Std
Spar Mean ≈
Spar Std
EUM Mean ↑
EUM Std
AHD mean ↓
AHD Std
All
default
0.5356
0.0179
0.0607
0.0504
0.7229
0.0808
0.1008
0.0043
P
5
0.5166 ◦
0.0225
0.0810 ◦
0.0880
0.6528 ◦
0.0460
0.0972 ◦
0.0284
15
0.5446 ◦
0.0155
0.0484 ◦
0.0454
0.6470 ◦
0.2518
0.0789 ▲
0.0082
ηcross
0.3
0.5290 ◦
0.0156
0.0459 ◦
0.0648
0.7445 ◦
0.0982
0.0937 ◦
0.0284
0.9
0.5426 ◦
0.0146
0.0256 ◦
0.0272
0.8348 ◦
0.0827
0.0911 ◦
0.0119
M
0
0.4625 ◦
0.0122
0.0543 ◦
0.0547
0.7164 ◦
0.0801
0.1238 ◦
0.0189
2
0.5221 ◦
0.0211
0.0756 ◦
0.0635
0.7172 ◦
0.0852
0.0981 ◦
0.0104
Time steps*
20,000
0.2907 ▲
0.0334
0.0112 ◦
0.0102
0.6096 ◦
0.1722
0.2144 ◦
0.0109
25,000
0.3513
0.0101
0.0101
0.0066
0.6091
0.0552
0.1779
0.0061
Note: Symbols follow Table II.
* Time-step ablation is evaluated using the complex SC setup with 25,000 being the default time steps.
represented by NSGA-II) is rather ineffective in exploring the
objective space, especially when the solution dimension grows
significantly, as in complex SC.
Our experiment signifies that the evolutionary mechanism
applied in the population of meta-policies can address the
typical problem arising from few-shot and limited fine-tuning
time steps when applying meta-learning-based methods, while
still benefiting from amortised meta-training cost since we do
not need to repeat meta-training for new, unseen tasks. Instead,
we only require fine-tuning for a substantially smaller number
of time steps than traditional methods.
Meta-MORL and metaheuristic methods generally yield
more clustered solutions in higher-dimensional search spaces,
largely due to insufficient learning when trading off explo-
ration and exploitation. In MERLION, this issue can be
alleviated by increasing the population size of meta-policies
and/or extending the fine-tuning horizon, at the expense of
additional computational resources.
4) Operational analysis: We examine representative solu-
tions with the most balanced final weights across multiple runs
for each SC setting. As problem complexity increases, the
learned policies shift from more reactive production and inven-
tory dynamics toward steadier production and more concen-
trated stockholding at selected facilities. Demand loss remains
broadly controlled, but becomes less uniformly distributed in
the more complex settings. More details and operational plots
are provided in the Appendix G.
C. Ablation Study
We run an ablation study on the simple SC benchmark
to assess MERLION’s sensitivity to three hyperparameters:
population size P, crossover probability ηcross, and local per-
turbation size M (defaults: P=10, ηcross=0.6, M=4). Table III
summarises the resulting changes in optimality and diversity.
Varying P has the clearest effect. A smaller population
(P=5) lowers hypervolume and EUM, and yields a sparser
approximation set, indicating weaker coverage. Increasing to
P=15 gives the strongest PF approximation, with the highest
hypervolume, much lower AHD (closer to the true PF), and
denser solutions (lower sparsity). However, EUM drops for
both P=5 and P=15 relative to the default, implying that
larger P favours broader PF coverage over maximising ex-
pected utility under the sampled preferences. The only clearly


--- Page 14 ---
14
TABLE IV: Normalised Hypervolume (HV) and Sparsity (Spar) of Merlion vs Traditional and Meta RL
Algorithm
mo-halfcheetah-v4
deep-sea-treasure-v0
resource-gathering-v0
mo-hopper-v4
mo-reacher-v4
Average
Rank
HV
Spar
HV
Spar
HV
Spar
HV
Spar
HV
Spar
HV
PCN
0.0185 ▲
0.0000 ▲
-
-
-
-
0.0024 ▲
0.0020 ▲
0.0244 ▲
0.0168 ▲
0.0151
7
CAPQL
0.1981 ◦
0.0001 ▲
-
-
-
-
0.0069 ▲
0.0003 ▲
0.0004
-
0.1025
5
PGMORL
0.0375 ▲
0.0002 ▲
-
-
-
-
0.0058 ▲
0.0037 ▲
-
-
0.0217
6
MPMOQL
-
-
0.4507 ◦
0.0702 ◦
0.1421 ▲
0.3272 ◦
-
-
-
-
0.2964
3
MORL/D
0.2240 ◦
0.0004 ◦
0.3033 ▲
0.0086 ◦
0.0984 ▲
0.0233 ▲
0.0138 ◦
0.0010 ▲
0.0685 ◦
0.0391 ▲
0.1416
4
Meta-
MORL
0.7432 ◦
0.0201 ◦
0.2900 ▲
0.0000 ▲
0.4000 ▲
0.3275 ▲
0.0520 ◦
0.0073 ◦
0.1513 ◦
0.1883 ◦
0.3273
2
MERLION
(ours)
0.4181
0.0405
0.5416
0.0185
1.0000
0.0000
0.5888
0.1158
0.1295
0.1713
0.5356
1
Note: Symbols follow Table II.
significant change across settings is the AHD reduction at
P=15.
Varying ηcross shows consistent but modest effects. Higher
crossover probability generally increases EUM, slightly im-
proves hypervolume and AHD, and yields denser solution sets,
reflecting more effective recombination of behavioural traits
across meta-policies. Lower ηcross produces weaker gains, with
slightly reduced hypervolume and higher AHD.
Local perturbations are crucial for exploration. Disabling
them (M=0) yields the lowest hypervolume and worst AHD,
indicating premature convergence and poor Pareto coverage.
A moderate rate (M=2) partly restores performance and
produces a sparser set than M=0, but still underperforms
the default, suggesting stronger perturbations better preserve
diversity. Except for the significant AHD gain at P=15, most
configuration differences are small (often within one standard
deviation and not significant), showing MERLION is fairly
robust to these hyperparameters on the simple SC benchmark.
Moreover, we investigate how adding more time steps
during fine-tuning affects performance when using complex
SC. The results show that including an additional 5,000 time
steps can increase the hypervolume by up to approximately
20%, while having little impact on the other metrics.
D. Cross-Domain Experiments
Table IV summarises MERLION’s performance beyond the
supply-chain domain. Across the toy MORL benchmarks,
MERLION achieves the highest average normalised hyper-
volume and the best overall rank, with statistically significant
gains on deep-sea-treasure-v0, resource-gathering-v0, and mo-
hopper-v4. Although Meta-MORL attains the highest mean
hypervolume on mo-halfcheetah-v4, the difference is not sig-
nificant due to its higher variance, and the two meta-learning
methods are also statistically comparable on mo-reacher-v4.
In terms of sparsity, MERLION generally maintains a moder-
ate and well-dispersed approximation set, suggesting that its
strong hypervolume does not arise from collapsing solutions
into a narrow region of the PF. Overall, these results suggest
that the benefits of MERLION’s are not limited to SC and can
extend to a wider range of MORL domains.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
MERLION is a population-based Meta-MORL framework
that combines gradient-based meta-learning with evolutionary
search in the scalarisation weight space. Across SC problems
of varying complexity, it consistently achieves the lowest
AHD and the highest hypervolume in Simple and Moderate
SC. In Complex SC, MERLION remains competitive with
MORL/D under a 25× smaller fine-tuning budget, while still
outperforming Meta-MORL under a comparable meta-learning
adaptation budget. MERLION improves hypervolume by up to
32% over Meta-MORL, indicating that maintaining multiple
meta-policies alleviates the limited exploration of few-shot
adaptation from a single shared meta-policy.
The PF approximations further show well-distributed solu-
tion sets, particularly in Simple and Moderate SC, in line with
the hypervolume and sparsity results. Overall, MERLION is
comparable to MORL/D and outperforms Meta-MORL and
metaheuristic baselines. Operational analysis showed more sta-
ble manufacturing and inventory trajectories as SC complexity
increased, although stockpiling became more concentrated
at several facilities. Nevertheless, demand loss remains low
across markets.
MERLION also performed well on popular RL problems,
attaining the highest average normalised hypervolume and the
best overall ranking against Meta-MORL and several con-
ventional MORL baselines, despite using substantially fewer
adaptation timesteps. This highlights its ability to convert of-
fline meta-training into rapid and sample-efficient adaptation.
Future work includes improving coverage in more complex
decision spaces, incorporating preference-aware evolutionary
objectives to enhance EUM, and extending MERLION to
larger and more realistic SC settings with richer operational
constraints.
REFERENCES
[1] C. P. Jayarathna, D. Agdas, L. Dawes, and T. Yigitcanlar, “Multi-
Objective Optimization for Sustainable Supply Chain and Logistics: A
Review,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 24, p. 13617, Dec. 2021.
[2] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction,
1st ed.
Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2015.
[3] I. E. Shar, H. Wang, and C. Gupta, “Multi-Objective Reinforcement
Learning for Sustainable Supply Chain Optimization,” in 2023 IEEE
19th International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE).
Auckland, New Zealand: IEEE, Aug. 2023, pp. 1–7.
[4] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, P. Shukla, and W. Pan,
“Reinforcement
learning
for
multi-objective
multi-echelon
supply
chain optimisation,” European Journal of Operational Research, p.
S0377221726001177, Feb. 2026.
[5] C. Finn, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Model-Agnostic Meta-Learning for
Fast Adaptation of Deep Networks,” 2017.


--- Page 15 ---
15
[6] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, W. Pan, P. Shukla, and
B. I. Nasution, “MIRACL: A Diverse Meta-Reinforcement Learning for
Multi-Objective Multi-Echelon Combinatorial Supply Chain Optimisa-
tion,” 2026.
[7] Q. Zhang and H. Li, “MOEA/D: A Multiobjective Evolutionary Algo-
rithm Based on Decomposition,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 712–731, Dec. 2007.
[8] K. Deb, A. Pratap, S. Agarwal, and T. Meyarivan, “A fast and elitist
multiobjective genetic algorithm: NSGA-II,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 182–197, Apr. 2002.
[9] F. Felten, L. N. Alegre, A. Now´e, A. L. C. Bazzan, E. G. Talbi, G. Danoy,
and B. C. da Silva, “A toolkit for reliable benchmarking and research
in multi-objective reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the 37th
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023),
2023.
[10] T. G. Smolinski, “Multi-objective Evolutionary Algorithms,” in Ency-
clopedia of Computational Neuroscience, D. Jaeger and R. Jung, Eds.
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2014, pp. 1–4.
[11] K. Deb, Multi-Objective Optimization Using Evolutionary Algorithms,
1st ed., ser. Wiley-Interscience Series in Systems and Optimization.
Chichester ; New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[12] S.
Faramarzi-Oghani,
P.
Dolati
Neghabadi,
E.-G.
Talbi,
and
R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, “Meta-heuristics for sustainable supply
chain management: A review,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 1979–2009, Mar. 2023.
[13] P. K. Detwal, R. Agrawal, A. Samadhiya, and A. Kumar, “Metaheuristics
in circular supply chain intelligent systems: A review of applications
journey and forging a path to the future,” Engineering Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 126, p. 107102, 2023.
[14] C. M. Fonseca, P. J. Fleming et al., “Genetic algorithms for multiob-
jective optimization: Formulationdiscussion and generalization.” in Icga,
vol. 93.
Citeseer, 1993, pp. 416–423.
[15] M. De, B. Das, and M. Maiti, “Green logistics under imperfect pro-
duction system: A Rough age based Multi-Objective Genetic Algorithm
approach,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 119, pp. 100–113,
May 2018.
[16] W.-C. Yeh and M.-C. Chuang, “Using multi-objective genetic algorithm
for partner selection in green supply chain problems,” Expert Systems
with Applications, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 4244–4253, Apr. 2011.
[17] R. Ehtesham Rasi and M. Sohanian, “A multi-objective optimization
model for sustainable supply chain network with using genetic algo-
rithm,” Journal of Modelling in Management, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 714–
727, 2021.
[18] M. Kadzi´nski, T. Tervonen, M. K. Tomczyk, and R. Dekker, “Evaluation
of multi-objective optimization approaches for solving green supply
chain design problems,” Omega, vol. 68, pp. 168–184, Apr. 2017.
[19] Y. Wang, Q. Shi, Q. Hu, Z. You, Y. Bai, and C. Guo, “An efficiency
sorting multi-objective optimization framework for sustainable supply
network optimization and decision making,” Journal of Cleaner Pro-
duction, vol. 272, p. 122842, Nov. 2020.
[20] E. Zitzler, M. Laumanns, and L. Thiele, “SPEA2: Improving the strength
pareto evolutionary algorithm,” ETH Zurich, Tech. Rep., May 2001.
[21] A. Azadeh, F. Shafiee, R. Yazdanparast, J. Heydari, and A. M. Fathabad,
“Evolutionary multi-objective optimization of environmental indicators
of integrated crude oil supply chain under uncertainty,” Journal of
Cleaner Production, vol. 152, pp. 295–311, May 2017.
[22] C. Coello, G. Pulido, and M. Lechuga, “Handling multiple objectives
with particle swarm optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 256–279, Jun. 2004.
[23] A. Jahed, S. M. Hadji Molana, and R. Tavakkoli-Moghaddam, “A sus-
tainable vaccine supply-production-distribution network with heterolo-
gous and homologous vaccination strategies: Bi-objective optimization,”
Socio-Economic Planning Sciences, vol. 98, p. 102113, Apr. 2025.
[24] S. Mirjalili, S. Saremi, S. M. Mirjalili, and L. d. S. Coelho, “Multi-
objective grey wolf optimizer: A novel algorithm for multi-criterion
optimization,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 47, pp. 106–119,
2016.
[25] A. Ala, A. Goli, S. Mirjalili, and V. Simic, “A fuzzy multi-objective
optimization model for sustainable healthcare supply chain network
design,” Applied Soft Computing, vol. 150, p. 111012, 2024.
[26] K. Deb and H. Jain, “An evolutionary many-objective optimization
algorithm using reference-point-based nondominated sorting approach,
part I: Solving problems with box constraints,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 577–601, 2014.
[27] G. Wang, “Green supply chain management and coordinated optimiza-
tion by an improved sparrow search algorithm,” Scientific Reports,
vol. 15, no. 1, p. 36730, Oct. 2025.
[28] T. Halder and B. K. Debnath, “Multi-objective closed-loop supply chain
inventory model with learning and forgetting under carbon emission
policies using NSGA-II, MOPSO, and TOPSIS,” Applied Soft Comput-
ing, vol. 180, p. 113291, 2025.
[29] Y. Lin, F. Lin, G. Cai, H. Chen, L. Zou, Y. Liu, and P. Wu, “Evolutionary
Reinforcement Learning: A Systematic Review and Future Directions,”
Mathematics, vol. 13, no. 5, p. 833, Mar. 2025.
[30] J. Shianifar, M. Schukat, and K. Mason, “MO-CoERL: Multi-objective
cooperative evolutionary deep reinforcement learning,” Information Sci-
ences, vol. 748, p. 123517, 2026.
[31] P. Yang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, and G. Li, “Reducing idleness in financial
cloud services via multi-objective evolutionary reinforcement learning
based load balancer,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 67, no. 2,
p. 120102, Feb. 2024.
[32] X. Yu, Z. Hu, W. Luo, and Y. Xue, “Reinforcement learning-based
multi-objective differential evolution algorithm for feature selection,”
Information Sciences, vol. 661, p. 120185, Mar. 2024.
[33] R. Shen, Y. Zheng, J. Hao, Z. Meng, Y. Chen, C. Fan, and Y. Liu,
“Generating behavior-diverse game ais with evolutionary multi-objective
deep reinforcement learning.” in IJCAI, 2020, pp. 3371–3377.
[34] E. Marchesini, D. Corsi, and A. Farinelli, “Exploring Safer Behaviors
for Deep Reinforcement Learning,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 7701–7709, Jun. 2022.
[35] Y. Qiu, N. Kotecha, and A. Del Rio Chanona, “Leveraging reinforcement
learning and evolutionary strategies for dynamic multi objective decision
making in supply chain management,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 58,
no. 14, pp. 598–603, 2024.
[36] P. Garcia and O. Pierrard, “Modeling the Evolution of Carbon Intensity:
Linking the Solow Model to the Transport Equation,” Environmental
and Resource Economics, vol. 88, no. 12, pp. 3473–3511, Dec. 2025.
[37] J. Schmidthuber, “Evolutionary principles in self-referential learning,”
Ph.D. dissertation, 1987.
[38] S. Thrun and L. Pratt, “Learning to Learn: Introduction and Overview,”
in Learning to Learn, S. Thrun and L. Pratt, Eds. Boston, MA: Springer
US, 1998, pp. 3–17.
[39] H. Altae-Tran, B. Ramsundar, A. S. Pappu, and V. Pande, “Low data
drug discovery with one-shot learning,” ACS central science, vol. 3,
no. 4, pp. 283–293, 2017.
[40] A. Ignatov, R. Timofte, A. Kulik, S. Yang, K. Wang, F. Baum, M. Wu,
L. Xu, and L. Van Gool, “AI Benchmark: All About Deep Learning on
Smartphones in 2019,” 2019.
[41] Y. Duan, J. Schulman, X. Chen, P. L. Bartlett, I. Sutskever, and
P. Abbeel, “RL$ˆ2$: Fast Reinforcement Learning via Slow Reinforce-
ment Learning,” 2016.
[42] X. Chen, A. Ghadirzadeh, M. Bjorkman, and P. Jensfelt, “Meta-Learning
for Multi-objective Reinforcement Learning,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). Macau,
China: IEEE, Nov. 2019, pp. 977–983.
[43] F.-Y. Liu and C. Qian, “Prediction Guided Meta-Learning for Multi-
Objective Reinforcement Learning,” in 2021 IEEE Congress on Evolu-
tionary Computation (CEC).
Krak´ow, Poland: IEEE, Jun. 2021, pp.
2171–2178.
[44] J. Lu, P. Mannion, and K. Mason, “A Meta-Learning Approach for
Multi-Objective Reinforcement Learning in Sustainable Home Environ-
ments,” 2024.
[45] A. A. Al-Habob, H. Tabassum, and O. Waqar, “Non-orthogonal age-
optimal information dissemination in vehicular networks: A meta multi-
objective reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Transactions on Mo-
bile Computing, vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 9789–9803, 2024.
[46] C. F. Hayes, R. R˘adulescu, E. Bargiacchi, J. K¨allstr¨om, M. Macfarlane,
M. Reymond, T. Verstraeten, L. M. Zintgraf, R. Dazeley, F. Heintz,
E. Howley, A. A. Irissappane, P. Mannion, A. Now´e, G. Ramos,
M. Restelli, P. Vamplew, and D. M. Roijers, “A practical guide to multi-
objective reinforcement learning and planning,” Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems, vol. 36, no. 1, p. 26, Apr. 2022.
[47] T. Hanne and M. J. Moghaddam, “A review of the evolution of multi-
objective evolutionary algorithms,” Computers, Materials and Continua,
vol. 85, no. 3, pp. 4203–4236, 2025.
[48] T. Ulrich and L. Thiele, “Bounding the Effectiveness of Hypervolume-
Based (µ + λ)-Archiving Algorithms,” in Learning and Intelligent
Optimization, Y. Hamadi and M. Schoenauer, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 7219, pp. 235–249.
[49] A. P. Guerreiro, C. M. Fonseca, and L. Paquete, “The Hypervolume
Indicator: Computational Problems and Algorithms,” ACM Computing
Surveys, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1–42, Jul. 2022.
[50] J. Knowles, Local-Search and Hybrid Evolutionary Algorithms for
Pareto Optimization.
University of Reading, 2002.


--- Page 16 ---
16
[51] E. Zitzler, L. Thiele, M. Laumanns, C. Fonseca, and V. Da Fonseca,
“Performance assessment of multiobjective optimizers: An analysis and
review,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 7, no. 2,
pp. 117–132, Apr. 2003.
[52] J. Branke, Multiobjective Optimization: Interactive and Evolutionary
Approaches, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag, 2008, no. 5252.
[53] E. Zitzler and L. Thiele, “Multiobjective optimization using evolutionary
algorithms — A comparative case study,” in Parallel Problem Solving
from Nature — PPSN V, G. Goos, J. Hartmanis, J. Van Leeuwen, A. E.
Eiben, T. B¨ack, M. Schoenauer, and H.-P. Schwefel, Eds.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, vol. 1498, pp. 292–301.
[54] S. ¯Obayashi, Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization: 4th Interna-
tional Conference, EMO 2007, Matsushima, Japan, March 5-8, 2007
Proceedings, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
Berlin New
York: Springer, 2007, no. 4403.
[55] L. M. Zintgraf, T. V. Kanters, D. M. Roijers, F. A. Oliehoek, and P. Beau,
“Quality Assessment of MORL Algorithms: A Utility-Based Approach,”
in Proceedings of the 24th Annual Machine Learning Conference of
Belgium and the Netherlands, 2015.
[56] J. Xu, Y. Tian, P. Ma, D. Rus, S. Sueda, and W. Matusik, “Prediction-
guided multi-objective reinforcement learning for continuous robot con-
trol,” in Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, H. D. III and
A. Singh, Eds., vol. 119.
PMLR, Jul. 2020, pp. 10 607–10 616.
[57] O. Schutze, X. Esquivel, A. Lara, and C. A. C. Coello, “Using the
Averaged Hausdorff Distance as a Performance Measure in Evolution-
ary Multiobjective Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 504–522, Aug. 2012.
[58] R. Rachman, J. Tingey, R. Allmendinger, P. Shukla, and W. Pan,
“Multi-objective Sequential Decision Making for Holistic Supply Chain
Optimization,” in Evolutionary Multi-Criterion Optimization, H. Singh,
T. Ray, J. Knowles, X. Li, J. Branke, B. Wang, and A. Oyama, Eds.
Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2025, vol. 15512, pp. 259–274.
[59] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms,” 2017.
[60] E. Liang, R. Liaw, P. Moritz, R. Nishihara, R. Fox, K. Goldberg,
J. E. Gonzalez, M. I. Jordan, and I. Stoica, “RLlib: Abstractions for
Distributed Reinforcement Learning,” 2017.
[61] F. Felten, E.-G. Talbi, and G. Danoy, “Multi-Objective Reinforcement
Learning Based on Decomposition: A Taxonomy and Framework,” 2023.
[62] D. Chen, Y. Wang, and W. Gao, “Combining a gradient-based method
and an evolution strategy for multi-objective reinforcement learning,”
Applied Intelligence, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 3301–3317, Oct. 2020.
[63] J. Blank and K. Deb, “Pymoo: Multi-Objective Optimization in Python,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 89 497–89 509, 2020.
[64] F. Biscani and D. Izzo, “A parallel global multiobjective framework for
optimization: pagmo,” Journal of Open Source Software, vol. 5, no. 53,
p. 2338, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02338


--- Page 17 ---
17
APPENDIX A
PROBLEM DEFINITION: MOMDP-BASED FORMULATION
Table V introduces the specific notation employed in the
SC modelling, whereas Table VI lists the nodes contained in
each set as well as the sets that belong to each set family.
TABLE V: Sets, parameters, and variables in the supply chain model.
Nodes u, v, and w (u < v < w) denote facilities, while t, ς, ψ, and τ denote
the time period, inventory, production, and transportation, respectively.
Notations
Definition
Sets
Ns
suppliers
Nm
manufacturers
Nwω
mid-level warehouses that deliver to lower-level warehouses
Nd
distribution centres that deliver to retailers*
Nr
retailers
Nz
markets
Family of sets
NF rom
origin nodes (|NF rom| = n1)
NT o
destination nodes (|NT o| = n2)
NInv
inventory-holding non-production nodes (|NInv| = n3)
NInvf
upstream inventory-shipping nodes (|NInvf| = n4)
NInvt
downstream inventory-receiving nodes (|NInvt| = n5)
Parameters
T
Total period horizon
Profit
Total profit of all periods
E
Total emission of all periods
F
Total SL inequality measure of all periods
SLy
SL at node y of all periods
Revt
Revenue at period t
PCt
Production cost at period t
TCt
Transport cost at period t
ICt
Inventory cost at period t
L
Transport lead time
Itv
Inventory unit at period t, node v
cς
v
Inventory cost per unit at node v
eς
v
Emission per unit resulted from inventory at node v
cψ
v
Manufacturing cost per unit at node v
eψ
w
Emission per unit resulted from the manufacturing process at
node w
cτ
uv
Transport cost per unit per day from node u to v
eτ
uv
Emission per unit per day resulted from product transport
from node u to v
Qtv
The outstanding order at node v
CEt
The accumulated emission at period t
AFt
The average service level inequality in period t
dtv
Demand at period t, retailer v
Cap
Transport capacity
pricev
Product selling price at retailer v
M
Very large number (big-M)
Variables
qτ
tuv
Transport quantity at period t, from node u to v
qψ
tw
Manufacturing quantity at period t, at manufacturer w
* Optional nodes in the SC. Mid-level warehouses, which may span multiple
echelons, exist only if distribution centres (i.e., the lowest-level ware-
houses) are present. Without warehouses, manufacturers act as distribution
centres.
TABLE VI: Sets and family of sets used in the formulation to distinguish
between SC network problems. The following table lists the nodes covered
in the sets and the sets covered in the family of sets in the three scenarios.
Notation
Simple SC
Moderate SC
Complex SC
Sets
Ns
1
1, 2
1, 2, 3
Nm
2, 3
3, 4, 5
4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Nw1
NA
6, 7
9, 10, 11
Nd
NA
NA
12, 13, 14
Nr
4, 5
8, 9, 10
15, 16, 17, 18, 19
Nz
6, 7
11, 12, 13
20, 21, 22, 23, 24
Family of sets
NF rom
Ns, Nm
Ns, Nm, Nw
Ns, Nm, Nw, Nd
NT o
Nm, Nr
Nm, Nw, Nr
Nm, Nw, NdNr
NInv
Nr
Nw, Nr
Nw, Nd, Nr
NInvf
Nm
Nm, Nw
Nm, Nw, Nd
NInvt
Nr, Nz
Nw, Nr, Nz
Nw, Nd, Nr, Nz
For the completeness of this study, we restate the SC formu-
lations that we adopt. Multi-echelon SC problems that involve
several facilities and markets, along with non-stationary de-
mand, are modelled using the MOMDP framework.
A. State Transition Functions
These expressions describe the evolution of the system from
its state in period (t −1) to its subsequent state in period
t. The corresponding state transition relations are specified
in Equations (42) through (46). In particular, Equation (42)
imposes that the entire quantity of raw materials supplied is
fully converted into finished products, as detailed below:
qψ
tv =
X
u∈N s
qτ
(t−L)uv
∀t, ∀v ∈N m.
(42)
Equation (43) calculates the inventory levels considering the
remainder of previous periods, additional goods (i.e., inflow),
and goods shipped (i.e., outflow):
Itv = I(t−1)v + inflowtv −outflowtv,
∀t, ∀v ∈N Inv ∪N m
where
inflowtv =



qψ
tv
if v ∈N m
P
u∈N Invf qτ
(t−L)uv
if v ∈N Inv
and
outflowtv =
(P
w∈N Inv
1
qv
t wτ
if v ∈N m
P
w∈N Invt
{2,...,n5} qτ
tvw
if v ∈N Inv.
(43)
Equation (44) defines, for each node, the overall ordering
quantity, represented as the aggregate of all incoming deliver-
ies:
Qtv =

qτ
(t−L+1)uv, . . . , qτ
tuv,
∀u ∈N F rom, ∀v ∈N T o	
.
(44)
Equation (45) specifies the computation of the daily cumula-
tive emissions, given by:
CEt = CE(t−1) + Et.
(45)
Equation (46) computes the daily average SL inequality:
AFt = (AFt−1 · (t −1) + Ft)
t
.
(46)


--- Page 18 ---
18
In our SC problem, we assume that state transitions are
deterministic, meaning that no intrinsic randomness is involved
(for instance, from lead time variability or defective product
disposal), which would otherwise introduce uncertainty into
the state transition, particularly in computing inventory for the
next period.
B. State Space (S)
The system state captures how agents perceive the learned
environment. Our SC model’s state variables include inventory
levels for raw materials and finished products, outstanding
orders across all routes within a given lead time, cumulative
emissions, and the average service level inequality, subject to
0 ≤I(t−1)j. The state in period t is defined as follows:
St = {I(t−1)v, Q(t−1)v, CEt−1, AFt−1,
∀v ∈N T o}.
(47)
C. Action Space (A)
In our SC setting, the action encompasses the production
quantities of all manufacturers as well as the shipment quan-
tities across all routes. The actions in period t are defined as:
At ={qτ
tuv, qψ
tw,
0 ≤qτ
tuv ≤Cap,
0 ≤qψ
tw,
∀u ∈N F rom, j ∈N T o, k ∈N m}.
(48)
D. Rewards (R)
This problem incorporates three objectives: maximising
profit, minimising GHG emissions, and minimising SL in-
equality, which together form a three-dimensional reward
vector. The MORL agents are designed to maximise the
expected cumulative rewards. Since the second and third
objectives should be penalised, they are assigned negative
reward values. Accordingly, the reward vector is defined as
Rt = {Proft, −Et, −Ft} · ρt, where ρ denotes the penalty
term that prevents the inventory level from dropping below
zero, as specified in Equation (49):
ρt =
X
v∈N T o
min(Itv, 0) · M.
(49)
In RL, the reward values are derived from objective functions
at each period as given in Equations (50),
(51), and
(52)
below:
Profitt =
X
u∈N d
X
v∈N r
qτ
(t−L)uv · pricev
|
{z
}
Revenue from delivered products
−
X
w∈N m
 
qψ
tw · cψ
w
vψ
w
!
|
{z
}
Manufacturing cost
−
X
u∈N F rom
X
v∈N T o
qτ
tuv · cτ
uv · L
|
{z
}
Transport cost over lead time
−
X
v∈N T o
Itv · cς
v
|
{z
}
Inventory holding cost
(50)
Et =
X
v∈N T o
Itv · eς
v
|
{z
}
Inventory-related emissions
+
X
w∈N m
qψ
tw · eψ
w
|
{z
}
Manufacturing emissions
+
X
u∈N F rom
X
v∈N T o
qτ
uv · eτ
uv · L
|
{z
}
Transport emissions over lead time
(51)
Ft = 1
2
X
v∈N r
X
v′∈Nr
v′̸=v
|SLtv −SLtv′| ,
where:
SLtj = min
 P
i∈N d qτ
(t−L)ij
dtj
, 1
!
,
∀j ∈N r,
(52)
where dtv denotes the corresponding demand for retailer v.
Formulating a model within the MDP framework can be more
involved than constructing an optimisation model, because
each paradigm introduces its own specific components and
notation. While most optimisation-based and MDP-based for-
mulations are theoretically equivalent, they do not necessarily
coincide in their mathematical expression. In particular, MDP
formulations frequently express the governing relations in a
sequential manner.


--- Page 19 ---
19
APPENDIX B
PROOFS
A. Proof of Lemma 1
Proof of Lemma 1: hypervolume monotonicity. By definition,
HV (S; xref) = λ(D(S)), where λ(·) denotes the Lebesgue
measure and D(S) is the region dominated by S with respect
to xref. Since K ⊆H, every point dominated by K is also
dominated by H. Hence,
D(K) ⊆D(H).
(53)
By monotonicity of Lebesgue measure, this implies
λ(D(K)) ≤λ(D(H)).
(54)
Therefore,
HV (K; xref) ≤HV (H; xref).
(55)
B. Proof of Lemma 2
Proof of Lemma 2: Strict hypervolume gain. The equality
HV (H ∪{x}; xref) = HV (H; xref) + ∆HV (x | H)
(56)
follows directly from the definition of hypervolume contribu-
tion. It remains to show that ∆HV (x | H) > 0.
Since x /∈Dom(H), no point in H dominates x. Since x is
also strictly better than the reference point in every objective,
the box bounded by xref and x has strictly positive volume.
Moreover, because x is not dominated by any point in H, there
exists a nonzero subregion of this box that is dominated by x
but not by any point in H. Hence, the exclusive hypervolume
contribution of x is strictly positive, i.e.,
∆HV (x | H) > 0.
(57)
Therefore, adding x to H strictly increases the hypervolume.
C. Proof of Proposition 1
Proof of Proposition 1: Population improvement probability.
By the complement rule,
Pr
 P[
i=1
Xi
!
= 1 −Pr
 P\
i=1
Xc
i
!
.
(58)
Under independence,
Pr
 P\
i=1
Xc
i
!
=
P
Y
i=1
Pr(Xc
i ) =
P
Y
i=1
(1 −Pr(Xi)).
(59)
Since Pr(Xi) ≥ρ for all i, we have 1 −Pr(Xi) ≤1 −ρ,
hence
Pr
 P\
i=1
Xc
i
!
≤(1 −ρ)P .
(60)
Therefore,
Pr
 P[
i=1
Xi
!
≥1 −(1 −ρ)P .
(61)
For P = 1, this reduces to Pr(X1) ≥ρ. For P > 1 and
ρ ∈(0, 1), we have (1 −ρ)P < 1 −ρ, so
1 −(1 −ρ)P > ρ.
(62)
This completes the proof.
D. Proof of Proposition 2
Proof of Proposition 2: Gradient inference. The
result
fol-
lows directly from the identity
∥gj + gk∥2 = ∥gj∥2 + ∥gk∥2 + 2g⊤
j gk,
(63)
together with the assumption g⊤
j gk < 0.


--- Page 20 ---
20
APPENDIX C
SIMULATED ENVIRONMENT
Our experiment employs three SC environments: simple,
moderate, and complex networks. SC networks are node
collections linked by edges, with parameters set at nodes and
edges. Each network is ’fully connected’, linking all nodes
across consecutive layers. Material supply from suppliers is
treated as unlimited. Market demand is unstable: markets one
and two fluctuate as normal distributions (µ = 150, σ = 60
and µ = 100, σ = 40) and markets three, four, and five as
Poisson distributions (λ = 200, 100, 150). Seasonal demand
shifts through sinusoidal-modulated distributions. Simple SC
serves markets 1 and 2, moderate SC covers markets 1-3, and
complex SC involves all markets.
For simple SC markets, a fixed mean price of 20 is applied,
while moderate and complex SC markets encounter variable
mean prices: [20, 21, 20.5] and [100, 101, 105, 103, 104]. Un-
fulfilled demand is regarded as demand loss. This problem is
structured within the MOMDP framework with a finite time
horizon T = 100 and a lead time range of L = {1, 3} days.
The transportation capacity (Cap) is set at 200, while the
manufacturing capacity is not restricted.
To simulate uncertainties originating mainly from demand,
cost, price structure, and lead time, we randomise the parame-
ters during environment generations. For example, in addition
to the fluctuation of demand along the period horizon, we
also introduce randomised mean and standard deviation values
within a range of {90%, 110%} of set values. A similar range
is also applied to the costs and prices, subject to the task
arrangement scenarios applied. During fine-tuning, new unseen
tasks are given in the Table VII to XII.
TABLE VII: Simple SC. Node parameter values that corre-
spond to the facilities in Simple SC environment.
Node
I0j
cς
j
eς
j
cψ
k
vψ
k
eψ
k
3
380
0.1100
0.0002
2.0000
1.0000
5.0126
4
350
0.1300
0.0002
2.2000
1.0000
4.5754
5
400
0.1200
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
6
80
0.1500
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
TABLE VIII: Simple SC. Transport parameter values that
correspond to product delivery.
From Node
To Node
cτ
ij
eτ
ij
1
2
0.2200
0.1258
3
0.6900
0.3947
2
4
1.0550
0.6035
5
0.4300
0.2460
3
4
0.4850
0.2774
5
0.7500
0.4290
TABLE IX: Moderate SC. Node parameter values that cor-
respond to the facilities in Moderate SC environment.
Node
I0j
cς
j
eς
j
cψ
k
vψ
k
eψ
k
3
380
0.1100
0.0002
2.0000
1.0000
5.0126
4
350
0.1300
0.0002
2.2000
1.0000
4.5754
5
400
0.1200
0.0002
2.3000
1.0000
5.4491
6
80
0.1500
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
7
110
0.2000
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
8
100
0.2500
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
9
80
0.3000
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
10
120
0.2000
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
TABLE X: Moderate SC. Transport parameter values that
correspond to product delivery.
From Node
To Node
cτ
ij
eτ
ij
1
3
0.2200
0.1258
4
0.6900
0.3947
5
0.5650
0.3232
2
3
1.0550
0.6035
4
0.6500
0.3718
5
0.6300
0.3604
3
6
0.0750
0.0429
7
0.4300
0.2460
4
6
0.6300
0.3604
7
0.2300
0.1316
5
6
0.4950
0.2831
7
0.0750
0.0429
6
8
1.0950
0.6263
9
0.6250
0.3575
10
0.9500
0.5434
7
8
1.6400
0.9381
9
1.1600
0.6635
10
0.5800
0.3318
TABLE XI: Complex SC. Node parameter values that corre-
spond to the facilities in Complex SC environment.
Node
I0j
cς
j
eς
j
cψ
k
vψ
k
eψ
k
4
155
0.2300
0.0002
2.0000
1.0000
5.0126
5
267
0.3500
0.0002
2.2000
1.0000
4.5754
6
342
0.2200
0.0002
2.1000
1.0000
5.4491
7
211
0.1100
0.0002
2.0000
1.0000
6.1232
8
162
0.2900
0.0002
2.3000
1.0000
5.5157
9
195
0.3700
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
10
333
0.1100
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
11
96
0.3600
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
12
285
0.3300
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
13
68
0.2600
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
14
379
0.3000
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
15
344
0.1700
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
16
66
0.2900
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
17
356
0.2700
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
18
382
0.2300
0.0002
NA
NA
NA
19
362
0.3700
0.0002
NA
NA
NA


--- Page 21 ---
21
TABLE XII: Complex SC. Transport parameter values that
correspond to product delivery.
From Node
To Node
cτ
ij
eτ
ij
1
4
0.5350
0.3060
5
0.2650
0.1516
6
1.8450
1.0553
7
1.6000
0.9152
8
1.4400
0.8237
2
4
0.3600
0.2059
5
0.2950
0.1687
6
1.2350
0.7064
7
0.6250
0.3575
8
1.8550
1.0611
3
4
0.6000
0.3432
5
0.1750
0.1001
6
0.7450
0.4261
7
1.3300
0.7608
8
0.1700
0.0972
4
9
1.9900
1.1383
10
0.3400
0.1945
11
0.8100
0.4633
5
9
1.5150
0.8666
10
0.6600
0.3775
11
0.6450
0.3689
6
9
1.6950
0.9695
10
1.5800
0.9038
11
0.8150
0.4662
7
9
1.6150
0.9238
10
1.2600
0.7207
11
0.6750
0.3861
8
9
1.0300
0.5892
10
1.0900
0.6235
11
1.6300
0.9324
9
12
1.9650
1.1240
13
1.9250
1.1011
14
1.6200
0.9266
10
8
1.4900
0.8523
9
1.9600
1.1211
10
0.6350
0.3632
TABLE XII: Table XII continued..
11
8
1.8700
1.0696
9
0.2000
0.1144
10
1.8550
1.0611
12
15
1.9450
1.1125
16
0.9650
0.5520
17
1.9050
1.0897
18
0.9000
0.5148
19
0.6900
0.3947
13
15
0.8050
0.4605
16
1.0650
0.6092
17
1.8400
1.0525
18
0.8300
0.4748
19
1.8850
1.0782
14
15
1.6600
0.9495
16
1.5100
0.8637
17
0.5900
0.3375
18
0.4000
0.2288
19
1.3950
0.7979


--- Page 22 ---
22
APPENDIX D
DETAILED ALGORITHM SETTINGS FOR SC EXPERIMENTS
This section provides the detailed hyperparameters used in
our experiment.
A. Meta-training settings
Table XIII and XIV show the algorithm settings we used
for Meta-MORL and MERLION during our experiments.
TABLE
XIII:
Hyperparameters
for
MAML-based
meta-
training.
Hyperparameter
Value
Shared parameters:
Inner-loop learning rate α
0.03
Outer-loop learning rate β
0.001
PPO steps per meta-update
10
Adaptation steps
4–8
Network architecture
[64, 64]
Discount factor γ
0.99
GAE weight
1.0
VF loss coefficient
0.5
Clipping parameter
0.3
KL target
0.01
KL coefficient
0.001
Batch size
32
Fragment length
100
Rollout workers
4
Evaluation interval
100
MERLION-specific:
Population size
10
Fitting score coefficient κ
0.5
Cross-over rate ηcross
0.6
Mutation strength δ
0.1
B. Fine-tuning settings
TABLE XIV: PPO hyperparameters used in fine-tuning.
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate
3 × 10−4
Minibatch size
64
Epochs per update
10
Discount factor γ
0.99
GAE weight λ
0.95
Clipping range
0.2
Entropy coefficient
0
VF loss coefficient
0.5
Max gradient norm
0.5
Episode length
100
Total timesteps
5 × 105
Activation
Tanh
C. MORL with decomposition (MORL/D) setup
Table XV shows the setup used for the MORL/D algorithm
as one of the baselines.
TABLE XV: Hyperparameters of MORL/D Algorithm with
MOSAC Policy
Hyperparameters
Values
MORL/D
Discount factor
0.995
Population size
6
Exchange every
5 × 104
Total time steps
5 × 105
Neighbourhood size
1
Update passes
10
Initial weight dist.
uniform
MOSAC
Buffer size
106
Discount factor
0.99
Target smoothing coef.
0.005
Batch size
128
Steps before learning
103
Hidden neurons
[256; 256]
Actor LR
3 × 10−4
Critic LR
10−3
Actor training freq.
2
Target training freq.
1
Activation function
ReLU
D. Non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm II (NSGA-II)
setup
Table XVI shows the setup used in NSGA-II as one of the
baselines.
TABLE XVI: Hyperparameters of NSGA-II to solve the SC
problem across three network complexities: simple, moderate,
and complex.
Hyperparameters
Values
Population size
300
Offspring number
30
Cross-over operator
binary (SBX)
Cross-over probability
90%
Cross-over ηcross
15
Mutation method
polynomial
Mutation ηmut
20


--- Page 23 ---
23
APPENDIX E
DETAILED EXPERIMENTAL SETTING FOR CONVENTIONAL
RL IN STANDARD PROBLEMS
A. Algorithm settings
This appendix reports the hyperparameter settings of the
benchmark algorithms used in the standard RL problem ex-
periments. Unless otherwise stated, all methods were imple-
mented using the morl-baselines framework and eval-
uated on the same mo-gymnasium environments as Meta-
MORL and MERLION. Table XVII to XXII displayed the
used hyperparameter for standard problem benchmarking.
TABLE XVII: Hyperparameters of MORL/D with MOSAC or
MOSAC-Discrete policy
Hyperparameter
Value
MORL/D
Scalarisation method
Weighted sum
Utility type
SER
Population size
10
Exchange every
4 × 104
Neighbourhood size
1
Update passes
10
Initial weight distribution
Uniform
Shared buffer
False
Policy backbone
Policy type
MOSAC / MOSAC-Discrete
Network architecture
[64, 64]
Policy learning rate
10−4
Critic learning rate
10−2
Discount factor
0.99
TABLE XVIII: Hyperparameters of the PGMORL algorithm
Hyperparameter
Value
Number of environments
4
Population size
10
Warm-up iterations
0.05× episode horizon
Steps per iteration
Episode horizon
Evolutionary iterations
20
Number of weights candidates
21 (2 objectives), 32 (otherwise)
Performance buffer size
100
Number of performance buffers
2
Weight range
[0, 1]
∆w
1/9
Sparsity coefficient
−1.0
Network architecture
[64, 64]
Number of minibatches
32
Update epochs
10
Learning rate
3 × 10−4
TABLE XIX: Hyperparameters of the CAPQL algorithm
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate
3 × 10−4
Target smoothing coefficient (τ)
0.005
Replay buffer size
106
Network architecture
[64, 64]
Batch size
Episode horizon
Number of Q-networks
2
Entropy coefficient (α)
0.2
Learning starts after
103 steps
Gradient updates per step
1
Discount factor
0.99
TABLE XX: Hyperparameters of the PQL algorithm
Hyperparameter
Value
Initial ϵ
1.0
Final ϵ
0.1
Epsilon decay steps
105
Discount factor
0.99
TABLE XXI: Hyperparameters of the MPMOQL algorithm
Hyperparameter
Value
Learning rate
0.1
Initial ϵ
0.1
Final ϵ
0.1
Epsilon decay
None
Weight selection
Random
GPI policy
False
Transfer Q-table
True
Dyna updates
False
Discount factor
0.99
TABLE XXII: Hyperparameters of the PCN algorithm
Hyperparameter
Value
Scaling factor
[1.0]
Learning rate
10−3
Batch size
Episode horizon
Hidden dimension
64
Exploration noise
0.1
Continuous action setting
Environment-dependent
B. Benchmark problem descriptions
We evaluated the benchmark Merlion and other algorithms
on
five
standard
problems
from
mo-gymnasium:
mo-halfcheetah-v4,
deep-sea-treasure-v0,
resource-gathering-v0,
mo-hopper-v4,
and
mo-reacher-v4. These tasks were selected to cover both
discrete and continuous domains, as well as different numbers
of objectives, ranging from two to four. This allows us to
assess performance under diverse Pareto-front structures and
control settings.
1) MO-HalfCheetah.:
mo-halfcheetah-v4
is
a
continuous-control
MuJoCo
locomotion
task
with
a
continuous observation space, a continuous action space,
and two objectives. In our implementation, it is treated as
a long-horizon control problem with a maximum episode
length of 1000 steps. This environment is useful for testing
whether a method can recover meaningful trade-offs between
competing locomotion objectives in a standard continuous
benchmark.
2) Deep Sea Treasure.: deep-sea-treasure-v0 is a
discrete grid-world problem with discrete observations, dis-
crete actions, and two objectives. It is one of the canonical
MORL benchmarks because it provides a structured Pareto
front with a clear trade-off between treasure value and time
penalty. We used a maximum episode length of 200 steps.
3) Resource Gathering.: resource-gathering-v0 is
a discrete grid-world environment with discrete observations,
discrete actions, and three objectives. The task requires bal-
ancing multiple resource-related returns while avoiding un-
favourable outcomes, making it a useful benchmark for testing


--- Page 24 ---
24
TABLE XXIII: RL standard problem environments details.
Env.
Obs.
Act.
Obj.
Timesteps/eps.
mo-halfcheetah-v4
Cont.
Cont.
2
1000
deep-sea-treasure-v0
Disc.
Disc.
2
200
resource-gathering-v0
Disc.
Disc.
3
200
mo-hopper-v4
Cont.
Cont.
3
1000
mo-reacher-v4
Cont.
Disc.
4
200
whether a method can identify non-dominated policies beyond
the two-objective setting. We used a maximum episode length
of 200 steps.
4) MO-Hopper.: mo-hopper-v4 is a continuous-control
MuJoCo
locomotion
task
with
continuous
observations,
continuous actions, and three objectives. Compared with
mo-halfcheetah-v4, this environment introduces a more
challenging multi-objective control setting with an additional
objective and longer-horizon dynamics. We used a maximum
episode length of 1000 steps.
5) MO-Reacher.: mo-reacher-v4 is a multi-objective
reaching task with a continuous observation space, a discrete
action space in our benchmark interface, and four objectives.
This task provides the highest reward dimensionality among
the standard problems considered here, making it suitable for
evaluating how well each method scales to more structured
and higher-dimensional Pareto fronts. We used a maximum
episode length of 200 steps.
6) Common environment configuration.: All environments
were
instantiated
through
mo_gym.make(...,
render_mode="rgb_array")
and
wrapped
with
TimeLimit
using
an
environment-specific
maximum
episode length. No reward normalisation or scalarisation was
applied at the environment level for benchmark evaluation,
and comparisons were based on the cumulative raw vector
rewards returned by the environments. The observation
space type, action space type, number of objectives, episode
horizon, and reference point used for each environment are
summarised in Table XXIII.
7) Common benchmark configuration.: Across all bench-
mark algorithms, we used the same environment definitions,
episode horizons, and random-seed interface. The discount
factor was set to γ
= 0.99 for all methods. Algorithm
applicability depended on the observation and action spaces
of each task. In particular, PQL and MPMOQL were only
used on discrete-observation, discrete-action environments,
while PGMORL and CAPQL were only used on continuous-
observation, continuous-action environments. MORL/D and
PCN were applied whenever their architectural assumptions
matched the corresponding environment.


--- Page 25 ---
25
(a) Simple SC - view 2
(b) Moderate SC - view 2
(c) Complex SC - view 2
(d) Simple SC - view 3
(e) Moderate SC - view 3
(f) Complex SC - view 3)
Fig. 5: Additional views from the other perspectives to complement PF Plots in the main text.
APPENDIX F
PARETO FRONT PLOTS
To compliment the PF plots in the main text, we provide
additional views of PF plots for better representation as shown
in Figure 5.


--- Page 26 ---
26
APPENDIX G
OPERATIONAL PERFORMANCE
We further examine the operational trajectories underlying
the representative solutions selected from the PF approxima-
tion sets. Figure 6 presents the corresponding manufacturing
quantities, inventory levels, and demand loss over time.
Manufacturing fluctuations are more pronounced in the
simple SC setting, while the moderate and complex settings
display steadier production schedules. One reason is that, in
deeper and more interconnected networks, decisions propagate
through additional stages, transit delays, and downstream
buffers, so abrupt short-term changes may create delayed and
amplified side effects. As a result, effective policies tend to
resemble more stable base-stock or level-production strategies,
using inventories and shipments to absorb variability rather
than relying on frequent production corrections. In addition,
the feasible action space becomes tighter as complexity in-
creases because more facilities, routes, and interdependencies
impose stronger operational constraints. These factors also
make policy learning more difficult, and PPO-style updates
may become effectively more conservative under noisier gradi-
ent signals, encouraging reliance on steadier control heuristics.
The inventory plots further indicate that buffering behaviour
changes with complexity. In the simple SC setting, inventories
stay close to zero for much of the horizon, interrupted by occa-
sional spikes, which is consistent with reactive replenishment
and rapid stock clearing. In the moderate and complex set-
tings, inventories become more persistent and are increasingly
concentrated at a smaller subset of facilities. This suggests that
the learned policies exploit positional buffering, where selected
nodes absorb variability locally rather than maintaining evenly
distributed stock across the network.
Demand loss remains bounded overall, but its spatial dis-
tribution becomes more heterogeneous in the more complex
settings. Some markets exhibit consistently higher unmet de-
mand, whereas others maintain relatively low and stable losses.
This indicates that, under stronger coupling and delayed flow
adjustments, the learned policy does not equalise service levels
uniformly across all markets, but instead allocates service
unevenly across locations as part of its broader multi-objective
trade-off.


--- Page 27 ---
27
(a) Mfg - simple SC
(b) Mfg - moderate SC
(c) Mfg - complex SC
(d) Inv - simple SC
(e) Inv - moderate SC
(f) Inv - complex SC
Market A
Market B
0
50
100
150
200
Units
(g) Loss - simple SC
Market A
Market B
Market C
0
50
100
150
200
Units
(h) Loss - moderate SC
Market A
Market B
Market C
Market D
Market E
0
100
200
Units
(i) Loss - complex SC
Fig. 6: MERLION’s operational performance across the SC problems shows that manufacturing and inventory levels fluctuate
less in more complex problems, although some stockpiling becomes more noticeable. Demand losses in the various markets
are relatively low.
