--- Page 1 ---
Autonomous Discovery of Wireless
Communications Algorithms
Fayçal Aït Aoudia1, Member, IEEE, Jakob Hoydis1, Fellow, IEEE,
Sebastian Cammerer2, Senior Member, IEEE, Gian Marti3, Member, IEEE,
Merlin Nimier-David3, Nicolas Roussel3, and Alexander Keller2
1NVIDIA, 92400 Courbevoie, France
2NVIDIA, 10623 Berlin, Germany
3NVIDIA, 8004 Zürich, Switzerland
Corresponding author: Fayçal Aït Aoudia (e-mail: faitaoudia@nvidia.com).
Parts of this article were presented at European Wireless, June 2026 [1]. Code repository: https://github.com/nvlabs/the-ai-telco-engineer
ABSTRACT Large language model (LLM)-driven evolutionary search is an emerging algorithm-discovery
paradigm that has already produced novel results in several scientiﬁc ﬁelds. Yet its application to wireless
communications remains largely unexplored. To bridge this gap, we introduce The AI Telco Engineer
(AITE), a framework to autonomously design algorithms for complex communication problems, while
navigating performance–complexity tradeoffs. We showcase AITE on two challenging physical-layer
problems: designing an equalizer for an orthogonal time–frequency space (OTFS) system, and constructing
a receiver algorithm for an orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) system using a custom
constellation and operating without pilots. For the ﬁrst task, AITE develops algorithms that outperform the
best-known solutions while reducing computational latency by a factor of 3.6 compared to the strongest
baseline. For the second task, it discovers the ﬁrst explicit, explainable algorithms that achieve performance
parity with state-of-the-art neural receivers. These results demonstrate the strong potential of LLM-driven
evolutionary search for the autonomous discovery of next-generation wireless communications algorithms.
INDEX TERMS algorithm discovery, evolutionary search, large language model (LLM), pilotless commu-
nication, orthogonal frequency-time space (OTFS), wireless communications
I. Introduction
A
LGORITHMS are central to modern communication
systems. They largely determine reliability and efﬁ-
ciency, and serve as important product differentiators. De-
signing and implementing such algorithms is a demanding
task for communications system engineers, requiring domain
expertise, mathematical insight, and extensive experimenta-
tion to identify robust implementations and suitable hyperpa-
rameters. Moreover, solutions that perform well analytically
or in simulation may behave unexpectedly once integrated
into a full system, where ﬁnding the root cause may be
difﬁcult. Large language models (LLMs) and agentic arti-
ﬁcial intelligence (AI) have advanced rapidly, creating an
opportunity to dramatically reduce the human effort required
for algorithm development. In this article, we therefore in-
vestigate their ability to autonomously discover, implement,
and optimize wireless communication algorithms.
An algorithm exists at two levels: an abstract mathematical
description and a concrete implementation that can be exe-
cuted. Thus, the optimization of an algorithm can be cast as
a programming problem. The target of the problem depends
on properties of the concrete implementation, such as its ac-
curacy or latency when run on a speciﬁc hardware platform.
One way of tackling such problems is genetic programming
(GP) [2]. GP relies on evolutionary algorithms to improve
computer programs by iteratively applying genetic operators,
such as random mutation and crossover, to a generation of
seed programs. One of the main problems of GP relates to
the deﬁnition of the search space, i.e., the set of valid code
modiﬁcations, which makes scaling to complex programs
difﬁcult and requires deep domain expertise.
The integration of LLMs into GP has gradually expanded
the ﬁeld into LLM-driven evolutionary search. The authors
of [3] were among the ﬁrst to replace GP’s mutation operator
with an LLM that actually understands the code and provides
logical program modiﬁcations, instead of random edits. This
idea was further developed in [4] and [5], where LLMs
were also used for crossover operations. The ﬁrst provably
1
arXiv:2607.17762v1  [cs.IT]  20 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
new scientiﬁc results were generated by FunSearch [6],
which leveraged a ﬁxed programmatic skeleton restricting
the LLM’s search to an isolated target function, combined
with island-based population management. This idea was
scaled to multiﬁle codebases in AlphaEvolve [7], which was
reproduced shortly thereafter as the open-source framework
OpenEvolve [8]. Since then, there has been a rapid prolif-
eration of LLM-based evolutionary methods for algorithm
discovery, such as ShinkaEvolve [9], GEPA [10], and the
SkyDiscover framework [11] (including AdaEvolve [12] and
EvoX [13]). They introduce several critical capabilities, such
as embedding-based novelty rejection, multiarmed bandit
LLM selection, adaptive exploration and compute budget
control, as well as optimization of the search strategy code
itself. Recently, the code-generation step was extended from
a single LLM invocation to tool-using coding agents that
iteratively implement, evaluate, and reﬁne solutions before
submitting them [1], [14]. This extension is particularly im-
portant for challenging coding problems that require the use
of debugging and proﬁling tools or documentation lookups.
In this article, we report on initial experiments applying
LLM-driven evolutionary search to the design of wireless
communications algorithms, providing a useful starting point
for others interested in this direction. Notably, even these
early results match or surpass the state of the art on the con-
sidered tasks, suggesting that agentic AI may have crossed a
critical capability threshold, with profound implications for
the future of research and development in our ﬁeld.
The only directly related publications we are aware of
are [15] and [16], which apply LLM-driven evolutionary
search to the optimization of deletion-correcting codes and
antenna port selection in a ﬂuid antenna system, respectively.
The authors of [17] describe a versatile platform capable
of automating research within a large-scale radio testbed,
without providing detailed technical results.
The rest of this article is structured as follows. Sec-
tion II describes the architecture of our evolutionary search
framework called The AI Telco Engineer (AITE), which is
available as open-source software [18] and implemented in
Python using LangChain [19]. We did not rely on existing
frameworks such as [8], [9], [11], although these could
have been adapted. In Sections III and IV, we describe two
speciﬁc physical-layer problems that AITE was tasked with,
namely developing an equalizer for an orthogonal time–
frequency space (OTFS) system [20] as well as a receiver
algorithm for an orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM) system operating without pilots and with custom
constellations [21]. We choose these two tasks because,
although both are nontrivial, they are very different in
nature. Equalizer design for OTFS is well studied, so the
main challenge is to ﬁnd efﬁcient implementations that
simultaneously improve on existing solutions. The pilotless
receiver, in contrast, has essentially no prior art, so the
biggest challenge is to discover a working algorithm. For
the ﬁrst task, AITE found algorithms that outperform state-
The AI Telco
Engineer
Task
description
Evaluation
tool
Set of
algorithms
FIGURE 1. AITE from an input–output perspective. The user describes a
task, i.e., a problem description paired with an evaluation tool, and AITE
returns a set of algorithms that explores the metric–complexity tradeoff.
of-the-art equalizers while running about 3.6× faster. For
the second task, only solutions based on neural networks
were known, and AITE found novel explicit algorithms with
comparable performance. Section V concludes the article
with a discussion of open problems and future directions.
The Appendices provide detailed descriptions of selected
algorithms generated by AITE and illustrate the depth and
implementation complexity of the discovered solutions.
II. Architecture of The AI Telco Engineer
AITE is an LLM-driven framework that iteratively explores
the space of algorithms that solve a speciﬁed problem. An
input–output view of the system is shown in Fig. 1. AITE
takes as input a task, deﬁned by a natural-language problem
description paired with an immutable, task-speciﬁc evalua-
tion tool. The evaluation tool executes algorithm implemen-
tations and returns a scalar metric evaluating the algorithm’s
performance and a scalar measuring the complexity of the
implementation (e.g., via the measured latency). Because the
evaluation tool is not editable by the system and can only be
invoked, AITE prevents “metric gaming” in which the scor-
ing procedure is modiﬁed to artiﬁcially inﬂate performance.
AITE does not focus on evolving a single best solution,
but rather aims to output a set of solutions that spans
the performance–complexity tradeoff. Concretely, solutions
are positioned in the two-dimensional plane spanned by
the task metric and the complexity measure returned by
the evaluation tool, yielding a point cloud from which the
user can pick an operating point after the run, without
being involved in the optimization itself. The optimization
objective is to expand the Pareto front by iteratively evolving
a population of algorithms. The same principle would extend
naturally to a higher-dimensional objective space, although
we have not explored this in our experiments.
A. Global Architecture
As illustrated in Fig. 2, AITE follows a two-tier architecture
inspired by [6], [7], [9]. Most importantly, it relies on agentic
code generation as in [1], [14], instead of a single LLM
invocation. This architecture proved effective for the tasks
considered here. An orchestrator drives the global optimiza-
tion loop, while a pool of workers implements and reﬁnes
solutions in parallel. Optimization proceeds over multiple
generations. At each generation, the orchestrator proposes
N distinct abstract algorithmic ideas, and a population of
M workers is distributed across these ideas, with M/N
2


--- Page 3 ---
Orchestrator
Idea 1
Idea 2
Idea N
· · ·
Worker
1
Worker
2
Worker
3
Worker
4
Worker
M −1
Worker
M
· · ·
Worker
pool
Implemented algorithms
FIGURE 2. Overview of the idea-driven iterative optimization loop. The
orchestrator generates ideas that are distributed to parallel workers, each
operating in its own workspace. Implemented algorithms ﬂow back to the
orchestrator to seed the next generation.
workers assigned to each. Each worker runs independently,
in parallel, and within its own containerized environment
referred to as a workspace. Neither the orchestrator nor the
workers have internet access.
Assigning multiple workers to the same idea exploits LLM
stochasticity (assuming a nonzero decoding temperature).
Different workers implementing the same idea tend to pro-
duce different implementations, thereby reducing the risk of
discarding a promising idea due to a single poor implemen-
tation. After all workers in a generation complete, the or-
chestrator aggregates the resulting implementations, updates
a global leaderboard, and uses the accumulated outcomes
to propose the next generation of ideas. Subsequent ideas
can be entirely novel approaches, reﬁnements of previously
explored ones, or combinations thereof, depending on the
current state of the performance–complexity frontier.
B. Orchestrator
The orchestrator architecture is shown in Fig. 3. It co-
ordinates the optimization by (i) generating diverse ideas,
(ii) dispatching them to workers, (iii) post-processing and
summarizing the algorithms produced by the workers, and
(iv) maintaining a global leaderboard that records all al-
gorithm implementations and their evaluation scores. The
leaderboard groups algorithms by their assigned idea and
stores multiple (metric, complexity) evaluation points per
algorithm when postrun hyperparameter tuning is enabled
(Section II-C1). The Pareto front across all implementations
is also maintained.
1) Idea Generation
At each generation, the orchestrator LLM is instructed to
produce N distinct algorithmic ideas that span the metric–
complexity tradeoff. Centralizing this step avoids a scenario
where independent workers each choose their own approach
and then tend to converge on similar methods, causing the
explored space to collapse. Beyond the ﬁrst generation,
the idea budget must be split between reﬁning previously
explored approaches (exploitation) and proposing fresh ones
(exploration). Because the number of workers, and hence the
per-generation budget, is limited, this allocation is critical to
search efﬁciency [9], [12]. AITE delegates this tradeoff to
the orchestrator LLM and instructs it to consistently reserve
a part of the budget for fresh ideas throughout the run.
For the initial generation, the orchestrator LLM receives
only the user query and is instructed to output exactly N
distinct algorithmic ideas, since there are no prior ones
to reﬁne. For subsequent generations, idea generation is
conditioned on previously explored ideas and their corre-
sponding implemented algorithms. However, providing the
entire leaderboard to the orchestrator is not scalable due
to the limited context window of the LLM. Instead, AITE
uses a two-part context construction: Pareto-front entries
are always included, and additional off-front entries are
sampled randomly. Off-front sampling includes at most one
representative algorithm per idea and excludes algorithms
that did not follow the assigned approach, based on a verdict
produced by the post-processing stage (cf. Section II-B3).
Off-front entries are sampled without replacement using
a temperature-controlled softmax over a spread-normalized
metric gap. Let mi denote the metric of algorithm i in the
off-front pool and let m⋆be the best metric in the pool.
Deﬁne the gap gi = |mi −m⋆| and the pool spread S =
maxi gi. The normalized gap is ˜gi = gi/S. If S = 0, we set
˜gi = 0 for all i, resulting in uniform sampling. The sampling
probability is then pi ∝exp (−˜gi/T ), where T > 0 is a
temperature hyperparameter that remains ﬁxed throughout
the run. Smaller values of T yield greedier selection, whereas
larger values yield nearly uniform sampling.
2) Job Launching
Once a generation’s ideas have been generated, the job-
launching stage turns them into work units and dispatches
them to the worker pool. The N ideas are distributed across
the M available workers, with M/N workers assigned to
each idea (see Fig. 2). Every worker therefore receives a
single idea and is tasked with implementing it in its own
dedicated workspace.
For each worker, the orchestrator assembles a job: a self-
contained initial context that fully speciﬁes what the worker
must do. Beyond the assigned idea, this context includes the
task description shared by all workers and, when reﬁning
ideas, references to one or more earlier implementations
that the worker should build upon. Concretely, a job is
materialized as a single prompt template into which the
task description, the assigned idea, and the source code of
optional reference algorithms are injected. The references’
achieved metrics are deliberately withheld. Exposing them
tends to bias the worker toward small edits of an existing
solution rather than implementing the assigned approach.
As detailed in Section II-B4, the prompt template is not
ﬁxed but reﬁned across generations to improve worker efﬁ-
3


--- Page 4 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
Idea generation
Leaderboard
Post-processing
Job launching
Prompt reﬁnement
Worker pool
Orchestrator
Task description
ideas
Pareto and
off-front algorithms
ideas
ideas
jobs
code
summaries,
verdicts
code, metric,
complexity
journals
Evaluation tool
reﬁned
prompt
FIGURE 3. Orchestrator internal structure. Idea generation is conditioned on the task description together with Pareto-front and off-front algorithms
drawn from the leaderboard. The job-launching stage dispatches ideas to the worker pool. Workers return code, metric, and complexity to the
leaderboard. The post-processing module pairs each implementation with its assigned idea to produce summaries and adherence verdicts, which are
also stored in the leaderboard. Worker journals feed the prompt-reﬁnement stage, whose reﬁned prompts are injected into subsequent jobs.
ciency, while protected placeholders guarantee that the task
description and the assigned idea are preserved verbatim.
3) Post-Processing of Generated Algorithms
Worker outputs do not always follow their assigned ideas,
especially when an idea is difﬁcult to implement or when
the worker LLM fails to adhere to the provided approach
description. We empirically observed that state-of-the-art
LLMs (e.g., GPT-5.5) diverge from the assigned idea less
frequently than smaller open-weight models (e.g., MiniMax-
M2.5 or gpt-oss-120b). Regardless of its source, such diver-
gence can mislead the orchestrator, e.g., into discarding an
idea that appears to perform poorly when, in fact, it was
never actually implemented. To mitigate this, AITE post-
processes each completed workspace by reading the resulting
code and prompting the orchestrator LLM to produce a
concise summary preﬁxed with a ternary verdict—yes, par-
tial, or no—indicating whether the implemented algorithm
follows the assigned idea, independent of its achieved score.
These summaries serve two purposes. First, they provide a
compact, human-readable description of what each algorithm
actually implements, allowing the orchestrator to reason over
a large history of explored methods. Second, they act as a
ﬁlter when sampling off-front entries for idea generation (see
Section II-B1). Only the best-scoring implementations with
a yes verdict are eligible to represent an idea, preventing the
orchestrator from being misled by spurious deviations.
4) Worker Prompt Reﬁnement
AITE is designed to operate with different LLMs, which
can vary widely in their tool-use patterns and ability to
adhere to instructions. To improve worker efﬁciency across
generations, AITE reﬁnes the worker prompt template using
a dedicated prompt-reﬁnement stage. After each worker
completes, its execution journal (which records all LLM and
tool calls together with their outcomes) is read and structured
process statistics (e.g., number of evaluation attempts, ﬁle
reads and writes, and timeouts) are extracted. An LLM is
then used to produce a behavioral critique.
At the end of a generation, the orchestrator aggregates
these behavioral critiques and requests an LLM to produce
a reﬁned prompt template for the next generation, which
is used when launching the next generation’s jobs (see
Section II-B2). For example, if multiple workers make the
same coding error, the reﬁned prompt may include a warning
to avoid this error in the future. The reﬁnement affects
only the generic instructions that govern how a worker
operates. The task description and the assigned approach are
injected through placeholders and are therefore never altered.
This design lets AITE adapt to different LLM behaviors
while keeping algorithm selection and exploration decisions
centralized in the orchestrator’s idea-generation stage.
C. Worker Workﬂow
Having described the orchestrator, we now turn to the work-
ers that implement the ideas it dispatches. Workers operate
in parallel, each running as a separate process that hosts
a single LLM-driven ReAct agent [22] which repeatedly
reasons about what to do, takes an action using a tool,
observes the result, and adapts until it completes the task.
The resulting worker architecture is shown in Fig. 4. Tasks
are distributed by a worker pool, which submits them to the
worker processes and collects their completion results asyn-
chronously. Each task is associated with a fresh workspace,
isolated through a container interface to prevent interference
across workers and to protect the host environment.
Within a workspace, the worker follows a two-ﬁle work-
ﬂow: draft.py is used for iterative development and
4


--- Page 5 ---
LLM
Evaluation
Sionna doc
Run code
Edit ﬁlesystem
Install packages
Tools
Workspace
Hyperparameter tuning
(Optuna)
solution.py
evaluate trials
(metric, complexity) points
and hyperparameters
FIGURE 4. Worker architecture. Each worker runs an agentic ReAct
loop [22] operating inside an isolated containerized workspace with
access to tools, including the evaluation tool. Once the worker completes,
an optional postrun stage tunes the algorithm’s hyperparameters.
experimentation, while solution.py stores the best-
performing code encountered so far.1 The evaluation tool
is invoked repeatedly by the worker LLM on draft.py.
When a new best metric is achieved, the framework automat-
ically copies draft.py to solution.py, ensuring that
progress is preserved even if the worker is interrupted. The
worker is terminated either when the worker LLM decides to
stop or when a generation-level timeout is reached. In either
case, solution.py is retained as the worker’s output for
downstream processing.
1) Hyperparameter Fine-Tuning
To reduce the risk of discarding a promising algorithm due
to poorly chosen hyperparameters, AITE performs optional
postrun hyperparameter tuning on each successful worker
output, as shown in Fig. 4. The worker LLM is instructed
to declare tunable hyperparameters by calling one of the
following forms:
HP.get("name", default, low=..., high=...)
HP.get("name", default, choices=[...])
corresponding, respectively, to a bounded numerical range
and a categorical choice set. The framework parses the
abstract syntax tree of solution.py to extract the implied
search space, then runs Bayesian multiobjective optimization
using Optuna [23] over the task metric and complexity.
Each Optuna trial evaluates solution.py for one can-
didate hyperparameter conﬁguration using the evaluation
1Although we use Python in this work, having AITE write code in a
different language is straightforward.
tool and yields a single (metric, complexity) point. Because
the two objectives often conﬂict, tuning does not return a
single best conﬁguration but a set of Pareto-optimal ones.
Each retained conﬁguration is then attached to the worker’s
generated algorithm in the global leaderboard as a distinct
(metric, complexity) point, tagged with its hyperparameter
values. A single worker output may therefore contribute
several leaderboard points, rather than just one.
2) Sionna
In our experiments, AITE uses Sionna [24] to perform link-
level simulations. To help workers write correct Sionna code
(in PyTorch [25]), the framework provides a documentation
tool offering three operations: Search, Help, and List. Search
performs semantic retrieval over the Sionna application pro-
gramming interface (API) docstrings and curated tutorials
using a FAISS [26] vector store with an external reranker.
Help retrieves the full docstring and signature of a Sionna
symbol, while List enumerates available classes and func-
tions within a given Sionna module.
3) Task-Speciﬁc Evaluation Tool
The evaluation tool is a critical component of the system.
It is supplied by the user as part of the task speciﬁcation
and, by deﬁning the metric and the complexity proxy to
optimize, ﬁxes the two objectives that drive the entire search.
In our experience, it is also typically the bottleneck of the
optimization, consuming the largest share of the compute and
time budget. Communication algorithms are usually assessed
through Monte Carlo simulations, which trade accuracy for
compute. More accurate or exhaustive simulations therefore
come at the cost of slower evaluations and, for a ﬁxed time
and compute budget, fewer generations of the framework.
In AITE, each task provides its evaluation tool as a
pluggable component that executes worker code and returns
a standardized, parseable output. The ﬁrst line follows one of
two forms: SUCCESS, <metric>, <complexity> or
a bare FAILURE. A binary success/failure ﬂag is thus always
available and, on success, the returned metric and complexity
deﬁne the algorithm’s position in the two-objective plane.
Beyond scoring, the evaluation tool can enforce constraints
by returning a failure whenever a requirement is violated
(e.g., when a secondary metric exceeds a threshold), thereby
restricting metric optimization to a feasible set. It can also
return error messages and warnings. To prevent any single
evaluation from stalling the optimization loop, each invoca-
tion is subject to a conﬁgurable timeout. Moreover, workers
can invoke the evaluation tool but cannot modify it, which
prevents direct modiﬁcation of the scoring procedure while
still allowing arbitrary user-deﬁned evaluation code.
III. OTFS Equalizer Design
The ﬁrst task assigned to AITE is to implement an equalizer
for an OTFS system [20]. In short, the receiver makes the
5


--- Page 6 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
noisy observation y = Hx + w of a vector of constellation
symbols x through a channel matrix H. Knowing H and
the variance N0 of the elements of the noise vector w,
the equalizer must produce bitwise log-likelihood ratios
(LLRs) for a channel decoder. Equalizers are ranked by
the normalized validation error (NVE) [27], the ratio of the
coded block error rate (BLER) achieved by the equalizer to
that of a reference equalizer, averaged over a set of signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) values S,
NVE = 1
|S|
X
SNR∈S
BLERcand(SNR)
BLERref(SNR) ,
(1)
so that NVE ≤1 means the equalizer matches or beats the
reference on this averaged metric. The latency of the equal-
izer (which must be compatible with torch.compile) is
used as a proxy for complexity.
A. System Model
We consider an OTFS system whose transmit signal is, for
every sub-block, an OFDM waveform with a cyclic preﬁx
(CP). The data symbols x[l, k] are deﬁned on the delay–
Doppler (DD) grid, for 0 ≤l < M and 0 ≤k < N, where
M and N denote the delay and Doppler bin count, respec-
tively. The data symbols are mapped to the time–frequency
grid by the inverse symplectic ﬁnite Fourier transform
Xtf[n, m] =
1
√
MN
M−1
X
l=0
N−1
X
k=0
x[l, k] e j2π( nk
N −ml
M )
(2)
and then modulated onto a CP-OFDM waveform with a
rectangular transmit pulse, CP length Tcp, subcarrier spac-
ing ∆f, symbol period T = 1/∆f, and sample period
Ts=T/M. We assume a linear time-varying multipath chan-
nel with P paths
h(τ, ν) =
P
X
i=1
hi δ(τ −τi) δ(ν −νi),
(3)
where path i has gain hi, delay τi, and Doppler νi. The
CP is assumed longer than the delay spread and the path
parameters hi, τi, and νi are constant over the OTFS frame.
As shown in Appendix A, one can derive the following
input–output relation for the OTFS system:
y = H x + w,
(4)
where x, y ∈CMN are the vectorized transmitted and
received symbols, respectively, H ∈CMN×MN is the ef-
fective DD channel matrix with elements given by (14), and
w ∈CMN is a vector of complex additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) with variance N0. As discussed at greater
length in the appendix, one may truncate the channel matrix
to a row-sparse approximation eH, e.g., by keeping only the
top-k strongest taps per row, with little loss in accuracy.
This structure can be efﬁciently exploited by several classes
of equalizers.
Since Sionna [24] does not support OTFS in its current
version, we provide a new Sionna OTFS module with all
required functionality in the article’s code repository.
B. Prior Art
Most practical OTFS equalizers are iterative schemes that
operate on the row-sparse eH channel representation instead
of the dense H matrix. This avoids the prohibitively high
complexity of inverting a large MN ×MN matrix, as in, for
example, the linear minimum mean-square error (LMMSE)
estimate bx = (HHH + N0I)−1HHy. The interference-
cancellation message passing (MP) detector of [28] is the
canonical example, exchanging beliefs over the discrete
constellation symbols on the factor graph induced by the
sparse channel. Gaussian-message variants reduce the per-
edge cost while retaining calibrated soft outputs, e.g., the
unitary approximate message passing (UAMP) detector [29]
and the expectation propagation (EP) detector [30]—which
serves as the reference baseline in this work due to its excel-
lent performance and low complexity. All of these exploit the
row sparsity of eH, so their per-iteration complexity scales
as MNS, where S is the number of retained taps per row,
rather than as (MN)2. Low-complexity LMMSE receivers
in [31], [32] exploit a full block-circulant-with-circulant-
blocks effective DD channel matrix, which reduces equaliza-
tion to a 2-D discrete Fourier transform (DFT). That stronger
property holds for ideal biorthogonal pulses with integer or
slowly varying Doppler, but fails under the rectangular-CP
waveform with continuous delay and Doppler considered
here. The channel nevertheless remains block-circulant along
the Doppler index [28], so that a Doppler DFT still decouples
the MN ×MN system into N independent M ×M blocks.
Most competitive algorithms discovered in this task exploit
this structure.
C. Simulation Setup
We consider an OTFS system with M = N = 64 delay
and Doppler bins, a carrier frequency of 4 GHz, a subcarrier
spacing of ∆f = 15 kHz, and a 16-sample CP. Information
bits are encoded by a rate-1/2 5G low-density parity-check
(LDPC) code with block length 16 384, mapped to a 16-
quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) constellation, and
then placed on the DD grid. As perfect channel state infor-
mation (CSI) is assumed, no pilots need to be sent.
We use the continuous DD channel model (13) (see
Appendix A) with P
= 6 paths. Per frame, the path
gains are independently and identically distributed accord-
ing to CN(0, 1/P), the delays are uniform on [0, 14 Ts]
(i.e., up to 14.6µs), and the Doppler shifts are uniform
on [−0.5∆f, 0.5∆f] (i.e., from −7.5 kHz to 7.5 kHz). The
ﬁrst path is ﬁxed at zero delay and zero Doppler. The path
parameters are constant over the frame and the exact full-
period input–output relation is used for the simulation of y.
An equalizer can use either the dense representation or a
row-sparse version obtained by retaining the top-k strongest
taps per row, where the number of retained taps is a free pa-
rameter. The noise variance follows the unit-average-symbol-
energy convention N0 = 10−SNRdB/10, and the evaluation
6


--- Page 7 ---
TABLE 1. Algorithm families explored in the candidate search for the OTFS equalizer design task
Family
Core operation
Candidates
Best NVE
Latency of best
VAMP / OAMP [33], [34]
Block-FFT linear module with extrinsic Gaussian–QAM iterations
557
0.496
5.28 ms
EP / EC [30], [35]
Linear Gaussian updates alternating with extrinsic QAM denoiser
392
0.496
6.40 ms
Proximal MAP / ADMM [36], [37]
Projected-gradient or ADMM steps with QAM proximal thresholding
116
0.549
6.56 ms
List / K-best [38], [39]
Local search over a small QAM neighborhood with residual scoring
88
0.561
3.36 ms
GAMP / AMP [40], [41]
Scalar AMP on the sparse DD graph with Onsager correction
108
0.630
37.60 ms
Linear / LMMSE [31], [32]
One-shot Wiener solve, dense or Doppler-FFT block-structured
252
0.659
2.24 ms
BP / MP [28]
Sparse-graph belief propagation with leave-one-out interference
97
0.677
19.52 ms
PIC / SIC [28]
Parallel or successive interference cancellation on sparse residuals
115
0.677
10.64 ms
Krylov / PCG [42]
Iterative solve of the regularized normal equations
130
1.142
10.64 ms
Fusion / gating [43]
Weighted combination of multiple detector LLR streams
22
1.258
3.28 ms
Low-rank / subspace [44]
Reduced-dimension solve via low-rank channel approximation
13
1.823
5.60 ms
Abbreviations: vector approximate message passing (VAMP), orthogonal approximate message passing (OAMP), expectation propagation (EP), expectation
consistency (EC), maximum a posteriori (MAP), alternating direction method of multipliers (ADMM), generalized approximate message passing (GAMP),
approximate message passing (AMP), linear minimum mean-square error (LMMSE), belief propagation (BP), message passing (MP), parallel interference
cancellation (PIC), successive interference cancellation (SIC), preconditioned conjugate gradient (PCG).
SNR grid for the NVE calculation is S = {13dB, 16 dB},
with EP [30] (top-k = 256) as the reference equalizer.
D. Results
Over 60 generations, AITE produced 1890 working can-
didates implementing 1114 distinct equalizer architectures.
We used GPT-5.5 as the underlying LLM and a cluster of
16 graphics processing units (GPUs) running 32 workers
per generation. The search broadly explored the accuracy–
latency tradeoff across a large variety of algorithm families
cataloged in Table 1. Fig. 5(a) shows the evolution of the best
NVE across generations and the corresponding latency. The
best NVE decreases from 0.677 to 0.549 by generation 3 and
reaches 0.496 by generation 9, with no further improvement
observed thereafter. The search then focused on ways to re-
duce latency without degrading performance. Fig. 5(b) shows
the Pareto front together with off-front solutions, zoomed
to the low-NVE-low-latency region for readability. Notably,
many families of algorithms reach comparable performance,
especially with the right hyperparameter tuning. All well-
performing algorithms exploit the block-circulant channel
structure mentioned earlier.
We select a candidate from the expectation consistency
(EC) family found in the 59th generation with an interesting
accuracy–latency tradeoff (NVE = 0.549, latency 2.17ms),
highlighted in Fig. 5(b), as a representative example for
comparison with several baselines. As shown in Fig. 6,
the generated algorithm beats all conventional baselines in
coded BLER, including MP [28], EP [30], and UAMP [29].
At the same time, Table 2 shows a per-frame latency
of 2.17 ms on an NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000 and 3.52 ms
on an NVIDIA DGX Spark. These values correspond to
speedups of around 3.6× over the most competitive baseline,
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
0.7
Generation
Best NVE
0
10
20
30
40
Latency of best (ms)
NVE
Latency
(a) Best NVE across generations and their corresponding latency
2
4
6
1
2
Off-front
Pareto front
Selected
Latency (ms)
NVE
(b) Generated equalizers in the latency–NVE plane
FIGURE 5. Results of the AITE run for the OTFS equalizer task.
UAMP [29], on both platforms and of 66× and 210× over
LMMSE on the RTX PRO 6000 and DGX Spark, respec-
tively. Note that all baselines underwent the same Optuna-
based hyperparameter tuning [23] as the generated algo-
rithms, and their implementations were optimized for latency
7


--- Page 8 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
12
13
14
15
16
17
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
SNR (dB)
Coded BLER
LMMSE
NVE reference
MP
EP
UAMP
Generated algorithm
FIGURE 6. Coded BLER versus SNR for various OTFS equalizers. The
values in parentheses show the speedup relative to LMMSE on an
NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000. LMMSE uses the dense channel representation;
MP uses top-k = 512; UAMP uses top-k = 2048; EP uses top-k = 512;
and the generated algorithm uses top-k = 2560. The equalizer used as a
reference for the NVE in (1) is EP with top-k = 256.
TABLE 2. Per-frame inference latency. Speedup is relative to LMMSE
RTX PRO 6000
DGX Spark
Equalizer
Latency
Speedup
Latency
Speedup
LMMSE
143.84 ms
1.0×
741.92 ms
1.0×
MP
58.56 ms
2.5×
365.92 ms
2.0×
EP
18.64 ms
7.7×
108.00 ms
6.9×
UAMP
7.76 ms
18.5×
12.16 ms
61.0×
Generated
2.17 ms
66.3×
3.52 ms
210.8×
with the help of agentic coding tools. A detailed discussion
of the generated algorithm and how it achieves state-of-the-
art performance at lower latency is deferred to Appendix B.
This ﬁne-grained optimization was performed across hun-
dreds of candidates explored in parallel, illustrating how
evolutionary agentic search can apply implementation-level
reﬁnement at scale.
IV. Explainable Pilotless OFDM Receiver
The second task assigned to AITE is to generate an ex-
plainable pilotless OFDM receiver. This line of work builds
on prior results on pilotless OFDM communication [21],
which showed that the OFDM waveform can operate without
reference signals when the transmitter and receiver are
jointly optimized through end-to-end learning. In that setting,
a learned constellation shown in Fig. 7 is used to modulate
the transmitted bits on all resource elements (REs) of the
OFDM resource grid, and a neural-network-based receiver
maps the received grid directly to LLRs for the coded bits.
The objective of this experiment is to retain the pilotless
transmission scheme using the learned constellation, while
replacing the black-box neural receiver with an explainable
receiver algorithm discovered by AITE. Algorithms using
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
In-phase
Quadrature
FIGURE 7. Learned 2M-point constellation (M = 6).
OFDM symbols
Subcarriers
(a) With DMRS
OFDM symbols
Subcarriers
(b) Pilotless (all data)
FIGURE 8. Resource grids (12 × 14 REs in this ﬁgure) for pilot-assisted
and pilotless transmission. Dark REs carry DMRS; light REs carry data.
In (a), DMRS symbols are placed in OFDM symbols t ∈{3, 12}.
sparse pilots exist [45], [46], [47], as do fully pilotless
schemes relying on multiple constellations to enable channel
estimation [48], [49]. However, the literature still lacks
a non-neural pilotless OFDM method that uses a single
constellation over all REs. Moreover, none of the existing
solutions seems to address the computation of LLRs for the
transmitted bits, which are required for channel decoding and
are challenging to obtain as they rely on accurate calculation
of the channel estimation error. It is thus unlikely that AITE
can reproduce an algorithm from its LLM training data.
A. System Model
We consider a single-input single-output OFDM link operat-
ing on a resource grid with NF subcarriers and NT OFDM
symbols per slot, yielding NF NT REs indexed by (f, t) with
1 ≤f ≤NF and 1 ≤t ≤NT . The constellation used to
modulate the transmitted bits is denoted by C ⊂C, with
|C| = 2M, where M is the number of bits per symbol.
Fig. 8 contrasts the resource allocation in a conventional
pilot-assisted grid and in the pilotless grid. In the former
case, a subset P of REs carries known demodulation refer-
ence signal (DMRS) symbols. In the latter case, P = ∅and
all REs are occupied by data symbols.
On the receiver side, after cyclic-preﬁx removal and DFT,
the complex baseband received symbols satisfy
Y = X ⊙H + W,
(5)
8


--- Page 9 ---
Bits
Transmitter
OFDM
channel
Equalization
Demap.
Channel
estimation
LLRs
Receiver
QAM
constellation
(a) Pilot-based baseline
Bits
Transmitter
OFDM
channel
Neural
receiver
LLRs
Learned
constellation
(b) Pilotless with neural receiver
Bits
Transmitter
OFDM
channel
Generated
receiver
LLRs
Learned
constellation
(c) Pilotless with AITE-generated receiver
FIGURE 9. End-to-end OFDM receivers considered in this section:
(a) conventional pilot-based baseline with QAM and DMRS; (b) pilotless
system with learned constellation and neural receiver [21]; (c) pilotless
system with learned constellation and AITE-generated receiver.
where X ∈CNF ×NT are the transmitted symbols, H ∈
CNF ×NT is the channel matrix, W ∈CNF ×NT is AWGN
with per-RE variance N0, Y ∈CNF ×NT is the received grid,
and ⊙denotes elementwise multiplication.
The pilotless system we build upon was introduced in [21],
in which the constellation at the transmitter is jointly opti-
mized with a neural network at the receiver, as shown in
Fig. 9(b). The neural receiver substitutes for channel esti-
mation, equalization, and demapping. It maps the received
resource grid to LLRs. In this work, the neural receiver is
a residual convolutional neural network as in [21]. On the
transmitter side, only the constellation is learned, while the
remainder of the transmission pipeline stays conventional.
The trainable parameters consist of a set of 2M complex
numbers eC = {ec1, . . . , ec2M }, which are centered and nor-
malized to form the constellation C used to modulate the
transmitted data,
C =



ec −µ
q
1
2M
P
ec′∈e
C |ec′|2 −|µ|2

ec ∈eC


,
(6)
where µ =
1
2M
P
ec∈e
C ec, so that C has zero mean and unit
average power. Centering prevents the learned constellation
from embedding a superimposed pilot in its mean, which
would act as a known reference signal. The learned constel-
lation is applied to every RE of the resource grid, as shown
in Fig. 8(b). Consequently, the resulting scheme uses neither
orthogonal nor superimposed pilots.
The results reported in [21] show that the neural receiver
is able to recover the transmitted bits despite the lack of
pilots. Removing pilots frees the REs that conventional
systems reserve for reference signals and reallocates them
to data, which translates into signiﬁcant throughput gains.
Achieving this requires the learned constellation to adopt an
unconventional geometry, shown in Fig. 7. While effective,
the neural receiver inherits the general lack of explainability
of neural networks. This makes the design difﬁcult to analyze
and extend, e.g., to multiple spatial streams or different mod-
ulation orders. It also motivates the search for an explainable
algorithmic receiver that AITE is asked to ﬁnd.
B. Simulation Setup
We consider an OFDM system with NF = 72 subcarriers
and NT = 14 OFDM symbols. To train the end-to-end
learning system (Fig. 9(b)) and generate algorithms with
AITE (Fig. 9(c)), we use the TDL-C channel model with
a nominal delay spread of 100 ns, a carrier frequency of
2.6 GHz, a subcarrier spacing of 30 kHz, and user speeds
between 0 and 3 m/s. The constellation optimized through
end-to-end learning, shown in Fig. 7, is reused unchanged
for generating algorithms with AITE. The evaluation tool
returns the NVE deﬁned in (1), computed over two SNR
points, 15 dB and 20 dB, using the pilot-based baseline in
Fig. 9(a) as the reference. The average latency required to
run the algorithm is used as a proxy for complexity.
We benchmark the generated algorithm on the TDL-A
and TDL-D models, which are non-line-of-sight (NLoS)
and line-of-sight (LoS) models, respectively, with the same
nominal delay spread and user speeds. Evaluating on channel
models unseen during training probes the generalization
capabilities of the receivers. For all receivers considered in
this section, the resulting LLR vector is passed to the same
LDPC decoder with code rate rc = 0.7, which outputs hard
decisions on the transmitted information bits.
C. Results
We ran the framework for 42 generations with GPT-5.5 as
the LLM and 32 workers per generation on a cluster of 16
GPUs. Fig. 10(a) reports the evolution of the search. The
best NVE decreases rapidly during the ﬁrst generations and
reaches 1.02 at generation 25; among tied-best solutions,
latency continues to decrease through generation 34. In total,
AITE produced 1240 functional receivers. Rather than the
monotone reﬁnement of a single algorithm, the search can
be described as a broad exploration that gradually concen-
trated around a small number of ideas. The ﬁrst generation
instantiated more than a dozen different receiver families,
most of them performing poorly.
Compared to the OTFS equalizer task, this task proved
more challenging for AITE, requiring more than 20 gen-
erations to converge, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Since no
directly applicable prior art is available, AITE had to dis-
cover the key methods enabling blind detection, in what
9


--- Page 10 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
resembles a research process. Progress originated from a
small number of breakthroughs rather than from incremental
tuning of a single approach. The ﬁrst key realization was
that the structure of the learned constellation C can be
leveraged to initialize the channel estimate blindly. Because
the transmitted symbols are drawn from C on every RE,
the local empirical moments of the received grid relate to
those of the constellation, i.e., over a small time–frequency
neighborhood, E[Y m] ≈Hm E[Cm] for integer m, where
C is uniformly distributed on C. Estimating these moments
and taking the mth root therefore yields a per-RE channel
estimate up to a discrete m-fold phase ambiguity, with the
residual ambiguity resolved by selecting the root that maxi-
mizes the likelihood P
c∈C exp

−|Y −Hc|2 /N0

, which
is possible only because the learned constellation, unlike
QAM, has no rotational symmetry. The resulting estimate
is accurate enough to seed an expectation–maximization
(EM) reﬁnement loop that alternates between soft symbol
posteriors and a channel update. This single idea moved
the receiver out of the failure regime, and essentially every
subsequent frontier solution descends from it.
A second breakthrough was not to commit to a single
channel estimate, but to retain a small set of competing
channel hypotheses per RE and use a log-sum-exp demapper
that marginalizes the likelihood over both the candidate chan-
nels and the constellation points when computing the per-bit
LLRs. From these two ideas, the improvements that mattered
were obtained by stacking complementary mechanisms onto
this backbone rather than by replacing it. Several of the
families that had failed as standalone receivers reappeared
at the Pareto front by being injected as reﬁnements.
These auxiliary reﬁnements are of three kinds. First,
a belief-propagation reﬁnement exploits the similarity of
the channel gains at neighboring REs. These gains largely
cancel in the ratio of the two received samples, leaving
a relationship governed primarily by the two transmitted
constellation points. Treating these pairwise relationships
as soft constraints and propagating them across the grid
sharpens the symbol decisions where the channel is hard
to estimate directly. Second, a decision-directed channel-
tracking candidate turns the receiver’s soft estimate of the
transmitted symbols into virtual pilots, from which an ad-
ditional channel estimate is formed and smoothed. Third, a
local afﬁne model assumes that the channel varies approxi-
mately linearly within a small time–frequency patch and ﬁts
an afﬁne plane to each patch to denoise the channel estimate.
In summary, after broad, divergent exploration, the lowest-
NVE solutions share a common receiver backbone, with the
bulk of the gain explained by a few enabling ideas and
by the recombination of mechanisms that were individually
insufﬁcient. Fig. 10(b) shows the Pareto front of the set of
generated receivers together with the off-front solutions, with
the view zoomed in on the low-NVE region. Several algo-
rithms attain the lowest NVE of 1.02. Among them, we select
the one with the lowest latency, highlighted in Fig. 10(b), for
1
10
20
30
40
1
2
3
4
5
Generation
Best NVE
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Latency of best (ms)
NVE
Latency
(a) Best NVE achieved so far and their corresponding latency
0.5
1
1.5
2
1
2
3
4
Off-front
Pareto front
Selected
Latency (ms)
NVE
(b) Generated algorithms in the latency–NVE plane
FIGURE 10. Results of the AITE run for the pilotless receiver task.
evaluation against the baselines. A more detailed description
of this algorithm is provided in Appendix C.
We benchmark the selected algorithm against two base-
lines: a pilot-based baseline (Fig. 9(a)) and the neural
receiver trained jointly with the constellation for pilotless
communication (Fig. 9(b)). The pilot-based baseline follows
a standard processing chain, i.e., least-squares channel es-
timation at the pilot positions P, linear interpolation of
the channel estimates and error variances onto all data
REs, LMMSE equalization, and a posteriori probability
demapping to LLRs. This baseline is implemented with the
corresponding components from Sionna [24] and employs a
2M-QAM constellation.
The goodput achieved by the evaluated receivers on TDL-
A and TDL-D is reported in Fig. 11(a) and 11(b), respec-
tively, and is deﬁned as
Goodput = (1 −BLER) rc rp M,
(7)
where rc = 0.7 is the code rate and M = 6 is the number of
bits per constellation symbol. The factor rp is the fraction of
REs carrying data: rp = 1 for the pilotless approaches and
the perfect-CSI upper bound, and rp = 12/14 for the pilot-
based baseline. As the ﬁgures show, the generated algorithm
achieves goodput on par with that of the neural receiver
on both channel models. Both pilotless receivers realize
the expected throughput gain over the pilot-based baseline,
which comes from reallocating pilots to data.
10


--- Page 11 ---
8
12
16
20
24
0
1
2
3
4
SNR (dB)
Goodput (bit/RE)
Perfect CSI
Generated algorithm
Neural receiver
Pilot baseline
(a) Goodput on TDL-A (NLoS)
8
12
16
20
24
0
1
2
3
4
SNR (dB)
Goodput (bit/RE)
(b) Goodput on TDL-D (LoS)
FIGURE 11. Evaluation of the selected AITE-generated receiver algorithm
against the pilot-based baseline and the neural receiver. The perfect-CSI
upper bound uses 2M-QAM on every RE, exact channel coefﬁcients, and
the same demapper and LDPC decoder as the pilot-based baseline.
The latency, measured on an NVIDIA RTX PRO 6000,
is 0.694 ms for the neural receiver and 1.23 ms for the
generated algorithm. The longer latency is somewhat ex-
pected because, with the used PyTorch backend, the con-
volutional layers of the neural receiver map efﬁciently onto
the GPU, whereas the generated algorithm relies on non-
neural signal-processing operations that are less amenable to
straightforward parallelization. Being explainable, however,
the generated algorithm is easier to analyze and improve. For
instance, it could be extended to other modulation orders and
multiple spatial streams, or accelerated through a dedicated
CUDA implementation. Both are left to future work.
V. Concluding Discussion
Our experiments demonstrate that LLM-driven evolutionary
search can discover novel wireless algorithms that are on
par with or even surpass the current state of the art. Such
methods allow for the parallel exploration and implemen-
tation of a large number of algorithmic ideas for a speciﬁc
problem with the goal of building a performance–complexity
Pareto front of solutions from which the most suitable can be
selected. We believe that agentic tools like AITE are likely
to become essential for the design of competitive algorithms
in the future, and the broader impact of this development
has been discussed by some of us [50]. Developing AITE
led us to identify several practical enablers and limitations,
which we discuss in the remainder of this section.
A. Impact of the Underlying LLM
The quality of the generated algorithms is strongly affected
by the capabilities of the LLMs used. Experiments with
smaller, less capable LLMs yielded signiﬁcantly less com-
petitive algorithms on complex tasks and required a larger
number of iterations to converge. Even when smaller LLMs
proposed strong ideas, they often struggled to implement
them correctly or to follow the instructions provided by
the orchestrator, resulting in a higher rate of unexploitable
algorithms. This observation motivated the use of a frontier
model (GPT-5.5) for the experiments reported in this article.
Each task took approximately four days on a cluster of
16 GPUs and incurred an LLM inference cost of about
USD 2500 at the time of writing. However, this cost is likely
to decrease signiﬁcantly in the future. Quantifying the run-
to-run variability of the search outcome remains open.
B. The Importance of the Evaluation Tool
The deﬁnition of the evaluation metric is one of the most im-
portant design decisions because evolutionary search will re-
lentlessly try to optimize for it and, as in supervised machine
learning, there is a risk of overﬁtting to the evaluation tool
(including channel models and target hardware platforms).
One way to circumvent this could be a validation tool whose
outputs would only be used to detect when algorithms start
to overﬁt so that they are not selected for reﬁnement in future
generations. In addition, we observed that AITE spends
most of the running time evaluating candidate algorithms,
as opposed to generating and implementing them. For the
two tasks considered in this article, this evaluation is based
on Monte Carlo simulations of BLER curves for the NVE
as well as latency measurements of PyTorch-compiled code.
The more accurate the desired metric estimates, the longer
the evaluation takes. Designing an efﬁcient evaluation tool is
therefore a critical enabler for the scalability of evolutionary
search methods. This becomes even more important when
evaluations are carried out in large digital twin networks or
with hardware-in-the-loop requiring time-consuming compi-
lation or high-level synthesis.
C. Hyperparameter Tuning
Most generated algorithms have hyperparameters, whose
number typically grows as the evolutionary search progresses
and the algorithms become more complex. As described in
Section II-C1, AITE provides a hyperparameter ﬁne-tuning
stage, which was applied to every candidate algorithm in the
experiments reported here. However, Bayesian optimization
becomes impractical with even a few dozen hyperparameters.
One solution would be to replace Bayesian optimization
with gradient descent for differentiable continuous hyper-
parameters, combined with a separate optimization method
for those deﬁned in discrete spaces, such as the number of
iterations. A different approach would be to run substantially
fewer generations of the framework and to perform more
11


--- Page 12 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
exhaustive hyperparameter ﬁne-tuning for each candidate.
The optimal allocation problem remains unresolved.
D. Idea Generation: Exploration Versus Exploitation
Evolutionary search frameworks like AITE need to solve
an exploration–exploitation tradeoff at the start of each
generation, when a ﬁnite number of workers must be tasked
either with exploring novel ideas or reﬁning ideas from
previous generations. Insufﬁcient exploration may cause po-
tential breakthrough ideas to be missed, while insufﬁcient
exploitation may cause promising ideas to be discarded
prematurely. In AITE, the orchestrator LLM is responsible
for solving this tradeoff through careful prompt reﬁnement.
Other frameworks adopt different strategies [9], [11], [12].
Improving the sample efﬁciency of the search is an important
direction for future work that would also allow reallocating
resources to hyperparameter tuning, cf. Section V-C.
E. Measuring Complexity
We can characterize algorithmic complexity in many ways.
Theoretical complexity concepts such as ﬂoating-point oper-
ations or asymptotic analysis are important for high-level
comparisons, but they are often unreliable indicators of
actual latency or throughput on target hardware, such as a
GPU or a central processing unit. Unfortunately, measuring
these concrete metrics requires direct access to the target
hardware, which is often infeasible in large compute clus-
ters. Frameworks like AITE can in principle use arbitrary
complexity metrics, but, much like the evaluation metric,
these metrics must be chosen carefully to properly steer the
search toward practically relevant outcomes.
Appendix A
OTFS Input–Output Relation
Based on the system model in Section III-A, we derive a
closed-form input–output relation for the OTFS system for
use in the evaluation tool’s Monte Carlo simulations.
Let us introduce the normalized DD coordinates
eli ≜τiM∆f = li+εi,
eki ≜νiN(T +Tcp) = ki+κi, (8)
with nearest integers li, ki ∈Z and fractional parts εi, κi ∈
(−1
2, 1
2]. The received signal y[l, k] on the DD grid after
matched ﬁltering, sampling at rate 1/Ts, CP removal, and
the unitary per-sub-block M-point DFT and symplectic ﬁnite
Fourier transform is then given by (13), where
Φi(l) = e−j2πνiτi e j2πνilTs,
(9)
DQ(ξ) = 1
Q
Q−1
X
q=0
e j2πqξ/Q
(10)
are per-path phase terms and Q-point Dirichlet kernels,
respectively. Here, (·)Q denotes reduction modulo Q, and
w[l, k] is standard complex AWGN with variance N0. The
values of γτ and γν run over the windows
Wτ = {−⌊M/2⌋, . . ., ⌈M/2⌉−1},
(11)
Wν = {−⌊N/2⌋, . . ., ⌈N/2⌉−1}
(12)
of size exactly M and N for either parity.
Collecting the DD symbols into vectors x, y, w ∈CMN
by assigning each cell (l, k) the scalar index n(l, k) ≜k +
Nl (row-by-row stacking, with the Doppler index varying
fastest, so that [x]n(l,k) = x[l, k], and likewise for y and w),
we can write the input–output relation (13) compactly as
y = H x + w,
where H ∈CMN×MN is the effective DD channel matrix
with elements given by (14). For the full windows Wτ, Wν,
the summations over the Kronecker deltas have exactly one
nonzero term for every l, l′, k, k′, so that H is generally
dense for noninteger delays or Dopplers.
In practice, the windows can be truncated with little
loss in accuracy to f
Wτ = {−Nτ, . . . , Nτ} and f
Wν =
{−Nν, . . . , Nν} with 2Nτ+1 ≪M and 2Nν+1 ≪N.
When these truncated windows are used in (14), only the
(2Nτ + 1)(2Nν + 1) columns nearest the integer shift
(l −li, k −ki) are nonzero for each path, yielding a row-
sparse matrix eH with at most S = P (2Nτ + 1)(2Nν + 1)
nonzero entries per row.
Alternatively, rather than ﬁxing the windows a priori, one
can compute the exact dense H and retain in each row only
the top-k entries with the largest absolute value. This yields
a controlled sparse approximation whose accuracy increases
monotonically with k, and—in contrast to the ﬁxed window
above—adapts to the actual location of the dominant taps,
which is advantageous under pronounced fractional-delay or
fractional-Doppler leakage. Equalizers can choose to work
with such truncated channel matrices for efﬁciency, whereas
the simulation of y always uses the full channel matrix.
Appendix B
Discussion of an OTFS Equalizer Candidate
For an observation y and perfect channel knowledge H,
the equalizer’s goal is to compute the posterior marginals
p(xr|y) for r ∈{0, . . ., MN −1} under the channel
likelihood (4) and a discrete prior p(xr), which accounts for
the fact that all symbols are drawn from a QAM constellation
Q = {α1, . . . , αQ} of order Q. Computing the joint posterior
p(x|y) ∝p(y|x)p(x) is prohibitive because all symbols
are discrete and coupled by the matrix H. The algorithm
sidesteps this by approximating the posterior p(x|y) with a
Gaussian q(x) whose marginal moments are made consistent
between two simpler views of the problem, iterating until
both agree. This two-module moment-matching construction
is an EC approximation [35] and works as follows:
A. Module A: Linear Model with Gaussian Prior
The ﬁrst view corresponds to the linear model (4) with
a Gaussian symbol prior pB(x) which it receives from
Module B. This prior is deﬁned by its natural parameters,
the precision pB ∈RMN
+
and precision-weighted mean
ηB ∈CMN. In the ﬁrst iteration this message is initialized
to the unit-energy Gaussian prior, pB = 1 and ηB = 0,
12


--- Page 13 ---
y[l, k] =
P
X
i=1
hi Φi(l)
X
γτ ∈Wτ
X
γν∈Wν
DM(γτ −εi)DN(γν + κi) x[(l −li −γτ)M , (k −ki + γν)N] + w[l, k]
(13)
[H]n(l,k), n(l′,k′) =
P
X
i=1
hi Φi(l)
X
γτ ∈Wτ
DM(γτ −εi)δ[l′ −(l −li −γτ)M]
X
γν∈Wν
DN(γν +κi) δ[k′ −(k −ki + γν)N] (14)
so that Module A reduces to a plain linear (LMMSE-type)
estimate. Under this assumption, the corresponding posterior
is also Gaussian with natural parameters ˜pA and ˜ηA:
˜pA = 1 ⊘diagpart
 A−1
(15)
˜ηA = ˜pA ⊙

A−1

ηB + 1
N0
HHy

(16)
A = diag (pB) + 1
N0
HHH,
(17)
where ⊙and ⊘denote elementwise multiplication and
division, respectively. Module A sends to Module B only
the extrinsic Gaussian with natural parameters
pA = ˜pA −pB,
ηA = ˜ηA −ηB.
(18)
B. Module B: QAM Denoiser via Moment Matching
This view treats the discrete prior exactly and accounts
for the channel only through the message it receives from
Module A, which it interprets as a per-symbol Gaussian
pseudo-observation of the transmitted symbols
rA = x + n,
(19)
where rA = ηA ⊘pA, and n ∼CN(0, diag (pA)−1). As-
suming equiprobable constellation symbols, it then computes
for each symbol index r the discrete posterior γr,q = p(xr =
αq|rA,r) over the Q constellation points:
γr,q =
exp
 −pA,r |rA,r −αq|2
PQ
q′=1 exp (−pA,r |rA,r −αq′|2)
.
(20)
As this tilted posterior is not Gaussian, Module B projects
it back onto a Gaussian by matching its ﬁrst two moments,
giving the posterior mean ˜rB and variance ˜vB with
˜rB,r =
Q
X
q=1
γr,q αq,
˜vB,r =
Q
X
q=1
γr,q |αq|2 −|˜rB,r|2 , (21)
which lead to the natural parameters ˜pB = 1 ⊘˜vB and
˜ηB = ˜pB ⊙˜rB. Module B then forms the extrinsic message
pext
B
= ˜pB −pA,
ηext
B
= ˜ηB −ηA
(22)
and sends a damped version back to Module A:
pB ←(1 −β) pB + β pext
B ,
ηB ←(1 −β) ηB + β ηext
B ,
(23)
with β ∈(0, 1]. This exchange is repeated until the marginals
of the two modules agree. In this generic form, the per-bit
LLRs are read off from the ﬁnal symbol posteriors γr,q.
C. Optimized Implementation
The generated algorithm is a performance- and latency-
optimized version of this algorithm based on the following
key modiﬁcations:
1) Per-Doppler
block-diagonalization.
The
input–
output relation (13) is a block-circulant convolution
along the Doppler index which can be diagonalized
by an N-point DFT along the Doppler axis [28]. This
decouples the MN ×MN system into N independent
M × M blocks which can be treated in parallel. The
implementation further shares a single precision per
delay across all Doppler bins, pB ∈RM
+ (the mean
ηB ∈CM×N stays per cell), so the same diag(pB)
regularizes every block.
2) No matrix inversion. Module A never forms A−1. In
(16), Module A uses Cholesky factorization followed
by forward/back substitution to obtain ˜ηA for each
Doppler block. The posterior precisions in (15) are
approximated by a second-order Jacobi estimate of
diagpart(A−1), averaged over Doppler to one vari-
ance per delay index.
3) Few iterations plus one Richardson half-step. The
algorithm runs for only two full EC iterations. In the
third, the Cholesky solve to compute (16) is replaced
by a single low-complexity damped Jacobi (i.e., diag-
onally preconditioned Richardson) update [42]:
xR = ˜rB + ω diag(A)−1 
ηB +
1
N0 HHy −A ˜rB

,
with relaxation factor ω. The associated precision ˜pA
is obtained from (15), and the resulting Richardson
cavity follows by the same extrinsic subtraction as in
(18), now with xR in place of the exact posterior mean,
pR
A = ˜pA −pB,
rR
A =
 ˜pA ⊙xR −ηB

⊘pR
A. (24)
This cavity is not fed back to Module B; it is passed
directly to the ﬁnal demapper.
4) Fused demapping from multiple log-metrics. Let
Lr,q(r, p) = −pr |rr −αq|2 denote the constellation
log-metric of a Gaussian pseudo-observation (r, p),
i.e., the numerator exponent of γr,q in (20). Rather
than demapping a single posterior, the implementation
linearly fuses three such metrics, evaluated at the
Richardson cavity (rR
A, pR
A), the last cavity (rA, pA),
13


--- Page 14 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
and the last linear posterior (˜ηA ⊘˜pA, ˜pA),
Lf
r,q = wc Lr,q(rR
A, pR
A) + wt Lr,q(rA, pA)
+ wℓLr,q(˜ηA ⊘˜pA, ˜pA)
(25)
and reads the per-bit LLRs by max-log demapping,
λr,k = max
q∈S1
k
Lf
r,q −max
q∈S0
k
Lf
r,q,
(26)
where Sb
k = {q : the kth label bit of αq is b}.
5) Scalings and precomputation. The noise variance is
scaled, ˜N0 = sN0N0, to correct for model mismatch
and used in place of N0. The data terms ˜N −1
0 HHH
and ˜N −1
0 HHy are formed once per frame and reused
across iterations, leaving only diag(pB) and the prior-
pull term in (16) to update. The output LLRs are ﬁnally
rescaled by a factor sλ before the LDPC decoder.
6) Hyperparameters. The tuned hyperparameters com-
prise the channel sparsity, numerical clipping thresh-
olds, relaxation and damping factors, fusion weights,
noise and LLR scalings, and ﬁnal demapping rule.
They are selected by the framework’s postrun hyper-
parameter optimization (Section II-C1).
Appendix C
Discussion of a Pilotless OFDM Receiver Candidate
The receiver maps the received grid Y to LLRs through a
sequence of stages. For clarity, we only describe the key
operation of each stage and omit details such as windowing,
damping, and reliability gating. The complete implementa-
tion is available in the code repository [18]. Throughout,
⟨·⟩f,t denotes a local average over a small time–frequency
window centered at (f, t).
A. Multiscale Moment Initialization
The receiver ﬁrst forms a set of candidate channel estimates
using moment matching. Since the constellation has unit
average power, the amplitude follows from the received
energy:
d
|H|f,t =
q
max
 ⟨|Y |2⟩f,t −N0, 0

.
(27)
The phase is recovered from the mth-order moments through
the approximation ⟨Y m⟩f,t
≈
Hm
f,t µm, with µm
=
1
|C|
P
c∈C cm. Taking the mth root leaves an m-fold ambi-
guity,
bθ(m,r)
f,t
= 1
m arg
⟨Y m⟩f,t
µm

+ 2πr
m ,
r = 0, . . . , m −1,
(28)
so that the orders m ∈{2, 3, 4, 6} used in the algorithm
yield 2 + 3 + 4 + 6 = 15 candidate phases, hence 15
candidate channels bH(m,r)
f,t
= d
|H|f,t ejbθ(m,r)
f,t
. The moments
are estimated at three time–frequency window aspect ratios
for the averaging ⟨·⟩f,t to cover different Doppler and delay
proﬁles. At each scale, the Ntop candidates with the highest
log-likelihood,
S(m,r)
f,t
=
*
ln



X
c∈C
exp


−
Yf,t −bH(m,r)
f,t
c

2
N0






+
f,t
,
(29)
are retained, leaving 3Ntop winners per RE. To these are
added Ntop candidates obtained by fusing the rank-matched
winners of the three scales through a score-weighted average,
leading to a cross-scale blended estimate where the scales
agree, while the per-scale winners are retained where they
disagree. The result is a pool of K = 4Ntop candidates per
RE, which we reindex by a single label k and denote by
{ bH(k)
f,t }K
k=1, with corresponding log-likelihoods {S(k)
f,t }K
k=1.
B. Hypothesis Smoothing
Since the moment-based estimates are computed locally and
the channel varies smoothly, the discrete choice among the
K candidates should be coherent across the grid. This is
achieved by modeling the resource grid as a conditional
random ﬁeld over the candidates. Let us denote by ℓu the
random variable that assigns to each RE u the “true” channel
candidate index out of the K candidates, and by ℓ= {ℓu}
the grid-wide assignment. The posterior on ℓis modeled as
P(ℓ| Y) ∝exp
 
−1
τ

−α
X
u
S(ℓu)
u
+ λ
X
(u,v)∈E
wuv
 bH(ℓu)
u
−bH(ℓv)
v

2 !
,
(30)
where α and λ are hyperparameters and E collects pairs
of neighboring REs. The wuv are uniform weights over a
boxcar window in time and frequency. Since the scores S(k)
u
are log-likelihoods, the unary term is the log-likelihood of
ℓover the resource grid under an independence assumption.
The pairwise term penalizes neighbors that select channels
with dissimilar values.
Computing the marginals of (30) is intractable, so the
posterior is approximated by a product of per-node distribu-
tions Q(ℓ) = Q
u qu(ℓu), with qu(k) ≥0, PK
k=1 qu(k) =
1, chosen to minimize the Kullback–Leibler divergence
KL
 Q ∥P(· | Y)

. Each factor qu(k) is then the approximate
marginal probability that node u takes candidate k. Zeroing
the gradient of this divergence with respect to each qu(k)
yields the ﬁxed-point update
qu(k) ∝exp
 
1
τ

α S(k)
u
−λ
 bH(k)
u
−¯Hu

2 !
(31)
for all k ∈{1, . . . , K}, in which each node sees its neighbors
only through
¯Hu =
X
v∈N(u)
wuv
K
X
k=1
qv(k) bH(k)
v
,
(32)
that is, the soft-assigned average channel of neighbors
N(u). Note that the implementation approximates (32) by
14


--- Page 15 ---
a boxcar window centered on u, which also includes the
node’s own soft channel. Since
¯Hu in (32) depends on
the same assignments updated by (31), the two are applied
alternately: starting from the unary-only assignment qu(k) ∝
exp

α S(k)
u /τ

, a few sweeps iterate (32) and (31).
C. Expectation-Maximization
The previous two stages aim to provide strong initializations
for an EM loop that jointly reﬁnes the channel estimates
and computes posterior symbol probabilities. Each of the
K candidates is reﬁned in parallel, with Y as the observed
data, the channel H as the parameter to be estimated, and
the transmitted symbols as the latent variables. The E-step
computes soft symbol posteriors under the current channel,
p(k)
f,t (c) ∝exp

−
Yf,t −bH(k)
f,t c

2
/N0

,
c ∈C.
(33)
The M-step re-estimates the channel by treating the resulting
soft symbols as pseudo-pilots, implementing a conﬁdence-
weighted least-squares ﬁt over the local window,
bH(k)
f,t ←
⟨w(k)
f,t Yf,t bc(k)∗
f,t ⟩f,t
⟨w(k)
f,t bv(k)
f,t ⟩f,t
,
(34)
with
soft
moments
bc(k)
f,t
=
P
c p(k)
f,t(c) c,
bv(k)
f,t
=
P
c p(k)
f,t (c) |c|2,
and
a
per-candidate
weight
w(k)
f,t
∝
(qf,t(k))κ (maxc p(k)
f,t (c))β
that
combines
the
posterior
qf,t(k) from the previous stage with the symbol-decision
probabilities, where κ and β are hyperparameters.
After the EM loop, a probability mass function over the
candidates is deﬁned by blending the smoothed posterior
with how well each candidate explains the received data,
πf,t(k) ∝
 qf,t(k)
ρ exp

1−ρ
τπ S(k)
f,t

,
1 ≤k ≤K, (35)
such that PK
k=1 πf,t(k) = 1, where S(k)
f,t is the local mixture
log-likelihood of the form (29) re-evaluated at the converged
channel bH(k)
f,t , qf,t(k) is the mean-ﬁeld posterior obtained by
reapplying the smoothing of (31) to these reﬁned scores, and
ρ ∈[0, 1] and τπ are hyperparameters. These weights yield
a fused posterior on the transmitted symbols
¯pf,t(c) =
K
X
k=1
πf,t(k) p(k)
f,t (c),
c ∈C.
(36)
The loop also returns a per-RE channel-estimation variance
σ2
H,f,t, used later for computing the LLRs.
D. Ratio-Prior Belief Propagation
While (36) gives probability mass functions for all symbols
in the resource grid, the true posteriors are coupled, because
the channel is approximately constant over neighboring REs.
Hence, more accurate marginals of the grid-wide poste-
rior can be obtained through a belief propagation-inspired
scheme on a Markov random ﬁeld. This ﬁrst reﬁnement
approximates, for each RE, the marginal of its symbol under
the grid-wide posterior,
P(cf,t | Y) =
X
c \ cf,t
P(c | Y),
(37)
where c = {cf,t} is the grid-wide symbol labeling, and turns
it into a per-RE symbol log-domain reﬁnement Γf,t(c) that
is fed back into the estimation. As all the REs are coupled
through the unknown channel, (37) is intractable.
It is assumed that the dependency between symbols is
restricted to time- and frequency-adjacent REs, which makes
P(c | Y) a pairwise Markov random ﬁeld on the resource
grid. For such a ﬁeld, the Hammersley–Clifford theorem
gives the factorization into unary and pairwise potentials,
P(c | Y) ∝
Y
u
ψu(cu)
Y
(u,v)∈E
ψuv(cu, cv),
(38)
where u and v index REs and E is the set of neighboring
RE pairs. The two potentials are set as follows. The unary
potential is set to ψu(c) = ¯pu(c) wsrc, where wsrc is a hy-
perparameter. The pairwise potential scores adjacent symbols
through the ratio of their received samples: two adjacent REs
are assumed to experience approximately the same channel
(Hu ≈Hv), so the channel approximately cancels in that
ratio,
Yu
Yv
= HuXu + Wu
HvXv + Wv
≈Xu
Xv
,
(39)
and the observed ratio quv = Yu/Yv depends on the two
symbols only. The corresponding potential is
ψuv(cu, cv) = eφuv(cu,cv), with
φuv(cu, cv) = −g ln
 
1 + |quv −cu/cv|2
σ2uv
!
,
(40)
with g a hyperparameter and ratio-error variance σ2
uv ∝
N0(1 + |quv|2)/ |Yv|2. This factor has heavy Cauchy-like
tails, which suppress edges near a deep fade where |Yv| is
small and the ratio is unreliable.
The marginals (37) of the ﬁeld (38) are approximated by
a belief propagation-inspired approach, with each symbol
restricted to the set Mf,t ⊂C of its most likely values under
the EM posterior. The edge messages are
µv→u(c) ∝
X
c′∈Mv
exp (φuv(c, c′) + wbp bv(c′)) ,
(41)
with wbp a hyperparameter. The node belief bu(c) combines
the incoming log-messages with the unary log-potential,
bu(c) = 1
du
X
v∈N(u)
wuv ln (µv→u(c))
+ wsrc Ru ln (¯pu(c)) ,
(42)
where N(u) is the set of neighbors of u and du
=
P
v∈N(u) wuv is the weighted node degree. Here Ru ∈[0, 1]
is a per-node reliability and wuv an edge weight, whose
detailed deﬁnitions are omitted. While the messages and
15


--- Page 16 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
beliefs could be updated alternately over the grid, the imple-
mentation runs a single sweep, comprising one frequency-
and one time-adjacent pass.
The resulting beliefs, mapped back onto the constellation,
give the per-RE symbol reﬁnement Γf,t(c). This reﬁnement
is added as a symbol log-prior in a further EM pass, which
re-estimates the channel bH(k)
f,t and the symbol posteriors
using the following E-step in place of (33):
p(k)
f,t(c) ∝exp

−
Yf,t −bH(k)
f,t c

2
/N0 + w′
Γ Γf,t(c)

,
(43)
where w′
Γ is a hyperparameter.
E. Decision-Directed Tracking and Fusion
The second reﬁnement consists in using the fused soft
symbol estimate bcf,t = P
c∈C ¯pf,t(c) c as a virtual pilot to
form a decision-directed estimate,
bHddtf
f,t
=
Yf,t bc ∗
f,t
bEf,t
,
bEf,t =
X
c∈C
¯pf,t(c) |c|2 .
(44)
Each RE is assigned a reliability
ηf,t = χf,t
|H⋆
f,t|2
|H⋆
f,t|2 + σ2
ddtf,f,t
(45)
with
σ2
ddtf,f,t =
N0 + |H⋆
f,t|2 Varf,t(c)
bEf,t
,
(46)
where H⋆
f,t = P
k πf,t(k) bH(k)
f,t is the trust-weighted mean
channel, Varf,t(c) = bEf,t −|bcf,t|2 is the soft-symbol vari-
ance, and χf,t ∈[0, 1] is a symbol-conﬁdence factor whose
computation details are omitted. The estimate is smoothed
by a reliability-weighted Gaussian convolution,
bHddtf
f,t
←
P
f ′,t′ Gf−f ′, t−t′ ηf ′,t′ bHddtf
f ′,t′
P
f ′,t′ Gf−f ′, t−t′ ηf ′,t′
,
(47)
with G a ﬁxed Gaussian kernel, so that conﬁdently esti-
mated REs dominate and unreliable ones are ﬁlled in from
their neighbors. The same convolution returns a channel-
estimation variance σ2
H,f,t from the smoothed σ2
ddtf.
The smoothed track is appended to the pool as an addi-
tional candidate, with its own variance σ2
H,f,t. All K + 1
candidates are then re-scored to update the trust weights
πf,t(k) by the same construction as (35). Each candidate
is rated by its local mixture log-likelihood of the form (29),
except that the noise is inﬂated by the channel estimation
variance, i.e., N0 + |c|2 σ2
H,f,t is used instead of N0.
F. Local Afﬁne Correction
The third reﬁnement denoises the channel within each small
time–frequency patch by ﬁtting an afﬁne surface
H(f + δf, t + δt) ≈p0 + p1δt + p2δf = d⊤p
(48)
over a 5 × 3 window δt ∈{−2, . . ., 2}, δf ∈{−1, 0, 1}
centered on (f, t), where d
=
[1, δt, δf]⊤and p
=
[p0, p1, p2]⊤∈C3, so that p0 is the channel at the patch
center and p1, p2 are its temporal and spectral gradients. The
parameters minimize the following objective over the patch,
J(p) =
X
δf,δt
wf ′,t′ E
 Yf ′,t′ −(d⊤p) cf ′,t′2 
+ λ0
p0 −H⋆
f,t
2 + λs

|p1|2 + |p2|2
,
(49)
where (f ′, t′) = (f + δf, t + δt) and the expectation is
taken over the fused soft symbol at each patch RE, yielding
E[
Y −(d⊤p)c
2 ] =
Y −(d⊤p)bc
2+
d⊤p
2 Var(c). The
weight wf ′,t′ = max(maxc∈C ¯pf ′,t′(c), w0)a grows with the
demapping conﬁdence of the RE, so that reliably demapped
REs contribute most to the ﬁt. The regularization anchors
p0 to the trust-weighted prior H⋆
f,t = P
k πf,t(k) bH(k)
f,t with
strength λ0 and shrinks the slopes with strength λs. Being
quadratic in p, (49) is solved in closed form,
p =
 P
δf,δt wf ′,t′ bEf ′,t′ dd⊤+ R
−1
·
 P
δf,δt wf ′,t′ bc ∗
f ′,t′ Yf ′,t′ d + r0

,
(50)
with R = diag(λ0, λs, λs) and r0 = [λ0H⋆
f,t, 0, 0]⊤. Here,
bE = |bc|2 + Var(c). The center value p0 is blended with its
3×3 neighborhood for spatial consistency, then replaces the
dominant candidate through a soft gate that opens according
to a conﬁdence threshold. The channel-estimation variance
σ2
H,f,t is correspondingly inﬂated by the patch residual and
the magnitude of the applied correction.
G. Demapper
Finally, the bit LLRs are computed by a demapper that sums
the likelihood over both the constellation points and the
competing channel candidates. It ﬁrst forms a per-symbol
log-metric in which the noise variance of each candidate is
inﬂated by its own channel-estimation variance. The K can-
didates reﬁned by the EM loop share the common variance
σ2
H,f,t, whereas the appended decision-directed track carries
its own variance and the afﬁne correction inﬂates the vari-
ance of the candidate it replaces. Together these deﬁne the
per-candidate variance σ2,(k)
H,f,t. Let ν(k)
f,t (c) ≜N0 +|c|2 σ2,(k)
H,f,t
be the inﬂated noise variance. Then
Λf,t(c) = ln



X
k
πf,t(k)
ν(k)
f,t (c)
exp


−
Yf,t −bH(k)
f,t c

2
ν(k)
f,t (c)






+ wΓ Γf,t(c).
(51)
The ratio reﬁnement Γf,t is added as a log-prior of weight
wΓ. Because the inﬂated variance also depends on the
symbol through |c|2, this normalizer is symbol-dependent
and penalizes the higher-energy symbols. The raw LLR of
bit b marginalizes this metric over the subsets Cb,1 and
Cb,0 of constellation points whose bth bit equals 1 and 0,
respectively,
LLRraw
f,t,b = ln
 P
c∈Cb,1 eΛf,t(c)
P
c∈Cb,0 eΛf,t(c)
!
.
(52)
16


--- Page 17 ---
Since Γf,t has already been injected upstream into the
channel estimates and trust weights, and through (51) into
the metric itself, the raw LLR is not extrinsic to the prior. To
provide an approximation of the demapper’s extrinsic infor-
mation, the receiver subtracts a reliability-weighted fraction
of the prior’s standalone bit-LLR LΓ
f,t,b,
LLRf,t,b = LLRraw
f,t,b −λf,t LΓ
f,t,b,
(53)
where the damping λf,t grows where Γf,t is less reliable, so
an uncertain prior is suppressed more strongly in the output.
Acknowledgment
The candidate algorithm code discussed in Sections III–
IV and Appendixes B–C was generated by GPT-5.5 within
AITE; the authors veriﬁed the implementations and edited
the accompanying descriptions. OpenAI Codex with GPT-
5.5 was used to check for grammar and spelling errors.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Aït Aoudia, J. Hoydis, S. Cammerer, L. Maggi, G. Marti, and
A. Keller, “The AI Telco Engineer: Toward autonomous discovery of
wireless communications algorithms,” in European Wireless, Rimini,
Italy, Jun. 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.19803
[2] J. R. Koza, Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers
by Means of Natural Selection.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
[3] J. Lehman, J. Gordon, S. Jain, K. Ndousse, C. Yeh, and K. O. Stanley,
“Evolution through large models,” in Handbook of Evolutionary
Machine Learning.
Springer Nature Singapore, 2024, pp. 331–366.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.08896
[4] E.
Meyerson
et
al.,
“Language
model
crossover:
Variation
through few-shot prompting,” ACM Trans. Evol. Learn. Optim.,
vol.
4,
no.
4,
pp.
1–40,
Nov.
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3694791
[5] A. Chen, D. M. Dohan, and D. R. So, “EvoPrompting: Language
models for code-level neural architecture search,” in Proc. 37th Conf.
Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), New Orleans, LA, USA, Dec.
2023, pp. 7787–7817.
[6] B. Romera-Paredes et al., “Mathematical discoveries from program
search with large language models,” Nature, vol. 625, no. 7995, pp.
468–475, Jan. 2024.
[7] A. Novikov et al., “AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for scientiﬁc and
algorithmic discovery,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131, Jun. 2025.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131
[8] A. Sharma, “OpenEvolve: An open-source evolutionary coding agent,”
https://github.com/algorithmicsuperintelligence/openevolve, 2025.
[9] R.
T.
Lange,
Y.
Imajuku,
and
E.
Cetin,
“ShinkaEvolve:
Towards
open-ended
and
sample-efﬁcient
program
evolution,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2509.19349,
2025.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.19349
[10] L.
A.
Agrawal
et
al.,
“GEPA:
Reﬂective
prompt
evolution
can
outperform
reinforcement
learning,”
in
Int.
Conf.
Learn.
Representations (ICLR), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Apr. 2026. [Online].
Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=RQm2KQTM5r
[11] S. Liu et al., “SkyDiscover: A ﬂexible, adaptive framework for AI-
driven scientiﬁc and algorithmic discovery,” in Proc. ACM Conf. AI
Agentic Syst. (CAIS’26), San Jose, CA, USA, May 2026, pp. 1223–
1227.
[12] M. Cemri et al., “AdaEvolve: Adaptive LLM driven zeroth-order
optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20133, Feb. 2026. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.20133
[13] S. Liu et al., “EvoX: Meta-evolution for automated discovery,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.23413, Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.23413
[14] T. Chen et al., “AVO: Agentic variation operators for autonomous
evolutionary search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.24517, Mar. 2026.
[Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.24517
[15] F. Weindel and R. Heckel, “LLM-guided search for deletion-correcting
codes,” Trans. Mach. Learn. Res., Jun. 2026. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=qZ69Ozpo6v
[16] G. Zheng, F. Liu, and Q. Zhang, “LLM-enabled automated algorithm
design for multiuser ﬂuid antenna communications,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless
Commun.,
May
2026,
to
appear.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.14661
[17] T.
Aghayev
et
al.,
“GENESIS:
Harnessing
AI
agents
for
autonomous
6G
RAN
synthesis,
research,
and
testing,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2605.27360,
May
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.27360
[18] F.
Aït
Aoudia,
J.
Hoydis,
S.
Cammerer,
L.
Maggi,
G.
Marti,
and
A.
Keller,
“The
AI
Telco
Engineer,”
https://github.com/nvlabs/the-ai-telco-engineer, 2026.
[19] LangChain, Inc., “LangChain,” https://github.com/langchain-ai/langchain,
2022, version 1.3.11.
[20] S. K. Mohammed, R. Hadani, A. Chockalingam, and R. Calderbank,
“OTFS—a mathematical foundation for communication and radar
sensing in the delay-Doppler domain,” IEEE BITS Inf. Theory Mag.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 36–55, Nov. 2022.
[21] F. Aït Aoudia and J. Hoydis, “End-to-end learning for OFDM: From
neural receivers to pilotless communication,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 1049–1063, Feb. 2022.
[22] S. Yao et al., “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language
models,” in Int. Conf. Learn. Representations (ICLR), Kigali, Rwanda,
May 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629
[23] T. Akiba, S. Sano, T. Yanase, T. Ohta, and M. Koyama, “Optuna:
A next-generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proc.
25th ACM SIGKDD Int. Conf. Knowl. Discovery Data Mining (KDD),
Anchorage, AK, USA, Aug. 2019, pp. 2623–2631.
[24] J. Hoydis et al., “Sionna,” https://nvlabs.github.io/sionna/, 2022, ver-
sion 2.0.1.
[25] J. Ansel et al., “PyTorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic
Python bytecode transformation and graph compilation,” in ACM
Int. Conf. Architectural Support Program. Lang. Operating Syst.
(ASPLOS), La Jolla, CA, USA, May 2024, pp. 929–947. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366
[26] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. Jégou, “Billion-scale similarity search
with GPUs,” IEEE Trans. Big Data, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 535–547, Jul.
2021.
[27] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep
learning-based channel decoding,” in Proc. 51st Annu. Conf. Inf. Sci.
Syst. (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA, May 2017, pp. 1–6.
[28] P. Raviteja, K. T. Phan, Y. Hong, and E. Viterbo, “Interference
cancellation and iterative detection for orthogonal time frequency
space modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 17, no. 10,
pp. 6501–6515, Oct. 2018.
[29] Z. Yuan, F. Liu, W. Yuan, Q. Guo, Z. Wang, and J. Yuan, “Iterative
detection for orthogonal time frequency space modulation with uni-
tary approximate message passing,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 714–725, Feb. 2022.
[30] H. Li, Y. Dong, C. Gong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, and X. Dai, “Low com-
plexity receiver via expectation propagation for OTFS modulation,”
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 3180–3184, Oct. 2021.
[31] S. Tiwari, S. S. Das, and V. Rangamgari, “Low complexity LMMSE
receiver for OTFS,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 12, pp. 2205–
2209, Dec. 2019.
[32] G. D. Surabhi and A. Chockalingam, “Low-complexity linear equal-
ization for OTFS modulation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 2,
pp. 330–334, Feb. 2020.
[33] S. Rangan, P. Schniter, and A. K. Fletcher, “Vector approximate
message passing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 6664–
6684, Oct. 2019.
[34] J. Ma and L. Ping, “Orthogonal AMP,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 2020–
2033, Jan. 2017.
[35] M. Opper and O. Winther, “Expectation consistent approximate
inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, no. 73, pp. 2177–2204, Dec.
2005. [Online]. Available: https://jmlr.org/papers/v6/opper05a.html
[36] P. L. Combettes and J.-C. Pesquet, “Proximal splitting methods in
signal processing,” in Fixed-Point Algorithms for Inverse Problems in
Science and Engineering.
New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2011, pp.
185–212.
[37] S. Boyd, N. Parikh, E. Chu, B. Peleato, and J. Eckstein, “Distributed
optimization and statistical learning via the alternating direction
17


--- Page 18 ---
F. Aït Aoudia et al.: Autonomous Discovery of Wireless Communications Algorithms
method of multipliers,” Found. Trends Mach. Learn., vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–122, 2011.
[38] B. Hassibi and H. Vikalo, “On the sphere-decoding algorithm I.
Expected complexity,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 8,
pp. 2806–2818, Aug. 2005.
[39] K. W. Wong, C. Y. Tsui, R. S. K. Cheng, and W. H. Mow, “A
VLSI architecture of a K-best lattice decoding algorithm for MIMO
channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Scottsdale,
AZ, USA, May 2002, pp. III-273–III-276.
[40] S. Rangan, “Generalized approximate message passing for estimation
with random linear mixing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory
(ISIT), St. Petersburg, Russia, Aug. 2011, pp. 2168–2172.
[41] D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message-passing
algorithms for compressed sensing,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., vol. 106,
no. 45, pp. 18 914–18 919, Nov. 2009.
[42] Y. Saad, Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 2003.
[43] R. A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton, “Adaptive
mixtures of local experts,” Neural Comput., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–87,
Mar. 1991.
[44] G. H. Golub and C. F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, 4th ed.
Baltimore, MD, USA: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 2013.
[45] M.-X. Chang and J.-H. Chen, “Efﬁcient blind detection for OFDM
systems in selective fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 1779–1792, May 2015.
[46] T. Y. Al-Naffouri, A. A. Dahman, M. S. Sohail, W. Xu, and B. Hassibi,
“Low-complexity blind equalization for OFDM systems with general
constellations,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 6395–
6407, Dec. 2012.
[47] S. A. Banani and R. G. Vaughan, “OFDM with iterative blind channel
estimation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 59, no. 9, pp. 4298–4308,
Nov. 2010.
[48] L. Bariah, A. Al-Dweik, and S. Muhaidat, “Blind channel estimation
technique for OFDM systems over time varying channels,” in Proc.
IEEE 87th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), Porto, Portugal, Jul.
2018, pp. 1–7.
[49] A. Saci, A. Al-Dweik, A. Shami, and Y. Iraqi, “One-shot blind
channel estimation for OFDM systems over frequency-selective fading
channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 12, pp. 5445–5458, Dec.
2017.
[50] E.
Björnson,
M.
Dohler,
J.
Hoydis,
and
R.
W.
Heath,
Jr.,
“Automating
wireless
research
and
development:
What
remains
human?”
Preprints,
Apr.
2026.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202604.1172.v1
18
