--- Page 1 ---
ExpertPlex: A High-Goodput Disaggregated Serving
System for MoE LLMs with Adaptive Persistent Kernels
Bingyang Wu1
Chao Jin1
Zili Zhang1
Xinming Wei1
Yinmin Zhong1
Ruidong Zhu1
Chengxu Yang2
Xin Jin1
Yuliang Liu2
1Peking University
2Independent Researcher
Abstract
LLMs scale Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) parameters for supe-
rior intelligence, but massive weights and dynamic com-
putation impede efficient serving. Existing instance-level
prefill-decode disaggregation isolates the phases on separate
full-model replicas. As MoE weights grow, each instance may
span tens to hundreds of GPUs, making resource allocation
increasingly coarse. Configured prefill-to-decode ratios thus
often mismatch demand, overprovisioning one phase while
overloading the other. Prefill-decode colocation avoids this
duplication, but existing Green Context solutions partition
each GPU by phase and fix phase resources during a kernel.
They cannot track resource changes across operations or lay-
erwise variation in routed expert load, causing head-of-line
blocking or idle reserved resources. Partitioning every GPU
also leaves each phase with fewer local resources, forces
wider parallelism and more communication, and lets prefill
and decode traffic interfere on the shared network.
We present ExpertPlex, which shares massive MoE experts
across phases while disaggregating lightweight attention
modules. Expert sharing eliminates over 95% duplicate model
weights and multiplexes dynamically sparse computation,
while attention disaggregation reduces attention communi-
cation cost. ExpertPlex further uses (1) adaptive persistent
kernels to schedule dynamic expert computation at tile gran-
ularity for efficient, isolated execution; (2) attention-initiated
MoE communication to avoid network interference and en-
able cross-phase communication-computation overlap; and
(3) a tile-to-cluster model to optimize these mechanisms for
maximum goodput. Experiments serving MiniMax-M2.7 and
GLM-5.1-FP8 show that ExpertPlex improves goodput by up
to 2.01× over instance-level prefill-decode disaggregation
and 1.66× over prefill-decode colocation.
1
Introduction
Scaling laws continue to reward larger model capacity [8, 26].
Frontier LLMs therefore increasingly use sparse Mixture-
of-Experts (MoE) modules that dynamically activate a few
experts to add parameters without proportionally increasing
computation [13, 17, 27, 33, 40, 51]. It is still challenging to
serve them efficiently, because instances must still store mas-
sive expert weights, while token-dependent routing makes
expert computation and communication vary across tokens.
Modern LLM serving systems typically use prefill-decode
disaggregation (PDD) to serve MoE LLMs to avoid interfer-
ence between the compute-intensive prefill phase from the
latency-sensitive decode phase [13, 23, 38, 39, 58]. For better
performance, PDD also needs to allocate resources accord-
ing to the P:D ratio that matches the resource demands of
two phases. However, existing instance-level PDD provisions
a complete model replica for each phase, so its allocation
granularity grows with the model. A reported DeepSeek-V3
deployment uses 32 GPUs for prefill and 320 GPUs for de-
code in one unit [13] to achieve this ratio. Small clusters
cannot realize this ratio, leading to resource waste. Large
clusters can achieve this ratio, but suffer from larger failure
blast radius that a rank failure in hierarchical communica-
tion can stall the entire unit [15, 44] and can only scale the
cluster at the granularity of the large deployment unit when
traffic shifts. Duplicated expert weights also displace KV
cache. PDD therefore obtains isolation at the cost of memory
efficiency, elasticity, and fault containment.
Prefill-decode colocation solutions instead use Green Con-
text [36] to reserve SMs for each phase to achieve weights
deduplication and computation multiplexing [10, 22, 41],
but they cannot follow the dynamic demands of MoE LLMs.
When using Green Context, resources are fixed for a ker-
nel, and reconfiguration is limited at the prefill layer level
because it requires CPU intervention. However, MoE and at-
tention modules in a layer and communication and computa-
tion operations in MoE modules have different demands [43,
60]. Dynamic expert computation also creates layer-to-layer
changes in expert activation on each GPU [20, 21, 47]. Coarse
reconfiguration therefore creates head-of-line blocking and
resource bubbles (§2). Partitioning GPU also reduces the local
resources available to each phase, increasing its required de-
gree of parallelism with more communication while leaving
cross-phase network interference unmanaged.
To address these problems, our key insight is a hybrid
disaggregation-colocation architecture that shares experts
across phases but disaggregates their attention modules. MoE
weights contribute over 95% of model parameters, sharing
eliminates their cross-phase memory duplication and multi-
plexes dynamic per-rank expert loads, letting computation
from either phase fill bubbles in the other’s attention–expert
pipeline. Attention holds under 5% of parameters, so disag-
gregation enables independent per-phase allocation in single-
GPU units without duplicating massive expert weights. Be-
cause attention is more compute-intensive [43, 60], giving
each phase whole attention GPUs rather than intra-GPU
partitions preserves local compute capacity for each phase
in a GPU. Partitioning attention GPUs would require wider
1
arXiv:2607.18002v1  [cs.DC]  20 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
per-phase parallelism for equivalent resources, increase com-
munication, and introduce cross-phase attention network
interference. This architecture lets ExpertPlex match phase
demands with fewer GPUs and less traffic, improving utiliza-
tion, scaling granularity, and fault containment.
However, sharing the experts requires finer GPU control
than existing mechanisms provide. CUDA stream priori-
ties [35] and API interception [49] cannot preempt long-
running prefill kernels that may significantly block latency-
sensitive decode kernels, while Green Context [36], MPS [1],
and MIG [37] cannot reallocate resources at fine granularity
between phases, leading to resource bubbles. Shared experts
also couple the phases through communication. The traffic
from two phases to the same MoE module can interfere with
each other, and conventional two-sided MoE communica-
tion requires MoE-side coordination that can cause deadlock
when different ranks are used by different phases.
To address these challenges, we propose ExpertPlex, a
disaggregated serving system for MoE LLMs with adaptive
persistent kernels. ExpertPlex runs an Adaptive Persistent
Kernel (APK) on each MoE GPU. APK schedules MoE com-
putation at tile boundaries, providing bounded preemption
for urgent decode work and reallocating idle CTA clusters
to prefill without CPU intervention or kernel relaunch. The
bound is independent of sequence length, while persistent
execution preserves CUDA Graph compatibility and GPU
utilization. ExpertPlex further uses attention-initiated one-
sided MoE communication to use mostly disjoint network
paths to transfer activations between attention and final
MoE-side buffers without APK coordination. It therefore re-
moves MoE-side polling, avoids cross-phase deadlock and
interference, and overlaps communication from one phase
with computation from the other. Because these mecha-
nisms introduce coupled choices in placement, parallelism,
computation-communication overlap, and tile scheduling,
ExpertPlex proposes a cross-stack placement optimizer that
models them jointly to maximize goodput. Evaluations serv-
ing MiniMax-M2.7 and GLM-5.1-FP8 on real-world work-
loads shows that ExpertPlex improves goodput by up to
2.01× over instance-level prefill-decode disaggregation, and
1.66× over Green Context-based prefill-decode colocation.
This paper makes the following contributions.
• We introduce a hybrid architecture that eliminates cross-
phase MoE weight duplication, multiplexes dynamically
sparse expert computation, and disaggregates attention to
reduce per-phase degree of parallelism with less commu-
nication while preserving fine-grained isolation.
• We design APKs for tile-level preemption and reallocation
and attention-initiated one-sided communication to re-
duce network interference and enable cross-phase overlap
between communication and computation.
• We jointly optimize them cross the stack and evaluate
ExpertPlex on two frontier MoE LLMs, demonstrating
goodput improvements over state-of-the-art baselines.
Global Memory
L2 Cache
L1 Cache/SMEM
L1 Cache/SMEM
Tensor
Cores
CUDA
Cores
TMA
Units
Tensor
Cores
CUDA
Cores
TMA
Units
Math 
warp
TMA 
warp
TMA 
warp
Math 
warp
CTA i
Math 
warp
TMA 
warp
TMA 
warp
Math 
warp
CTA i+1
CTA Cluster
Figure 1. GPU execution model.
2
Background and Motivation
2.1
MoE LLM Inference
An LLM stacks Transformer layers, each with an attention
module and a feed-forward network (FFN) module. Atten-
tion mixes information across tokens and materializes key-
value tensors as the KV cache, which later iterations reuse.
The FFN instead transforms each token independently. Fron-
tier MoE LLMs replace conventional FFNs with mixture-of-
experts (MoE) modules and scale their expert weights ag-
gressively [13, 27, 33, 40, 51]. These weights now dominate
the model footprint, such as 95% in DeepSeek-V4-Pro [3],
96% in GLM-5.1-FP8 [6], and 98% in MiniMax-M2.7 [5].
An MoE module partitions the FFN into many experts.
Shared experts process all tokens, while a router dynamically
selects a small top-𝑘subset of routed experts for each token
at each layer. The router dispatches the token activation to
the activated experts and combines their outputs before the
next layer. This sparse activation increases model capacity
without proportionally increasing computation per token.
Inference has two phases with different objectives. Pre-
fill processes all input tokens in parallel, builds their KV
cache, and produces the first output token, which makes it
throughput-oriented. Decode then generates one token per
iteration from the preceding token based on the prefix KV
cache. It is latency-sensitive because inter-token latency is
user-visible and orders of magnitude shorter than prefill.
2.2
GPU Execution Model
MoE modules are primarily grouped general matrix multipli-
cations (GEMMs) on GPUs, so their performance depends on
the GPU execution model. As Figure 1 shows, a GPU contains
many streaming multiprocessors (SMs). Each SM integrates
Tensor Cores, CUDA cores, Tensor Memory Accelerator
(TMA) units, registers, an L1 cache, and software-managed
shared memory. All SMs share the L2 cache and global mem-
ory, which is also visible to peer GPUs and NICs. Recent
GPUs allow a thread-block cluster to coordinate across SMs
through distributed shared memory (DSMEM) and to multi-
cast a global-memory tile through TMA.
2


--- Page 3 ---
Decode: 1/3
Prefill: 2/3
GPU 0
Decode: 1/3
Prefill: 2/3
Decode: 1/3
Prefill: 2/3
GPU 1
GPU 2
Network
Interference!
Larger DoP! (1.5x for prefill, 2x for decode)
Prefill
Attn
Prefill
MoE
Attn
Prefill
Attn
Prefill
MoE
MoE
5 Active 
Experts
Attn
MoE
2 
Active 
Experts
Launch decode
Blocking!
CPU Intervention
(Use Different Green Contexts)
Dynamic Computation
Different Resource Demand
Bubble!
Figure 2. Limitations of prefill-decode colocation solutions.
GPU work is launched as kernels through CUDA streams.
Kernels in one stream execute in order, while kernels in
different streams may overlap when resources are available.
Within a kernel, threads form warps, warps form cooperative
thread arrays (CTAs), and CTAs may form clusters. A CTA
runs on one SM until completion, while CTAs in a cluster
can cooperate across SMs. High-performance GEMM kernels
specialize warps for data movement and Tensor Core compu-
tation, then pipeline them to hide memory latency [15, 56].
2.3
Large-scale MoE LLM Serving
MoE weights often exceed one GPU’s memory, so serving
systems use expert parallelism (EP) to shard experts across
GPUs. Because routing decisions vary by token, dispatch
sends activations to the ranks hosting the selected experts
and combine returns their outputs. Both operations are com-
monly implemented as all-to-all communication [15]. Serv-
ing systems can hide part of this cost with two-batch over-
lap (TBO), which overlaps one microbatch’s communication
with another’s computation, or single-batch overlap (SBO),
which overlaps communication with shared-expert compu-
tation in the same microbatch.
Attention admits a different parallelization because its
weights are much smaller. Data parallelism (DP) replicates
attention to favor throughput and KV-cache capacity with
little communication. Tensor parallelism (TP) shards atten-
tion to reduce per-request latency, but adds communication
and may reduce effective KV-cache capacity when entries
are replicated. Therefore, the resource demand and best con-
figurations of attention and MoE often differ [43, 60].
2.4
Prefill-Decode Disaggregation
Prefill-decode disaggregation (PDD) places the two phases on
different GPU instances to eliminate cross-phase interference
and specialize each instance for its phase [23, 38, 39, 58].
Prefill benefits from hierarchical dispatch and combine due
to the large number of activations [15]. An activation crosses
the scale-out network once to a remote node and is then
multicast over its faster scale-up fabric, avoiding redundant
scale-out transfers when several activated experts reside
on that node. Decode moves far less data per iteration, so
direct transfers to the relevant ranks reduce latency. PDD
also specializes expert computation [56]. Prefill packs many
expert inputs into a contiguous layout to reduce memory.
Decode has too few tokens to amortize this packing, so a
masked layout avoids copies.
Limitations. The isolation, however, creates a rigid and
increasingly coarse deployment granularity. Each prefill or
decode instance must hold a complete model replica, so grow-
ing MoE weights directly increase its minimum GPU count
and duplicated weights displace KV-cache capacity. PDD
must then provision these indivisible instances in a prefill-to-
decode resource ratio that matches the phases’ asymmetric
demands. The smallest combination that realizes this ratio
defines the deployment unit, which becomes much larger
than either phase’s instance alone. One reported DeepSeek-
V3 unit combines 32 prefill and 320 decode GPUs to realize
its target ratio [13]. Another use 176 GPUs as a single unit
for a different load [14]. Kimi-K2 has likewise been deployed
on 128 H200 GPUs [34].
This compounding effect makes the target ratio impossible
to realize in a small cluster, while deviating from it makes one
phase overloaded and leaves another phase overprovisioned.
For a large cluster with sufficient GPUs, each scaling step
changes capacity by hundreds of GPUs and cannot match
moderate traffic shifts efficiently. Larger units also widen
the failure blast radius. Unlike direct transfers, hierarchical
communication couples many ranks into one group, so a
single rank failure can stall the entire unit and is difficult to
recover [15, 44]. PDD therefore obtains isolation at the cost
of memory efficiency, elasticity, and fault containment.
2.5
Prefill-Decode Colocation
Colocation avoids separate model replicas by sharing one
instance across phases. To avoid interference, many tech-
niques are proposed. Chunked prefill splits a long input into
3


--- Page 4 ---
chunks that can be mixed with decode iterations to mitigate
interference [2, 25]. However, it introduces memory access
overhead from rereading prefix cache entries and model
weights [58]. Recent systems colocate the phases through
spatial GPU partitioning [10, 22, 41]. They commonly use
Green Contexts [36] to reserve separate SMs for prefill and
decode, avoiding duplicate model replicas while providing
compute isolation.
Limitations. However, spatial partitioning is inefficient to
handle temporal resource demand variations along three
dimensions. First, under EP, both the number of activated
experts and tokens on a GPU change across layers, so the
MoE load varies by rank and layer [20, 21, 47]. Second, atten-
tion and MoE have different resource demands even within
the same layer [43, 60]. Third, each MoE module alternates
among dispatch, expert computation, and combine, shifting
its bottleneck between communication and computation [4].
A fixed partition cannot follow these changes. Changing an
allocation requires CPU coordination and kernel-completion
waits make per-kernel changes impractical. Existing systems
therefore repartition at the prefill layer boundary [10, 41].
As Figure 2 illustrates, a poor partition creates two fail-
ure modes. If prefill holds too many SMs when decode be-
comes ready, latency-sensitive decode waits behind a non-
preemptible prefill kernel. This head-of-line blocking can be
severe because a prefill kernel may run for tens to hundreds
of milliseconds while a decode kernel finishes in hundreds
of microseconds, a difference of orders of magnitude. If re-
sources remain reserved for decode when it has no ready
work, prefill cannot use them and the GPU develops a re-
source bubble. Rank-varying EP load and different module
characteristics compound both problems.
Existing solutions also leave communication unisolated.
Prefill and decode dispatch and combine share the same
NICs and links, where a large prefill transfer can throttle a
small latency-sensitive decode transfer. Conventional two-
sided communication further requires matching two-side
progress. Independent scheduling can leave some MoE ranks
serving prefill while others serve decode, so each phase waits
for receiver work on ranks occupied by the other and the
system deadlocks. Finally, partitioning every GPU gives each
phase fewer local resources. As Figure 2 shows, meeting
the same latency target may then require a larger degree
of parallelism, which increases communication and further
amplifies network interference.
3
ExpertPlex Overview
To address these problems, we propose ExpertPlex, a dis-
aggregated serving system for MoE LLMs with adaptive
persistent kernels. ExpertPlex shares MoE experts across
phases while disaggregating attention by phase. As shown
in Figure 3, each node assigns a configurable subset of GPUs
to prefill servers, another subset to decode servers, and the
MoE Server 
(rank=4)
MoE Server 
(rank=5)
MoE Server 
(rank=6)
MoE Server 
(rank=7)
Prefill Server 
(rank=0)
Decode Server 
(rank=1)
Decode Server 
(rank=2)
Decode Server 
(rank=3)
MoE Server 
(rank=13)
MoE Server 
(rank=14)
MoE Server 
(rank=15)
Prefill Server 
(rank=8)
Decode Server 
(rank=9)
Decode Server 
(rank=10)
Decode Server 
(rank=11)
Token 0
Token 1
Node 0
Node 1
Scale-up domain comm.
Scale-out domain comm.
Expert i
Expert j
Figure 3. Architecture of ExpertPlex.
remaining GPUs to MoE servers. Prefill and decode servers in
each node can be empty. Prefill and decode servers run their
respective attention modules, while MoE servers host the
MoE experts and execute expert computation for both phases.
Because attention weights occupy only a small fraction of the
model while MoE weights account for over 95% of it, sharing
MoE servers eliminates massive MoE weight duplication and
multiplexes dynamically sparse expert computation. Disag-
gregating attention gives each phase full GPUs instead of
GPU partitions, reducing its required degree of parallelism
and communication while eliminating cross-phase attention
network interference. This MoE-weight-independent bound-
ary matches phase demands with fewer GPUs and enables
finer elastic scaling with a smaller failure blast radius.
Each MoE server runs an Adaptive Persistent Kernel (APK)
that keeps the GPU busy with adaptive scheduling (§4). APK
preserves CUDA Graph compatibility and supports spatial
and time multiplexing to maximize computation efficiency.
Its tile-level scheduler follows real-time expert load, pre-
empts prefill for decode within a sequence-length-independent
bound, and reallocates idle SMs without CPU intervention or
kernel relaunch while preserving prefill phase performance.
ExpertPlex uses attention-initiated one-sided primitives
for MoE communication (§5). Attention servers push dis-
patch data into and pull combine results from final MoE-side
buffers. Direct final-buffer access removes MoE-side coordi-
nation and polling, avoids deadlock, and overlaps communi-
cation with computation across phases. To reduce network
interference, prefill scale-out traffic travels between attention
modules whenever possible, while decode communicates di-
rectly between attention and MoE servers.
4


--- Page 5 ---
API Inter-
ception [16,
19, 49]
CUDA
streams [35]
NVIDIA
MPS [1]
Green Con-
text [36]
NVIDIA
MIG [37]
ExpertPlex
CUDA Graph Compatibility
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Time Multiplexing
✓
✓
✓
Spatial Multiplexing
✓
✓
Limited
✓
Bounded Fast Preemption
✓
Bounded Fast Reallocation
✓
Table 1. Comparison between ExpertPlex and existing GPU sharing solutions.
Finally, a cross-stack optimizer models ExpertPlex from
the tile level to the cluster level (§6). It jointly selects APK
policies, placements, resource ratios, parallelism, and overlap
strategies to maximize goodput under both phase SLOs.
4
Adaptive Persistent Kernel
4.1
GPU Sharing Design Space
Across MoE LLMs, prefill processes all input tokens, whereas
each decode iteration processes only one new token per re-
quest. The duration gap between their operations therefore
grows with input length. For example, with EP4 on MiniMax-
M2.7, grouped GEMMs for decode with eight active experts
take 17.7–34.7 𝜇s, while matched prefill GEMMs with 16K
tokens take 1.8–2.9 ms, or 84–101× longer. The exact ratio
is model dependent, but this trend is universal. Because ev-
ery layer invokes an MoE operation, blocking can recur at
every layer and accumulate into end-to-end decode latency.
Static partitioning avoids this interference only by leaving
resources idle whenever a phase is communicating or has no
ready operation. A useful sharing mechanism must prevent
repeated blocking without stranding this idle capacity.
Efficient sharing therefore requires five complementary
properties, summarized in Table 1. CUDA Graph compati-
bility avoids per-operation CPU intervention and its launch
and synchronization overhead on short decode paths. Spatial
multiplexing lets different SM subsets execute both phases
concurrently. It lends SMs to the computing phase while
the other communicates and changes the split across layers
as routing shifts the expert load on each rank. Time multi-
plexing lets the same SM switch phases over time when its
current phase has no ready operation. Bounded preemption
prevents a long prefill operation from causing severe head-
of-line blocking, while bounded reallocation lets a newly
ready phase reclaim SMs quickly enough to avoid bubbles.
Launch-time mechanisms miss several properties. API
interception [16, 19, 49] offers only launch-boundary time
multiplexing. It lacks CUDA Graph compatibility, spatial mul-
tiplexing, and bounded preemption and reallocation. CUDA
streams with priorities [35] support graph replay and launch-
time ordering, but provide no spatial isolation or bounded
resource handoff once a kernel begins execution.
Hardware partitioning provides spatial isolation but re-
mains static. MPS [1] and Green Context [36] support graph-
compatible spatial multiplexing, but fix the allocation during
a kernel. They lack in-kernel time multiplexing and bounded
preemption and reallocation. MPS also leaves cache and
shared-memory interference on a shared SM unpredictable.
MIG [37] provides hard but highly restricted spatial isolation.
H100 exposes only 1g, 2g, 3g, 4g, and 7g profiles, so the only
two-way split that lets two phases collectively use the GPU’s
full compute capacity is 3g–4g. MIG lacks time multiplex-
ing and preemption, and driver-level reconfiguration cannot
bound reallocation latency. It therefore cannot follow the
layer-level load changes described above for either phase.
4.2
Tile-Level Scheduling
These requirements favor a scheduling unit that is short
and native to optimized GPU operations. APK chooses a
tile, the smallest independently completable unit of these
operations. Registers, shared memory, TMA buffers, and
Tensor Core shapes bound its dimensions, so longer inputs
add tiles without enlarging them. For example, our SM90
DeepGEMM configuration [56] uses CTA tiles of at most a
128×192 output block with a 128-wide reduction tile. Across
MoE-side operations, tile boundaries occur every 2.2–25.3 𝜇s,
independent of the total operation length (Figure 15). Input
length stretches an operation by adding scheduling units
rather than lengthening each scheduling interval.
APK switches phases only after the current tile commits.
No accumulator, TMA transaction, shared-memory buffer,
or communication state remains live at this boundary, so
switching needs no checkpoint, restore, or recomputation.
Finer preemption would preserve pipeline state, while kernel-
or layer-level scheduling would retain long blocking inter-
vals. APK keeps each operation’s native CTA or cluster shape,
TMA multicast, and warp-specialized pipeline. The scheduler
changes only the next tile, leaving each operation’s pipeline
and synchronization intact throughout execution.
Before APK starts, ExpertPlex builds an operation tem-
plate including buffers and TMA descriptors for every MoE
operation. At runtime, an attention server signals a ready
operation. CTA 0 instantiates its template into the decode
or prefill queue and updates runtime fields such as the layer,
token count, and SM budget. APK schedules at CTA-cluster
5


--- Page 6 ---
P
pi
Other
Devices
TMA 
warp
Math 
warp
SMEM
CTA 0
TMA 
warp
Math 
warp
SMEM
CTA i
…
TMA 
warp
Math 
warp
SMEM
CTA i+1
CTA Cluster w/ DSMEM
Global Memory
System scope
Device scope
Figure 4. Tile-level preemption mechanism.
granularity because CTAs connected by TMA multicast must
execute the same tile. The cluster leader selects an tile and
broadcasts its metadata to peer CTAs. Different clusters ex-
ecute different phases for spatial multiplexing, while each
cluster switches phases at tile boundaries for time multiplex-
ing and fast reallocation. Because APK is long lived and all
scheduling occurs on the GPU, this process requires neither
CPU intervention nor kernel relaunch and remains compati-
ble with CUDA Graph replay throughout execution.
4.3
Bounded Tile-level Preemption
Independent tile-boundary checks are unsafe because high-
performance operations pipeline both warps and CTAs across
tiles. Within a CTA, a TMA warp may load tile 𝑘+ 1 while
math warps consume tile 𝑘. If one warp switches phases, an-
other can wait forever for data or an mbarrier event from the
old phase. Across a CTA cluster, an independently switching
CTA can similarly strand peers at a TMA multicast or cluster
barrier. Stalling the entire cluster after every tile prevents
both deadlocks but serializes a microsecond-scale pipeline
and defeats fine-grained scheduling.
APK instead propagates one cooperative decision through
the memory hierarchy shown in Figure 4. An attention server
signals an urgent decode operation through the system-scope
word 𝑃. CTA 0 checks 𝑃at a tile boundary of its current op-
eration and writes one device-scope word 𝑝𝑖for each cluster
𝑖. Each cluster reads only its 𝑝𝑖, avoiding repeated system-
scope accesses and a grid-wide barrier. At its next tile bound-
ary, the leader CTA broadcasts the decision through DSMEM
so every CTA participating in TMA multicast stays on the
same operation. Within each CTA, the first pipeline warp
reads the decision, broadcasts it within the warp, and uses an
mbarrier handoff to notify later warps before they claim an-
other tile. The decision remains fixed within a check epoch,
so no CTA can claim another old-phase tile after observing it.
The slowest CTA therefore finishes at most its current tile be-
fore the cluster converges on the new phase. The propagation
follows the GPU memory hierarchy through system memory,
device memory, DSMEM, shared memory, and warp broad-
cast. It prevents mixed-phase dependencies both within a
CTA and across a CTA cluster without draining the pipeline
after every tile. Preemption is bounded by one tile execution
time plus one local cluster check epoch. This bound remains
independent of the interrupted operation’s total length.
5
Attention-initiated MoE Communication
5.1
Concurrent Communication over a Shared
Network
Disaggregating prefill and decode attention onto different
servers eliminates cross-phase interference for attention
communication. The remaining contention point is therefore
MoE communication, because both phases dispatch routed
activations to, and combine expert outputs from, the same
MoE server pool. Existing MoE communication usually uses
a two-sided protocol for two reasons. Token routing reveals
destinations and transfer sizes only at runtime, and the com-
munication operator is decoupled from the compute operator
that consumes its output. The sender therefore streams data
into a bounded receiver-side ring buffer, while the receiver
polls and drains that buffer, scatters arrivals into the final
tensor, and returns credits that prevent the sender from over-
writing unread slots. The ring buffer bounds memory use,
but progress now requires both sides. With concurrent prefill
and decode, independent GPU scheduling can leave some
MoE ranks running prefill kernels and others running decode
kernels. Each phase then waits for receiver kernels on ranks
occupied by the other phase, so neither ring buffer is drained
nor returns the credits needed for its senders to finish. The
blocked sender cannot retire and release its GPU resources
for the other phase’s receiver kernel. This cross-phase cycle
can deadlock an otherwise correct protocol.
Reserving receiver-side polling SMs avoids this liveness
failure only by wasting compute capacity. MoE traffic is
bursty, so these SMs spin between dispatches and cannot
execute ready expert tiles. Letting compute borrow them
is unsafe because receiver progress would again depend on
whether enough SMs become available at every rank. Net-
work contention remains as well. Optimized MoE transfers
can saturate the fabric [15], while scale-out bandwidth is
scarce. For example, DeepSeek-V3 reports 160 GB/s intra-
node NVLink bandwidth but only 50 GB/s cross-node In-
finiBand bandwidth on H800, a 3.2× bandwidth gap [13]. A
prefill burst can delay latency-sensitive decode even when
the phases use different GPUs.
5.2
One-Sided Dispatch and Combine
Our key insight is to remove MoE-side progress with one-
sided transfers initiated by attention servers. ExpertPlex
uses both push and pull primitives of the scale-up links, i.e.,
NVLink and scale-out links, i.e., RDMA. APK already preallo-
cates each operation’s buffers for its maximum routed-token
volume. This requirement follows from APK’s persistent ex-
ecution because its operation templates, tensor addresses,
and communication descriptors must be fixed before run-
time scheduling. ExpertPlex exposes these final dispatch and
combine buffers to attention servers and removes the inter-
mediate ring buffer. Transfers consequently need neither
receiver-side draining and scattering nor credit feedback
6


--- Page 7 ---
to throttle a sender. MoE servers expose only buffers and
readiness words, with no matching communication kernel or
reserved polling SMs. Dispatch uses an attention-side push.
After routing determines each expert’s destination and fi-
nal offset, the attention server writes activations into that
location through NVLink peer stores or one-sided RDMA
writes. It publishes a ready signal only after the payload is
visible. APK does not coordinate this transfer and schedules
the MoE task after observing that signal at a tile boundary.
Combine reverses the data flow but remains attention ini-
tiated. After expert computation writes the final combine
buffer and publishes a done signal, a small WaitDone kernel
on the attention GPU observes completion and the attention
server pulls the result through NVLink loads or one-sided
RDMA reads. WaitDone is a single-thread kernel, so it can
coexist with TBO or SBO and preserve their attention-side
overlap. It runs on the communication stream and blocks
only the dependent pull, while the compute stream continues
the work exposed by the selected overlap strategy. Mean-
while, removing MoE-side communication kernels lets APK
overlap one phase’s MoE computation with the other phase’s
dispatch or combine, as Figure 5 shows. For example, APK
can execute prefill tiles while decode waits to combine, or
execute urgent decode tiles while a prefill transfer is in flight.
This mechanism is compatible with each phase’s original
overlap strategy but adds cross-phase opportunities. Prefill
and decode follow independent dependency chains, so this
overlap is not limited by the intra-phase dependencies that
constrain TBO and SBO and can keep the SMs busy as long
as there is work available.
5.3
Hierarchical Prefill Path and Traffic Isolation
One-sided transfers remove MoE-side coordination, but pre-
fill and decode can still contend for scarce RDMA bandwidth.
Our key insight is to route most prefill scale-out traffic be-
tween prefill attention servers, reserving direct attention-to-
MoE paths primarily for decode. Latency-sensitive decode
accesses each MoE server directly through local NVLink
or remote RDMA. For a remote node with a prefill server,
the source sends each activation once over RDMA to prefill
server with the same local rank on that node. The receiver
multicasts it out over NVLink to all activated experts chunk
by chunk. For combine, the same server gathers outputs
over NVLink and returns the combined result through the
prefill-only RDMA path. This path preserves hierarchical
deduplication because activations for multiple experts on one
remote node cross the scarce scale-out link only once. The
placement optimizer spreads prefill servers across nodes to
make this path common (§6). When a destination node lacks
a prefill server, ExpertPlex uses direct one-sided RDMA but
assigns prefill a lower-priority InfiniBand virtual lane than
decode. Topology thus separates the phases whenever pos-
sible, while virtual-lane priority protects latency-sensitive
decode when they must share a scale-out link.
CTA Clusters
MoE Server’s GPU
Decode Server’s Comm. Stream
Prefill Server’s Comm. Stream
Dispatch
Write start signal
Combine
Read done signal
WaitDone
Dispatch
Write start signal
Preempt!
WaitDone
Combine
Read done signal
WaitDone
Combine
Read done signal
…
Data 
Transfer
Data 
Transfer
Data 
Transfer
Data 
Transfer
Decode’s MoE computation
Prefill’s MoE computation
Figure 5. Cross-phase overlap enabled by attention-initiated
one-sided transfers.
6
Cross-stack Placement Optimizer
6.1
Cross-stack Scheduling Problem
Although the mechanisms above expose enough control to
adaptively schedule prefill and decode with stricter isolation
at finer granularity, they also couple decisions convention-
ally made by different layers of the serving stack. For exam-
ple, changing the number of prefill servers simultaneously
changes the degree of parallelism, the KV-cache capacity,
and the communication path. Optimizing placement, over-
lap, or GPU sharing in isolation can therefore select a locally
efficient configuration that violates an SLO once these ef-
fects interact. We instead jointly search the attention and
MoE parallelism, server placement, overlap strategy, and
APK sharing policy.
We formalize a configuration as a layout ℓand a decode
SM budget 𝑞under contention. For (ℓ,𝑞), let 𝐵𝑝and 𝐵𝑑de-
note the largest prefill and decode batches whose modeled
iteration latencies 𝑇𝑝and 𝑇𝑑meet their respective SLOs, and
let ¯𝑂be the average output length. The request-level goodput
is defined as
𝐺(ℓ,𝑞) = min
𝐵𝑝
𝑇𝑝
, 𝐵𝑑
𝑇𝑑¯𝑂

.
(1)
The minimum captures pipeline balance because each re-
quest consumes one prefill iteration but ¯𝑂decode iterations.
We admit only candidates satisfying both phase SLOs and
maximize 𝐺over the feasible candidates, rather than over-
provisioning either phase in isolation.
6.2
Tile-aware Latency Model
Evaluating every candidate on a full cluster would make the
search prohibitively expensive. ExpertPlex instead profiles
attention and MoE kernels, including APK overhead, on only
a few representative GPUs and interpolates their per-rank
latency. Network time requires no profiling GPU. The model
computes it directly from routed bytes, measured RDMA or
NVLink bandwidth, and the hierarchical path in §5. For each
layout, it derives the work on every rank from the attention
and MoE parallelism, placement, routing, and sharing policy.
7


--- Page 8 ---
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
Per expert batch size
0
50
100
150
200
Execution time (us)
GateUp #expert=1
Down #expert=1
GateUp #expert=2
Down #expert=2
GateUp #expert=4
Down #expert=4
GateUp #expert=8
Down #expert=8
GateUp #expert=16
Down #expert=16
GateUp #expert=32
Down #expert=32
GateUp #expert=64
Down #expert=64
Figure 6. Latency of MoE Grouped GEMMs under different
numbers of active experts and tokens.
For a profiled component 𝑐, we fit a small set of input
samples with
ˆ𝑡𝑐(𝑥,𝑠) = 𝛼𝑐+ 𝛽𝑐𝑥+ 𝛾𝑐𝑥𝑠+ 𝛿𝑐𝑥𝑠2.
(2)
For attention, 𝑥is the local batch size and 𝑠is the sequence
length. Our key observation is that raw routed-token count is
insufficient for MoE computation because its latency follows
the number of executed tiles. If expert 𝑒receives 𝑚𝑒token
rows and the kernel tile height is 𝑀𝑡, the MoE footprint is
𝑥moe =
∑︁
𝑒|𝑚𝑒>0
𝑚𝑒
𝑀𝑡

(3)
and we evaluate the fitted form with 𝑥= 𝑥moe and 𝑠= 1. Fig-
ure 6 illustrates this distinction. Batches with the same num-
ber of tokens can have different latency when they activate
different numbers of experts. This behavior is fundamental to
tiled MoE kernels rather than specific to one model or GPU.
Tensor Core and TMA pipelines operate on aligned tiles,
and each active expert triggers at least one tile’s metadata,
weight transfer, and computation even if it receives only a
few tokens. Thus sparse routing changes latency through
both token volume and its per-expert packing. By predicting
the per-expert token vector and interpolating on 𝑥moe, the
model captures this general effect with a small GPU profile
set instead of profiling every full-cluster layout.
6.3
Offline Search Algorithm
Algorithm 1 jointly searches these choices for the workload’s
expected input and output lengths. The generator enumer-
ates layouts L, where each ℓspecifies the number of MoE
servers, the number of attention servers, the prefill-to-decode
server ratio, and the layout of all servers. FitsMemory first
rejects layouts that cannot hold attention and expert weights
or sufficient KV caches.
For every remaining layout, Qℓenumerates decode SM
budgets. For each (ℓ,𝑞), MaxFeasibleBatch binary-searches
up to the configured and KV-cache bounds for each phase
(lines 6–7). At each probe, the model from §6.2 estimates the
attention latency, the tile-aware MoE computation latency
under 𝑞SMs, and the communication latency. The overall
iteration latency is then estimated as the sum of latencies
Algorithm 1 Cross-stack placement search
1: 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡←⊥
2: for all ℓ∈L do
3:
if ¬FitsMemory(ℓ) then
4:
continue
5:
for all 𝑞∈Qℓdo
6:
(𝐵𝑝, ok𝑝) ←MaxFeasibleBatch(ℓ,𝑞, prefill)
7:
(𝐵𝑑, ok𝑑) ←MaxFeasibleBatch(ℓ,𝑞, decode)
8:
if ok𝑝∧ok𝑑then
9:
𝑔←𝐺(ℓ,𝑞)
10:
if 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡= ⊥∨𝑔> 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡.𝑔then
11:
𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡←(ℓ,𝑞, 𝐵𝑝, 𝐵𝑑,𝑔)
12: return 𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡
on the critical-path. Under TBO, ExpertPlex uses one mi-
crobatch’s attention overlaps another’s communication and
MoE computation, so the iteration latency is the maximum of
these two paths. Under SBO, ExpertPlex uses shared-expert
computation overlaps routed-expert computation and com-
munication within one microbatch, so the iteration latency is
their maximum plus the attention latency. Lines 8–11 retain
only configurations feasible for both phases and select the
one with maximum 𝐺. The selected configuration jointly
fixes the parallelism, placement, overlap strategy, and the
expected decode SM budget.
6.4
Online SM Reallocation
The offline solution targets an average workload, whereas
routing changes 𝑥moe across layers and servers, and either
phase may temporarily have no ready MoE computation.
APK therefore interprets 𝑞as a contention policy rather than
a static partition. When only one phase is ready, it uses all
CTA clusters. Under contention, it scales 𝑞by the ratio of
the current decode footprint 𝑥moe to the offline expectation
𝑥★
moe as follows.
𝑞′ = min

𝑄max,
𝑞𝑥moe
𝑥★moe

𝑐

,
(4)
Here, ⌈·⌉𝑐rounds up to a CTA-cluster multiple, 𝑄max pre-
serves prefill progress, and prefill receives the remaining
clusters. The reason of protecting decode share first is that de-
code is more latency-sensitive, and that outputs for already-
started requests should be served before inputs for new re-
quests. For the prefill phase, APK uses all the remaining SMs
to preserve throughput as high as possible.
7
Evaluation
7.1
Experiment Setup
Implementation. We implement ExpertPlex by modifying
DeepGEMM [56], DeepEP v1 [15], and SGLang [57]. The
adaptive persistent kernel (APK) is implementated based on
DeepGEMM and DeepEP v1. We fuse two grouped GEMMs,
8


--- Page 9 ---
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TTFT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPOT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
SGLang-ChunkedPrefill (Chunk=2048, DP8EP8)
SGLang-Colocated (DP8EP8)
ExpertPlex (1P3D4E)
SGLang-PDD (1P1D x DP4EP4)
SGLang-PDMux (TP8EP8)
Figure 7. SLO attainment of ExpertPlex and baselines on the MiniMax-M2.7 and ShareGPT datasets.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TTFT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPOT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
SGLang-ChunkedPrefill (Chunk=2048, DP8EP8)
SGLang-Colocated (8DP8EP)
ExpertPlex (3P1D4E)
SGLang-PDD (1P1D x DP4EP4)
SGLang-PDMux (TP8EP8)
Figure 8. SLO attainment of ExpertPlex and baselines on the MiniMax-M2.7 and LooGLE datasets.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TTFT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0
1
2
3
4
5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPOT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0
1
2
3
4
5
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
SGLang-ChunkedPrefill (Chunk=4096, DP16EP16)
SGLang-Colocated (DP16EP16)
ExpertPlex (3P6D15E)
SGLang-PDMux (TP16EP16)
Figure 9. SLO attainment of ExpertPlex and baselines on the GLM-5.1-FP8 and ShareGPT datasets.
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TTFT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
TPOT SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Request Rate (req/s/node)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
SLO Attainment (%)
90% SLO
SGLang-ChunkedPrefill (Chunk=4096, 16DP16EP)
SGLang-Colocated (16DP16EP)
ExpertPlex (6P3D15EP)
SGLang-PDMux (TP16EP16)
Figure 10. SLO attainment of ExpertPlex and baselines on the GLM-5.1-FP8 and LooGLE datasets.
activation functions, MoE data preprocessing, MoE data post-
processing and CTA-cluster scheduler into one long-lived
persistent kernel on each MoE GPU. For each operation, the
host determines tile sizes before launch and JIT-compiles
them as constants at startup to reduce register pressure.
We also replace DeepEP’s receiver-driven all-to-all path
with the attention-initiated M-to-N path described in Figure 3
and Figure 5. Dispatch writes routed activations and meta-
data directly into the target MoE buffers without receiver-
side coordination. Combine is initiated from the attention
side through pull semantics, so the MoE server only publishes
finished expert outputs and ready signals. For the Infiniband
GPUDirect Async (IBGDA) path, we customize nvshmemi_
ibgda_get_nbi_warp to support fine-grained pulls from re-
mote combine buffers over a specific RDMA connection. In
SGLang, we add support for the disaggregated attention and
shared-MoE layout, the MoE token dispatcher for this layout,
and a OperationsStrategy for communication overlap.
Models. We use MiniMax-M2.7 for single-node experiments
and GLM-5.1-FP8 for multi-node experiments. Both models
use 256 routed experts per MoE layer and activate eight
routed experts per token. MiniMax-M2.7 has a 230 GB FP8
model footprint in our deployment, and each token activates
about 7.0B routed expert parameters across layers. GLM-
5.1-FP8 has a 756 GB FP8 model footprint and 724.8B routed
expert parameters, of which each token activates about 22.6B.
The former uses full attention, the latter uses DSA.
Testbed. Single-node experiments run on one NVIDIA H800
node with eight GPUs connected by NVLink. Multi-node
9


--- Page 10 ---
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Latency of decode's grouped GEMM (us)
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Latency of prefill's grouped GEMM (us)
Exclusive
Green Context
ExpertPlex
CUDA Stream
MPS
Figure 11. Pareto frontier of GPU sharing mechanisms.
experiments use up to three machines. Each machine has
eight NVIDIA H800 GPUs connected by NVLink. Machines
are connected by eight 200 Gbps InfiniBand NICs per node.
All throughput numbers are reported as requests per second
per node when systems use different numbers of nodes.
Baselines. Because ExpertPlex is implemented in SGLang,
all baselines use SGLang-based implementations to isolate
system-level differences. SGLang-Colocated is the original
SGLang serving mode. It enables DP for attention and EP for
MoE. When memory allows, it enables two-batch overlap
to improve throughput. SGLang-ChunkedPrefill additionally
enables chunked prefill with the best chunk size found in
prior tuning for the corresponding workload and model.
Other settings match SGLang-Colocated. SGLang-PDD im-
plements widely used prefill-decode disaggregation. Because
MoE weights consume most GPU memory, MiniMax-M2.7
uses a 1P1D deployment. GLM-5.1-FP8 runs out of memory
under this PDD layout on 24 GPUs, so we do not report
GLM-5.1-FP8 PDD numbers. SGLang-PDMux is based on the
open-source MuxWise implementation. MuxWise targets
dense models and uses Green Context to partition GPU re-
sources, so we modify it to support MoE models. Because
its implementation is compatible only with tensor parallel
attention, it uses TP for attention and EP for MoE. Several
baselines cannot express ExpertPlex’s 24-GPU fine-grained
layout under their parallelism constraints. For GLM-5.1-FP8,
those baselines run on the largest compatible 16-GPU layout,
and we compare request rate per node for fair comparison.
Workloads. Following prior works, we sample input and
output lengths from ShareGPT and LooGLE to represent
short and long requests. Request arrivals follow a Poisson
process. Because SGLang-PDD leaves less GPU memory for
the KV cache after duplicating MoE weights across prefill
and decode instances, we cap sampled sequence lengths at
the PDD KV-cache capacity.
Metrics. The main metric is P90 goodput, defined as the
highest arrival rate at which at least 90% of requests meet
both their time to first token (TTFT) and time per output
token (TPOT) SLOs. For MiniMax-M2.7 on ShareGPT, the
TTFT SLO is 1 s and the TPOT SLO is 50 ms. For MiniMax-
M2.7 on LooGLE, the TTFT SLO is 10 s and the TPOT SLO
Prefill's grouped GEMM
Decode's grouped GEMM
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
Slowdown vs exclusive (x)
1.00x
1.00x
1.08x
1.12x
1.24x
3.33x
13.79x
1.04x
1.34x
4.07x
Exclusive
ExpertPlex
MPS
CUDA Stream
Green Context
Figure 12. Case study of preemption slowdown.
is 100 ms. For GLM-5.1-FP8 on ShareGPT, the TTFT SLO
is 2 s and the TPOT SLO is 100 ms. For GLM-5.1-FP8 on
LooGLE, the TTFT SLO is 20 s and the TPOT SLO is 100 ms.
These SLOs follow the range used by prior disaggregated
and high-goodput serving work [10, 43, 55, 60].
7.2
End-to-End Performance
Figures 7, 8, 9, and 10 show the goodput of all systems on
different models and workloads. Across the four settings,
ExpertPlex improves goodput by matching phase resources
at the MoE-attention boundary instead of duplicating the
whole model or partitioning every GPU by phase.
For MiniMax-M2.7 on ShareGPT, ExpertPlex reaches 11.3
requests per second per node under the joint SLO. This is
5.65× higher than SGLang-ChunkedPrefill, 2.72× higher than
SGLang-Colocated, 2.01× higher than SGLang-PDD, and
1.41× higher than SGLang-PDMux.
Chunked prefill performs worst. Each chunk rereads model
weights and the KV cache and repeats MoE communica-
tion. Large chunks still interfere with decode, whereas small
chunks reduce prefill efficiency. Colocated serving runs pre-
fill aggressively to build larger batches and improve through-
put, but lets long prefill delay decode iterations. SGLang-PDD
removes prefill-decode interference, but it duplicates massive
MoE weights and leaves less room for KV cache. Instance-
level disaggregation also leads to resource mismatch, so the
prefill phase uses only part of the available resources even
when decode is not the bottleneck. SGLang-PDMux improves
over colocated serving by using Green Context, yet its GPU
partitions cannot follow the actual number of active experts
on each MoE rank. It also introduces cross-phase communica-
tion interference and requires a larger degree of parallelism.
ExpertPlex avoids these failure modes by sharing the MoE
pool with APKs while disaggregating attention modules.
On MiniMax-M2.7 with LooGLE, longer requests mag-
nify the difference. SGLang-ChunkedPrefill cannot sustain
the SLO over the evaluated load range because longer in-
puts amplify its memory-access overhead. They also amplify
interference in SGLang-Colocated, over which ExpertPlex
improves goodput by 4.12×; the improvement over SGLang-
PDMux is 1.28× on this workload.
10


--- Page 11 ---
0
10000
20000
30000
Per expert batch size
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
Execution time (us)
0
5
10
15
Number of experts
0
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
DeepGEMM-GateUp
DeepGEMM-Down
ExpertPlex-GateUp
ExpertPlex-DeepGEMM
GateUp Overhead
Down Overhead
(a) Contiguous layout.
(b) Masked layout.
Figure 13. Overhead of adaptive persistent kernels.
GLM-5.1-FP8 shows similar improvements in multi-node
deployments. Compared with SGLang-ChunkedPrefill, Ex-
pertPlex improves goodput by 3.3× on ShareGPT and 5.0×
on LooGLE. Compared with SGLang-Colocated, ExpertPlex
improves goodput by 1.5× on ShareGPT and 2.5× on LooGLE.
On ShareGPT, ExpertPlex and SGLang-PDMux achieve simi-
lar joint goodput of about 1.5 requests per second per node.
PDMux’s tensor-parallel attention gives each short request
more parallelism and thus a TTFT advantage, but adds com-
munication and allocates resources without regard to MoE
sparsity. On LooGLE, this advantage fades and ExpertPlex
improves goodput over SGLang-PDMux by 1.66×. Long re-
quests expose network interference and Green Context’s in-
ability to maximize GPU utilization while preserving TPOT.
7.3
Effectiveness of APKs
We evaluate APK’s GPU sharing mechanism with concurrent
prefill- and decode-shaped grouped GEMMs from GLM-5.1-
FP8 on one GPU. The decode grouped GEMM is launched
10 𝜇s after the prefill grouped GEMM. The number of tokens
is 128 in the decode phase an 8192 in the prefill phase, and
all activate eight experts. We compare APK with exclusive
execution, priority CUDA streams, MPS, and Green Context.
Figure 11 plots the Pareto frontier. CUDA stream priorities
order kernel launches but provide no isolation after launch,
so decode waits behind a running prefill GEMM, leading to
significant head-of-line blocking. Green Context spatially
isolates the phases, but its fixed partition prevents either
phase from borrowing the other’s idle SMs, leading to re-
source bubbles. MPS multiplexes space more flexibly, but
still cannot time-multiplex an SM at tile granularity within
a running kernel. APK is the only mechanism that reaches
the low-latency region for the decode phase while keeping
the prefill phase high performance.
Figure 12 shows the result under the decode-latency pro-
tection target. CUDA streams increase decode latency by
13.79× over exclusive execution. MPS and Green Context
keep latency of the decode phase close to exclusive execu-
tion, but their fixed allocations slow prefill by 3.33× and
4.07×. In contrast, ExpertPlex adds only 8% overhead to the
4096
8192
16384
32768
Number of tokens
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
Execution time (us)
16
64
256
1024
Number of tokens
0
200
400
600
800
Dispatch
Combine
DeepEPv1
ExpertPlex
(a) Normal mode.
(b) Low-latency mode.
Figure 14. Overhead of attention-initiated communication.
decode phase and slows prefill by only 1.12×. The reason is
that decode GEMMs are short and intermittent, APK gives
all idle CTA clusters to prefill, only preempts prefill when
decode arrives, and reallocates idle SMs back to prefill when
decode completes the execution.
7.4
Overhead of Tile-Level Scheduling
Tile-level scheduling adds queue checks, task selection, and
CTA-budget enforcement to grouped GEMM. We measure
its overhead against DeepGEMM using the configuration
from §7.3. Figure 13(a) evaluates the contiguous layout used
by prefill. The x-axis varies per-expert batch size, the domi-
nant factor in prefill GEMM time. Scheduling adds less than
12% overhead because it runs once per tile group without
changing the TMA or Tensor Core pipelines.
Figure 13(b) evaluates the masked layout used by decode.
For decode, execution time depends more on the number
of active experts than on the number of tokens. Scheduling
adds less than 20 𝜇s across all measured active-expert counts.
This small cost replaces a much longer wait behind prefill
kernels. Moreover, because each token can activate eight
experts, its relative overhead falls below 10% for grouped
GEMMs with many active experts.
7.5
Overhead of Attention-Initiated MoE
Communication
Figure 14 measures the attention-initiated MoE communica-
tion described in §5. On 16 GPUs, we compare DeepEP v1
with ExpertPlex’s attention-initiated one-sided dispatch and
combine under both normal and low-latency execution.
In normal mode, dispatch and combine track DeepEP v1
within about 5%, preserving hierarchical communication’s
bandwidth benefit. Low-latency dispatch and combine ex-
pose measurement noise, yet the difference remains within
about 45 𝜇s. Thus, removing MoE-side coordination and us-
ing pull-based combine integrates communication with APK
without sacrificing communication efficiency, while leaving
MoE-server SMs available to the other phase.
7.6
Analysis of Preemption Intervals
ExpertPlex tunes GEMM and data-processing tiles for oper-
ation performance rather than shrinking them to improve
11


--- Page 12 ---
250
500
750
LithOS: 250 us
Bless: 700 us
128
256
512
1024
2048
Per expert batch size
0
20
40
60
80
100
GPREEMPT: 100 us
REEF: 35 us
EP Scatter Stage 1
EP Scatter Stage 2
UpGate GEMM
SiLU + Mul + Quant
Down GEMM
EP Gather
Preemption Interval (us)
Figure 15. Preemption interval of different tasks.
preemption. Under these tile sizes, Figure 15 shows that all
MiniMax-M2.7 MoE operations have intervals below 25.3 𝜇s,
and particularly GEMM intervals stay below 10.7 𝜇s. The
interval depends on tile execution time, not token count,
allowing a short decode operation to preempt work from a
prefill request with thousands of input tokens.
We compare against the best reported delays of LithOS,
Bless, GPreempt, PipeSwitch, and REEF [7, 12, 16, 19, 53]
only as reference points, since they do not target MoE LLM
workloads and lack the support of modern MoE kernel fea-
tures such as TMA multicast, CTA clusters, warp specializa-
tion, and CUDA Graph. APK instead schedules at natural tile
boundaries, performs useful work throughout each interval,
and requires no checkpoint, restore, or recomputation. Even
REEF’s best reported delay is 35 𝜇s and requires recomput-
ing the preempted kernel, which is costly when millisecond-
scale prefill GEMMs are frequently interrupted by decode.
APK therefore achieves finer-grained preemption with lower
pause and resume costs for MoE serving workloads.
8
Related Work
LLM serving systems. Many techniques are propsoed to
adapt to accelerate LLM serving. Prefill-decode disaggrega-
tion (PDD) provisions independent prefill and decode in-
stances to avoid interference between two phases [23, 38,
39, 58]. As discussed in §2, instance-level PDD is inefficient
to deploy on small clusters, enlarges the rank-failure blast
radius and only supports coarse elastic scaling. Chunked pre-
fill instead split prefill work into smaller chunks to reduce
interference [2, 25], while repeated chunk execution intro-
duce extra memory access. Recent GPU partitioning systems
let prefill and decode share a GPU by assigning resources
through mechanisms such as Green Context [10, 22, 31, 41].
However, as desribed in §2, these systems can introduce bub-
bles, head-of-line blocking, network interference, and larger
degree of parallelism. More recent attention-expert disaggre-
gation systems disaggregate attention and expert computa-
tion to fit their different characteristics [43, 55, 60]. However,
these designs are built on instance-level PDD, so they in-
herit the same limitations and further introduce pipeline
bubbles [4]. In contrast, ExpertPlex shares the MoE servers
between phases, which maximizes GPU occupancy and re-
duces bubbles. Its attention-initiated communication fur-
ther introduce communication-computation overlap across
phases. Attention-side techniques such as sequence paral-
lelism [48, 50], attention offloading [29, 30, 46] are orthog-
onal to ExpertPlex. MoE load-balancing [20, 21, 28, 47, 52]
solutions are also orthogonal, while ExpertPlex can absorb
phase-level load shifts through multiplexing.
Kernel scheduling. Many systems improve GPU efficiency
by scheduling work below the operator boundary. Megaker-
nel systems break kernel boundaries, fuse small or memory-
bound operations, and exploit inter-operator parallelism [11,
18, 24, 32, 42, 45, 59]. These techniques target small batch
sizes or intra-phase efficiency, but ExpertPlex targets high-
goodput MoE serving with concurrent prefill and decode
phases, where the scheduler must protect decode SLOs while
keeping prefill throughput high. Other systems overlap com-
putation and communication through fine-grained pipelin-
ing or kernel fusion [4, 9, 54]. They overlap operations within
one phase or one layer pipeline. ExpertPlex keeps these opti-
mizations compatible, but it can also overlap communication
from one phase with computation from the other phase.
GPU sharing and preemption systems provide another
line of fine-grained scheduling [1, 7, 12, 16, 19, 37, 49]. These
systems target multitasking across models or applications
rather than multiple phases of one MoE model. They also
do not supports some modern GPU kernel features such as
TMA multicast, CTA clusters, warp specialization, and CUDA
Graph. More importantly, their preemption mechanisms also
introduce checkpoint, restore, or recomputation overhead.
ExpertPlex uses tile-level scheduling to avoid these issues to
guarantee bounded low preemption and reallocation over-
head with temporal and spatial multiplexing support.
9
Conclusion
We presented ExpertPlex, a high-goodput MoE LLM serving
system that disaggregates attention by phase while shar-
ing massive MoE experts. ExpertPlex shares MoE weights
for memory efficiency, disaggregates attention to reduce at-
tention communication of wide parallelism, uses adaptive
persistent kernels to multiplex dynamic sparse MoE compu-
tation with performance isolation, and initiates one-sided
MoE communication from attention servers to avoid cross-
phase interference and overlap communication with com-
putation. Evaluations on MiniMax-M2.7 and GLM-5.1-FP8
show that ExpertPlex improves goodput by up to 5.65× over
chunked prefill, 2.01× over instance-level prefill-decode dis-
aggregation, 1.66× over Green Context-based prefill-decode
colocation, and 4.12× over naive colocated serving systems.
12


--- Page 13 ---
References
[1] 2025. CUDA Multi-Process Service. (2025). https://docs.nvidia.com/
deploy/pdf/CUDA_Multi_Process_Service_Overview.pdf.
[2] Amey Agrawal, Nitin Kedia, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun
Kwatra, Bhargav Gulavani, Alexey Tumanov, and Ramachandran Ram-
jee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency tradeoff in LLM inference with
Sarathi-Serve. In USENIX OSDI.
[3] DeepSeek AI. 2026. Deepseek-v4: Towards highly efficient million-
token context intelligence. arXiv (2026).
[4] DeepSeek AI. 2026. Revealing the challenges of attention-ffn disaggre-
gation for modern moe models and hardware systems. arXiv (2026).
[5] Minimax AI. 2026. The minimax-m2 series: Mini activations unleashing
max real-world intelligence. arXiv (2026).
[6] Zhipu AI. 2026. Glm-5: from vibe coding to agentic engineering. arXiv
(2026).
[7] Zhihao Bai, Zhen Zhang, Yibo Zhu, and Xin Jin. 2020. Pipeswitch: Fast
pipelined context switching for deep learning applications. In USENIX
OSDI.
[8] Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared
Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh,
Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Christopher Hesse,
Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess,
Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot
Learners. (2020).
[9] Li-Wen Chang, Wenlei Bao, Qi Hou, Chengquan Jiang, Ningxin Zheng,
Yinmin Zhong, Xuanrun Zhang, Zuquan Song, Chengji Yao, Ziheng
Jiang, Haibin Lin, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. 2024. FLUX: Fast Software-
based Communication Overlap On GPUs Through Kernel Fusion. In
arXiv.
[10] Yukang Chen, Weihao Cui, Han Zhao, Ziyi Xu, Xiaoze Fan, Xusheng
Chen, Yangjie Zhou, Shixuan Sun, Bingsheng He, and Quan Chen. 2026.
Towards High-Goodput LLM Serving with Prefill-decode Multiplexing.
In ACM ASPLOS.
[11] Xinhao Cheng, Zhihao Zhang, Yu Zhou, Jianan Ji, Jinchen Jiang,
Zepeng Zhao, Ziruo Xiao, Zihao Ye, Yingyi Huang, Ruihang Lai,
Hongyi Jin, Bohan Hou, Mengdi Wu, Yixin Dong, Anthony Yip, Zihao
Ye, Songting Wang, Wenqin Yang, Xupeng Miao, Tianqi Chen, and
Zhihao Jia. 2026. MPK: A Compiler and Runtime for Mega-Kernelizing
Tensor Programs. In USENIX OSDI.
[12] Patrick H. Coppock, Brian Zhang, Eliot H. Solomon, Vasilis Kypriotis,
Leon Yang, Bikash Sharma, Dan Schatzberg, Todd C. Mowry, and
Dimitrios Skarlatos. 2025. LithOS: An Operating System for Efficient
Machine Learning on GPUs. In ACM SOSP.
[13] DeepSeek-AI. 2024. DeepSeek-V3 Technical Report. In arXiv.
[14] DeepSeek-AI. 2025.
Day 6: One More Thing, DeepSeek-V3/R1
Inference System Overview. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/open-
infra-index/blob/main/202502OpenSourceWeek/day_6_one_more_
thing_deepseekV3R1_inference_system_overview.md. (2025).
[15] DeepSeek-AI. 2025. DeepEP: an efficient expert-parallel communica-
tion library. https://github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepEP. (2025).
[16] Ruwen Fan, Tingxu Ren, Minhui Xie, Shiwei Gao, Jiwu Shu, and
Youyou Lu. 2025. GPREEMPT: GPU Preemptive Scheduling Made
General and Efficient. In USENIX ATC.
[17] GLM-4.5 Team. 2025. GLM-4.5: Agentic, Reasoning, and Coding (ARC)
Foundation Models. In arXiv.
[18] Wentao Guo, Mayank Mishra, Xinle Cheng, Ion Stoica, and Tri Dao.
2025. SonicMoE: Accelerating MoE with IO and Tile-aware Optimiza-
tions. In arXiv.
[19] Mingcong Han, Hanze Zhang, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2022.
Microsecond-scale Preemption for Concurrent GPU-accelerated DNN
Inferences. In USENIX OSDI.
[20] Jiaao He, Jiezhong Qiu, Aohan Zeng, Zhilin Yang, Jidong Zhai, and Jie
Tang. 2021. Fastmoe: A fast mixture-of-expert training system. arXiv
(2021).
[21] Jiaao He, Jidong Zhai, Tiago Antunes, Haojie Wang, Fuwen Luo,
Shangfeng Shi, and Qin Li. 2022. Fastermoe: modeling and optimizing
training of large-scale dynamic pre-trained models. In ACM PPoPP.
[22] Ke Hong, Lufang Chen, Zhong Wang, Xiuhong Li, Qiuli Mao, Jianping
Ma, Chao Xiong, Guanyu Wu, Buhe Han, Guohao Dai, Yun Liang,
and Yu Wang. 2025. semi-PD: Towards Efficient LLM Serving via
Phase-Wise Disaggregated Computation and Unified Storage. arXiv
(2025).
[23] Cunchen Hu, Heyang Huang, Liangliang Xu, Xusheng Chen, Jiang
Xu, Shuang Chen, Hao Feng, Chenxi Wang, Sa Wang, Yungang Bao,
Ninghui Sun, and Yizhou Shan. 2024. Inference without Interference:
Disaggregate LLM Inference for Mixed Downstream Workloads. In
arXiv.
[24] Hongyi Jin, Bohan Hou, Guanjie Wang, Ruihang Lai, Jinqi Chen, Zihao
Ye, Yaxing Cai, Yixin Dong, Xinhao Cheng, Zhihao Zhang, Yilong Zhao,
Yingyi Huang, Lijie Yang, Jinchen Jiang, Gabriele Oliaro, Jianan Ji, Xu-
peng Miao, Vinod Grover, Todd C. Mowry, Zhihao Jia, and Tianqi Chen.
2026. Event Tensor: A Unified Abstraction for Compiling Dynamic
Megakernel. In Conference on Machine Learning and Systems.
[25] Aditya K. Kamath, Ramya Prabhu, Jayashree Mohan, Simon Peter,
Ramachandran Ramjee, and Ashish Panwar. 2024. POD-Attention:
Unlocking Full Prefill-Decode Overlap for Faster LLM Inference. In
arXiv.
[26] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B. Brown, Ben-
jamin Chess, Rewon Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and
Dario Amodei. 2020. Scaling Laws for Neural Language Models. (2020).
[27] Kimi Team. 2025. Kimi K2: Open Agentic Intelligence. In arXiv.
[28] Jiamin Li, Yimin Jiang, Yibo Zhu, Cong Wang, and Hong Xu. 2023.
Accelerating Distributed MoE Training and Inference with Lina. In
USENIX ATC.
[29] Yunkai Liang, Zhangyu Chen, Pengfei Zuo, Zhi Zhou, Xu Chen, and
Zhou Yu. 2025. Injecting Adrenaline into LLM Serving: Boosting
Resource Utilization and Throughput via Attention Disaggregation.
arXiv (2025).
[30] Bin Lin, Tao Peng, Chen Zhang, Minmin Sun, Lanbo Li, Hanyu Zhao,
Wencong Xiao, Qi Xu, Xiafei Qiu, Shen Li, Zhigang Ji, Yong Li, and
Wei Lin. 2024. Infinite-LLM: Efficient LLM Service for Long Context
with DistAttention and Distributed KVCache. In arXiv.
[31] Zejia Lin, Hongxin Xu, Guanyi Chen, Xianwei Zhang, and Yutong Lu.
2025. Bullet: Boosting GPU Utilization for LLM Serving via Dynamic
Spatial-Temporal Orchestration. arXiv (2025).
[32] Lingxiao Ma, Zhiqiang Xie, Zhi Yang, Jilong Xue, Youshan Miao, Wei
Cui, Wenxiang Hu, Fan Yang, Lintao Zhang, and Lidong Zhou. 2020.
Rammer: Enabling Holistic Deep Learning Compiler Optimizations
with rTasks. In USENIX OSDI.
[33] MiniMax. 2025. MiniMax-M1: Scaling Test-Time Compute Efficiently
with Lightning Attention. In arXiv.
[34] Mooncake Team. 2025. Deploying Kimi K2 with PD Disaggregation
and Large-Scale Expert Parallelism on 128 H200 GPUs. https://www.
lmsys.org/blog/2025-07-20-k2-large-scale-ep/. (2025).
[35] NVIDIA. 2025. CUDA Programming Guide. https://docs.nvidia.com/
cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide. (2025).
[36] NVIDIA. 2026. Green Contexts. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-
programming-guide/04-special-topics/green-contexts.html. (2026).
[37] NVIDIA Corporation. 2024. NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU User Guide.
https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/tesla/mig-user-guide/. (2024).
[38] Pratyush Patel, Esha Choukse, Chaojie Zhang, Íñigo Goiri, Aashaka
Shah, Saeed Maleki, and Ricardo Bianchini. 2023. Splitwise: Efficient
generative LLM inference using phase splitting. In arXiv.
[39] Ruoyu Qin, Zheming Li, Weiran He, Jialei Cui, Heyi Tang, Feng Ren,
Teng Ma, Shangming Cai, Yineng Zhang, Mingxing Zhang, Yongwei
13


--- Page 14 ---
Wu, Weimin Zheng, and Xinran Xu. 2025. Mooncake: A KVCache-
centric Disaggregated Architecture for LLM Serving. ACM Trans.
Storage (2025).
[40] Qwen Team. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. In arXiv.
[41] Xiaoxiang Shi, Colin Cai, Junjia Du, Zhanda Zhu, Xingda Wei, and
Zhihao Jia. 2025. Nexus: Taming Throughput-Latency Tradeoff in
LLM Serving via Efficient GPU Sharing. arXiv (2025).
[42] Benjamin Spector, Jordan Juravsky, Stuart Sul, Owen Dugan, Dylan
Lim, Dan Fu, Simran Arora, and Christopher Re. 2025. Look Ma, No
Bubbles! Designing a Low-Latency Megakernel for Llama-1B. https:
//hazyresearch.stanford.edu/blog/2025-05-27-no-bubbles. (2025).
[43] StepFun. 2025. Step-3 is Large yet Affordable: Model-system Co-design
for Cost-effective Decoding. In arXiv.
[44] Xun Sun, Shaoyuan Chen, Pingchuan Ma, Yue Chen, Ziwei Yuan,
Zhanhao Cao, Han Han, Shangming Cai, Teng Ma, Xuchun Shang,
et al. 2026. Surviving Partial Rank Failures in Wide Expert-Parallel
MoE Inference. arXiv (2026).
[45] Tile-AI. 2025. TileRT: Tile-Based Runtime for Ultra-Low-Latency LLM
Inference. https://github.com/tile-ai/TileRT. (2025).
[46] Chao Wang, Pengfei Zuo, Zhangyu Chen, Yunkai Liang, Zhou Yu,
and Ming-Chang Yang. 2025. Prefill-Decode Aggregation or Disaggre-
gation? Unifying Both for Goodput-Optimized LLM Serving. arXiv
(2025).
[47] Xinming Wei, Chao Jin, Tuo Dai, Yinmin Zhong, Shan Yu, Chengxu
Yang, Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Jing Mai, Qianchao Zhu, et al. 2026.
UltraEP: Unleash MoE Training and Inference on Rack-Scale Nodes
with Near-Optimal Load Balancing. arXiv (2026).
[48] Bingyang Wu, Shengyu Liu, Yinmin Zhong, Peng Sun, Xuanzhe Liu,
and Xin Jin. 2024. Loongserve: Efficiently serving long-context large
language models with elastic sequence parallelism. In ACM SOSP.
[49] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Zhihao Bai, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2023.
Transparent GPU Sharing in Container Clouds for Deep Learning
Workloads. In USENIX NSDI.
[50] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Yinmin Zhong, Guanzhe Huang, Yibo Zhu,
Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2025. TokenLake: A Unified Segment-level
Prefix Cache Pool for Fine-grained Elastic Long-Context LLM Serving.
arXiv (2025).
[51] Xiaomi LLM-Core Team. 2026. MiMo-V2-Flash Technical Report. In
arXiv.
[52] Mingshu Zhai, Jiaao He, Zixuan Ma, Zan Zong, Runqing Zhang, and
Jidong Zhai. 2023. SmartMoE: Efficiently Training Sparsely-Activated
Models through Combining Offline and Online Parallelization. In
USENIX ATC.
[53] Shulai Zhang, Quan Chen, Weihao Cui, Han Zhao, Chunyu Xue, Zhen
Zheng, Wei Lin, and Minyi Guo. 2025. Improving GPU Sharing Per-
formance through Adaptive Bubbleless Spatial-Temporal Sharing. In
EuroSys.
[54] Shulai Zhang, Ningxin Zheng, Haibin Lin, Ziheng Jiang, Wenlei Bao,
Chengquan Jiang, Qi Hou, Weihao Cui, Size Zheng, Li-Wen Chang,
Quan Chen, and Xin Liu. 2025. Comet: Fine-grained Computation-
communication Overlapping for Mixture-of-Experts. In arXiv.
[55] Zhexiang Zhang, Ye Wang, Yumiao Zhao, Jiayu Xiao, Qianjing Yang,
Xiangyu Wang, Jingzhe Jiang, Qizhen Weng, Ruichuan Chen, Shao-
huai Shi, Adel N. Toosi, Yin Chen, and Minchen Yu. 2026. Janus:
Disaggregating Attention and Experts for Scalable MoE Inference. In
arXiv.
[56] Chenggang Zhao, Zhean Xu, Liang Zhao, Jiashi Li, Chenhao Xu,
Anyi Xu, Shengyu Liu, Kexing Zhou, and Kuai Yu. 2025.
Deep-
GEMM: clean and efficient BLAS kernel library on GPU.
https:
//github.com/deepseek-ai/DeepGEMM. (2025).
[57] Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff
Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. SGLang:
Efficient Execution of Structured Language Model Programs. In Neural
Information Processing Systems.
[58] Yinmin Zhong, Shengyu Liu, Junda Chen, Jianbo Hu, Yibo Zhu, Xu-
anzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Hao Zhang. 2024. DistServe: Disaggregating
Prefill and Decoding for Goodput-optimized Large Language Model
Serving. In USENIX OSDI.
[59] Kan Zhu, Yufei Gao, Yilong Zhao, Liangyu Zhao, Gefei Zuo, Yile Gu,
Dedong Xie, Tian Tang, Qinyu Xu, Zihao Ye, Keisuke Kamahori, Chien-
Yu Lin, Ziren Wang, Stephanie Wang, Arvind Krishnamurthy, and Baris
Kasikci. 2025. NanoFlow: Towards Optimal Large Language Model
Serving Throughput. In USENIX OSDI.
[60] Ruidong Zhu, Ziheng Jiang, Chao Jin, Peng Wu, Cesar A. Stuardo,
Dongyang Wang, Xinlei Zhang, Huaping Zhou, Haoran Wei, Yang
Cheng, Jianzhe Xiao, Xinyi Zhang, Lingjun Liu, Haibin Lin, Li-Wen
Chang, Jianxi Ye, Xiao Yu, Xuanzhe Liu, Xin Jin, and Xin Liu. 2025.
MegaScale-Infer: Serving Mixture-of-Experts at Scale with Disaggre-
gated Expert Parallelism. In arXiv.
14
