--- Page 1 ---
Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) to convert images
of queuing networks into verifiable simulation models: an
open-weight LLM workflow approach
Thomas Monks, Alison Harper, Amy Heather, Navonil Mustafee
July 2026
Abstract
Recent work has explored the use of Large Language Models (LLMs) to automate simu-
lation model building, typically by generating executable code directly from natural language
descriptions. However, this raises challenges for verification and reproducibility particularly for
users without programming expertise. We propose Sketch2DES, a sketch-to-simulation workflow
that converts diagrammatic representations of queuing networks into verifiable discrete-event
simulation models using open-weight LLMs. The workflow has three stages: (1) translation of
a diagram into a semi-structured textual description using a multimodal LLM; (2) conversion
into schema-validated structured data (JSON) via an LLM with a reflection-based verification
loop; and (3) deterministic transformation into an executable simulation model using a software
adapter. Intermediate artefacts can therefore be inspected and automatically validated before
execution. We evaluate the approach on eight queuing-network diagrams of varying complexity.
The workflow achieved high reliability for all stages, and results were statistically indistinguish-
able from human-coded and analytical benchmarks. Compared to direct code generation, the
workflow improves reproducibility, transparency, and verifiability, while reducing the need for
programming expertise. Limitations include restricted model scope and dependence on accu-
rate visual interpretation. The results demonstrate the feasibility of structured, workflow-based
model generation as a robust foundation for LLM-assisted simulation modelling.
Practitioner Summary
Building simulation models typically requires specialist programming skills as well as exper-
tise in conceptual modelling and verification. This can make simulation inaccessible to many
domain experts, despite their understanding of the systems being modelled.
This study presents an AI workflow that converts sketches of queuing networks into exe-
cutable discrete-event simulation models using Generative AI and software adaptors. Rather
than generating simulation code directly, the workflow creates intermediate descriptions and
structured model specifications that can be inspected and verified before a simulation model
is produced. This allows users to identify and correct errors before implementation, increasing
transparency and confidence in the resulting model.
For practitioners, the approach offers a practical way to reduce the effort required to trans-
late conceptual models into executable simulations while maintaining human oversight. The
workflow may be particularly valuable during early model development, stakeholder workshops,
teaching, and rapid prototyping, where ideas are often communicated using informal diagrams
rather than formal model specifications.
The current implementation is limited to a defined class of open queuing networks. However,
the staged architecture provides a foundation for extending AI-assisted model generation to a
1
arXiv:2607.24259v1  [cs.AI]  27 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
broader range of simulation applications while maintaining reproducibility, transparency, and
opportunities for human verification.
1
Introduction
Previous work using Generative AI (GenAI) for Operational Research (OR) model building has
shown promise (Giabbanelli, 2023; Jackson et al., 2024; Dehghani, 2026), but has also exposed
important methodological challenges, including model verification, cost, scalability, and privacy
(Zhou and Sheu, 2025). One approach to model generation is direct code generation (Jackson et al.,
2024), in which a modeller prompts a Large Language Model (LLM), using natural language, to
implement a simulation model in a programming language of their choice. However, studies have
now shown that this approach can require substantial programming and modelling expertise from the
user, particularly when generated code must be inspected, debugged, adapted, or verified (Monks
et al., 2025).
More fundamentally, direct generation of simulation code can produce materially
different implementations across repeated runs, even when the same modelling problem is supplied.
This variability raises concerns about reliability and trust, especially in settings where simulation
models are used to inform operational decisions.
Research to date has predominantly relied on commercial frontier LLM services, including models
such as Anthropic’s Claude, Google’s Gemini, and OpenAI’s ChatGPT. Given the way access to
LLMs has emerged, this is a logical choice for early studies. However, the proprietary nature of these
GenAI tools means that the interfaces, behaviour, costs, licensing terms, and underlying models
of these services can change during a study, or become unavailable at a later date. This makes
reproducibility difficult and introduces the risk of model or version drift, where the performance of
the LLM changes over time.
In this study, we introduce a three-stage LLM workflow approach to generating simulation mod-
els that sits within an emerging paradigm of sketch-to-simulation, or Sketch2Sim; in particular we
investigate Sketch to Discrete-Event Simulation (Sketch2DES). Instead of asking an LLM to gener-
ate simulation code directly, we use open-weight LLMs, in a reproducible locally hosted workflow,
for translation tasks: first from image to textual description, and then from description to structured
data. The final conversion from structured data to a simulation model is deterministic, following
a set of rules that we define. This approach is designed to mitigate the challenges associated with
direct code generation and commercial AI services, including verification, reliability, privacy, repro-
ducibility, and programming skill barriers. The workflow creates intermediate artefacts that can be
inspected by a human modeller and allows automatic validation of the generated model specification
before it is converted into executable simulation software. We demonstrate that the workflow can
be executed privately using both academic High Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure and
a desktop machine equipped with a retail Graphics Processing Unit (GPU).
2
Aims and Contributions
This study investigates the feasibility of using open-weight LLMs and Free and Open-Source Software
(FOSS) to convert diagrams of queuing networks into verifiable simulation models. Our motivation
is both technical and practical. FOSS tools, in languages such as Python or R, offer transparency,
reproducibility, and flexibility, but they often require programming skills that can create an entry
barrier for novice modellers or modellers used to working with commercial off-the-shelf simulation
software (Smith and Schneider, 2020; Monks and Harper, 2023).
In contrast, many early-stage
simulation studies begin with visual problem structuring: stakeholders and analysts sketch activities,
2


--- Page 3 ---
resources, queues, routing decisions, and assumptions before any code is written. These process flow
diagrams might be hand or computer drawn, use a variety of notations, and include different types
of data.
We therefore examine whether a workflow that starts from a diagram can reduce the need for
users to directly implement models in code. The intention is not to remove the modeller from the
process, but to support a workflow in which human effort is focused on defining, checking, and
refining the conceptual and computer model, rather than on translating that model into the syntax
and data structures required by a particular simulation package.
This study makes three contributions. First, it introduces Sketch2DES, a staged workflow that
combines multimodal open-weight LLMs with inspectable intermediate artefacts and deterministic
software transformation.
Unlike direct code-generation approaches, the workflow enables errors
to be identified separately during visual interpretation, formal model specification and software
implementation. Second, it introduces a software-independent JSON representation for queuing-
network DES models, together with an open-source json2ciw adapter that automatically verifies
the specification and converts it deterministically into an executable simulation model using the
Ciw package.
This separates model specification from software implementation and provides a
basis for extending to other simulation packages.
Third, it provides a systematic evaluation of
the workflow across repeated runs of eight queuing-network diagrams, quantifying stage-level and
end-to-end reliability, computational effort, and failure modes, and identifying the points at which
human-in-the-loop oversight remains necessary.
Collectively, these contributions respond to recently identified research priorities for simulation.
Boyle et al. (2026) identify understanding how GenAI can support the construction and analysis of
simulation models while providing valid and robust decision support as a grand challenge for the
field (Grand Challenge 6), together with a more specific need for methods and tools that enable
automated verification of AI-generated simulation models (Validation Challenge 4). Sketch2DES
addresses these priorities by breaking model generation into steps that users can inspect and check
before the final simulation model is built using reproducible, rule-based software.
3
Related Literature
3.1
Automatic simulation model building
The challenge of building simulation models from human-readable specifications has motivated a
sustained research effort over more than two decades. Cimino et al. (2025) provided a systematic
review of 61 studies on Automatic Simulation Model Generation (ASMG) in industrial systems,
identifying four broad development perspectives: data-centric approaches using event logs and pro-
cess mining; algorithmic approaches using rule-based and machine learning driven model generation;
knowledge-based approaches employing parametric templates, ontologies, and component libraries;
and interface-facilitated approaches including graphical model builders. This tradition has generated
a variety of flexible, reusable modelling frameworks, though manual intervention is required for all
four strategies (Schmitt et al., 2026).
A recurring theme across the literature is the use of structured intermediate representations to de-
couple model specification from software-specific implementation. Using DES, efforts have included
Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) diagrams and similar formal notations (Onggo and
Karpat, 2011). In the System Dynamics domain, the XMILE standard formalised this by defining an
open XML interchange language that enables model sharing, reuse, and tool interoperability across
platforms (Diker and Allen, 2005).
While both traditions demonstrate that expressing a model
in a software-agnostic structured format enables model generation and exchange, they require the
3


--- Page 4 ---
modeller to create the formal specification manually before automation can proceed. Therefore, while
structured representations improved interoperability and model generation, they did not remove the
burden of formal model specification from the modeller.
The aspiration to use natural language rather than formal notation as the input for simulation
model generation began in the 1980s. Su and Kachitvichyanukul (1989) reported a working pro-
totype that parsed English descriptions of manufacturing systems into a structured intermediate
representation and automatically generated executable simulation code. This was explicitly moti-
vated by the goal of software independence, but relied on a hand-crafted lexicon and case grammar
rules constrained to a narrow manufacturing vocabulary.
Cimino et al. (2025) noted that these
challenges characterise the entire pre-LLM history of natural language interfaces for ASMG. The
emergence of LLMs makes this approach feasible across a broader range of domains and input for-
mats without requiring hand-crafted parsers, however they also introduce uncertainty, variability,
and verification challenges.
3.2
Multimodal and open-weight LLMs
Recent advances in LLMs have extended model capabilities beyond text-only inputs. Multimodal
LLMs are models that can process and reason over multiple input types (modalities), such as text,
images, tables, and diagrams within a unified architecture. This enables them to interpret relation-
ships between visual and textual representations that may be included with a diagram of a queuing
system, and generate structured outputs grounded in both.
Most existing simulation-generation frameworks take natural language descriptions as their pri-
mary input, either as written system descriptions (Monks et al., 2025; Jackson et al., 2024), or as
iterative prompts (Giabbanelli, 2023; Dehghani, 2026). Giabbanelli (2026b) examined the comple-
mentary use of text-to-image generation in modelling and simulation for communicating conceptual
models, visualising simulation outputs, and generating educational materials. However, simulation
studies commonly begin with visual problem structuring, sketching activities, queues, resources, and
routing decisions on paper or whiteboards before any formal specification exists (Giabbanelli et al.,
2024; Huang et al., 2025b). Multimodal LLMs can also process these visual artefacts alongside text,
creating opportunities to treat diagrams as direct inputs to simulation model generation workflows.
Treating sketches as primary inputs to simulation pipelines predates LLMs.
Kara and Sta-
hovich (2004) demonstrated a working sketch-based interface for Simulink that converted hand-
drawn block diagrams into functional simulation models using pen-stroke recognition and hierar-
chical symbol parsing, without any natural language component. More recently, Ren et al. (2025)
revisited Simulink and demonstrated that multimodal LLMs could recreate models from the original
Simulink diagram image when combined with a retrieval augmented generation (RAG) pipeline.
Recent work has shown that multimodal LLMs can create formal model specifications directly from
visual modelling artefacts. For example, Bates et al. (2025) generated executable PlantUML rep-
resentations from UML diagram images. However, these studies use diagrams in constrained or
formalised formats (e.g. Simulink diagrams or UML), rather than informal, hand-drawn sketches of
processes typical in early-stage DES modelling.
LLMs are typically accessed either through proprietary cloud-hosted services or through open-
weight models that can be deployed locally.
Proprietary frontier LLMs have evidenced strong
performance across a wide range of tasks, but their underlying weights, training data, and imple-
mentation details are generally unavailable to researchers. Additionally, their behaviour, version,
and availability can be changed without notice, which creates challenges for scientific reproducibility.
For example, proprietary LLMs such as GPT4 and o3 have been deprecated and superseded, making
exact reproduction of any research using them impossible.
4


--- Page 5 ---
Open-weight models such as Meta’s LLaMA family or Google’s Gemma model partially ad-
dress these concerns by making model weights publicly available under licenses that permit local
deployment and redistribution. They can be downloaded, fine-tuned, and prompted on local hard-
ware. This offers advantages for transparency, reproducibility, and data governance, particularly in
domains where privacy requirements may restrict the external sharing of data (Riedemann et al.,
2024). Evidence suggests that open-weight models can achieve performance approaching that of
proprietary frontier alternatives on a range of specialised tasks, including clinical information ex-
traction (Nowak, Sebastian et al., 2025; Jabal et al., 2025), geospatial reasoning (Morandini et al.,
2024), and more broadly across multilingual and multi-case structured extraction tasks (Spaander-
man et al., 2025). Huang et al. (2025a) reported state-of-the-art results on optimisation modelling
benchmarks using open-weight models. These developments suggest that open-weight LLMs are ca-
pable of supporting specialised model-generation tasks while offering advantages in reproducibility
and governance for scientific simulation workflows.
3.3
LLM workflows
While LLMs provide powerful capabilities for information extraction, generation, and multimodal
reasoning, their outputs remain probabilistic and may contain errors or inconsistencies.
Conse-
quently, increasing attention has been directed towards workflow-based approaches that separate
generation, checking, and refinement tasks.
Because verification and reliability are central con-
cerns in simulation model generation, workflow architectures provide a promising mechanism for
constraining and validating LLM outputs. Recent modelling and simulation guidance similarly em-
phasises task decomposition, explicit validation steps, and empirical evaluation of LLM behaviour
and variability when designing multi-stage workflows (Giabbanelli, 2026a).
Workflows are structured pipelines in which one or more LLM calls are organised in a defined
sequence, with the output of each call used as an input to a subsequent deterministic or LLM-driven
step. Drawing on a taxonomy adopted by Schmitt et al. (2026), the most relevant workflow pat-
terns for model generation are prompt chaining (passing outputs between sequential LLM calls),
the evaluator-optimiser loop (where a generator produces an output and an evaluator critiques it
and requests iterative revision), and parallelisation (running multiple independent calls and select-
ing among the results). The evaluator-optimiser loop formalises a reflection pattern in which the
generator is re-prompted with its own prior output and feedback to produce a corrected response.
Related ideas have appeared in the literature, such as the Reflexion framework (Shinn et al., 2023)
which demonstrated that iterative linguistic feedback can substantially improve performance on cod-
ing and reasoning tasks. Similar workflow principles have been applied in optimisation modelling, for
example, Mostajabdaveh et al. (2024) separated model generation from model verification through a
multi-agent architecture, showing improved correctness and verifiability relative to direct generation
approaches. In simulation modelling, Schmitt et al. (2026) incorporated evaluator-optimiser loops
and structured validation mechanisms to address hallucination and reliability challenges in auto-
mated model generation. Agentic systems represent a more flexible extension of workflow architec-
tures by allowing LLMs to dynamically select tools and adapt execution paths. While such flexibility
may be advantageous in open-ended tasks, workflow-based approaches offer stronger opportunities
for deterministic validation and reproducibility when reliability is a primary concern. More broadly,
workflow architectures enable complex generation tasks to be decomposed into smaller, inspectable
artefacts that can be independently verified before subsequent stages are executed. This property is
particularly attractive in simulation model generation, where correctness is often difficult to establish
from executable code alone (Jackson et al., 2024; Schmitt et al., 2026).
5


--- Page 6 ---
3.4
GenAI for OR and simulation model generation
The application of generative AI to OR has accelerated rapidly since the public release of capable
LLMs. Recent reviews and editorial syntheses suggest that GenAI is becoming embedded across
optimisation, stochastic systems, simulation, supply chains, and decision support, while simultane-
ously raising questions of verification, trustworthiness, and governance within OR workflows (Choi
et al., 2026; Zhou and Sheu, 2025). In simulation, Giabbanelli (2023) provided an early systematic
assessment of how LLMs could support simulation tasks, identifying model generation, parameter es-
timation, scenario design, and results identification as distinct areas of application, and establishing
that LLM-generated prototype models could reduce the time required to reach a working imple-
mentation. Subsequently, Giabbanelli et al. (2024) examined the challenge of broadening simulation
access to non-expert end-users via LLMs, identifying the gap between user intent and correctly
specified model logic as the primary failure mode. This line of work was further extended to in-
teroperability, proposing that LLMs can serve as middleware for converting model representations
between heterogenous simulation platforms (Giabbanelli et al., 2025).
Jackson et al. (2024) presented a framework that translates natural language descriptions of
logistics systems directly into executable DES models, demonstrating that an LLM could manage
the full specification-to-code translation pipeline without formal intermediate notation. A related
strategy in the healthcare context was implemented by Monks et al. (2025), using GenAI to repli-
cate simulation models from published descriptions of past studies. The authors demonstrated that
LLMs can recover sufficient model structure from informal, narrative sources to produce valid im-
plementations and reproduce published results.
Extending this line of work, Kute et al. (2025)
proposed an automatic simulation model generation framework for factory planning that converts
natural language descriptions into structured simulation data before instantiating executable mod-
els in Siemens Plant Simulation. Their approach incorporated validation and iterative optimisation
loops, showing the potential value of intermediate machine-readable representations within LLM-
supported simulation workflows. Dehghani (2026) introduced SimGPT, integrating LLMs with the
Simio simulation environment across generation, execution, and analysis stages, and finding that
LLM-based dispatching decisions can outperform traditional heuristics in job scheduling scenarios.
The most comprehensive framework in manufacturing DES was developed by Schmitt et al. (2026),
who proposed an end-to-end generative AI system for automated model generation, adaptation, and
evaluation, explicitly addressing hallucination risk through evaluator-optimiser loops and structured
output validation.
A recurring concern is that generating simulation code directly from natural language descrip-
tions produces outputs that are difficult to verify systematically. Unlike optimisation models, where
feasibility and objective values provide useful correctness signals, simulation models often lack equiv-
alent computable criteria, making verification of generated outputs particularly challenging. Similar
challenges arise more broadly across OR applications that seek to transform unstructured inputs into
formal analytical representations. For example, Nie et al. (2026) used a four-stage, auditable RAG
pipeline to convert unstructured documentary evidence into validated, simulation-ready inputs for
an agent-based model. Similarly, Jackson et al. (2026) combined RAG with network science meth-
ods to extract supplier-customer relationships from public documents and automatically construct
large-scale supply-chain graphs, showing how LLMs can act as intermediaries between unstructured
information sources and structured OR artefacts. Recent simulation-generation frameworks have
also begun to incorporate structured intermediate representations. For example, Zhang et al. (2025)
proposed a workflow in which product design documents are transformed into simulation models
through an intermediate modelling language and scalable templates, reducing the complexity of
direct code generation while enabling validation of generated artefacts.
6


--- Page 7 ---
The NL2OPT (natural language to optimisation model) literature has confronted a related
challenge of translating informal problem descriptions into formally specified optimisation mod-
els. Ahmed and Choudhury (2024) introduced LM4OPT, a framework for progressively fine-tuning
smaller open-weight LLMs for the NL2OPT problem, demonstrating that democratisation of ac-
cess to optimisation modelling is achievable without reliance on large proprietary models. Mosta-
jabdaveh et al. (2024) addressed the verification problem more directly, proposing a multi-agent
LLM framework that separates model generation from model verification, and providing evidence
that structured specification inputs (Spec2Model) consistently outperform unstructured natural lan-
guage descriptions (Desc2Model) in terms of both solution correctness and verifiability. Huang et al.
(2025a) extended this finding at scale in the OR domain, training open-weight models specifically
for optimisation modelling, and achieving high performance on the LM4OPT benchmark. Struc-
tured intermediate representations reduce the verification problem from reasoning about arbitrary
source code to checking a constrained set of model elements and relationships against predefined
rules. Although optimisation differs from simulation, the NL2OPT literature directly addressed the
problem of translating informal descriptions into formally checkable model specifications.
3.5
Research gap
Four strands of work are particularly relevant to this study:
long-standing attempts to auto-
mate simulation model construction from human-readable inputs (Cimino et al., 2025; Su and
Kachitvichyanukul, 1989); the rapid adoption of LLMs for this task across logistics, manufactur-
ing, and healthcare simulation (Jackson et al., 2024; Schmitt et al., 2026; Monks et al., 2025); the
methodological case for structured intermediate representations as a means of improving reliability
and enabling staged verification (Mostajabdaveh et al., 2024); and the reproducibility and gov-
ernance advantages of open-weight local deployment (Riedemann et al., 2024; Manchanda et al.,
2024). These developments suggest that simulation model generation is increasingly feasible, but
also highlight unresolved challenges relating to verification, transparency, and reproducibility.
A specific methodological gap is apparent in the most directly comparable work of Jackson
et al. (2024) and Monks et al. (2025). These studies ultimately generate executable simulation code
directly from natural language inputs without an intermediate representation that can be indepen-
dently inspected and validated. Schmitt et al. (2026) introduced additional validation and refinement
stages, but the workflow remains centred on generating executable models rather than exposing a
software-independent model specification that can be inspected and verified separately from the
generated simulation code. While these approaches can produce working models, they introduce
limitations. First, the absence of an inspectable intermediate representation means that verifica-
tion is largely performed at the level of executable code rather than the conceptual model, limiting
opportunities to identify structural errors before implementation. Second, reproducibility may be
constrained by reliance on proprietary LLM services whose behaviour, availability, and underlying
models may change over time. Finally, existing frameworks mostly assume natural language text as
the primary input despite the fact that simulation studies often begin with sketches, process dia-
grams, BPMN-style process maps, and other visual artefacts produced during problem-structuring
and process-mapping activities (Giabbanelli et al., 2024).
The final limitation is important because visual artefacts frequently constitute the earliest formal
representation of a system and may never be translated into detailed textual specifications. Recent
advances in multimodal LLMs make it possible to treat such diagrams as direct inputs to simulation
model generation workflows. However, neither multimodal processing nor structured intermediate
representations eliminate the need for conceptual validation. A schema-valid JSON specification or
correctly generated simulation model can satisfy structural constraints while still failing to represent
7


--- Page 8 ---
the intended real-world system.
Schema validation can confirm that required fields are present,
data types are correct, and constraints such as transition probabilities summing to one are satisfied,
but it cannot establish conceptual truth. Consequently, the objective is not to automate concep-
tual validation, but to improve transparency and verifiability through the generation of inspectable
intermediate artefacts that can be reviewed by a human before simulation is executed.
To our knowledge, no existing simulation-generation framework combines multimodal inputs, an
inspectable intermediate specification, staged verification, and deployment using open-weight LLMs
within a single workflow. The contribution of Sketch2DES is the introduction of staged verification
through inspectable intermediate artefacts, not the automation of conceptual validation. Rather
than requiring verification to occur only after executable simulation code has been generated, the
workflow enables errors to be identified at the levels of visual interpretation, model specification,
and implementation.
4
Sketch2DES workflow
The workflow can be broken down into three stages:
Stage 1: Translate an image of a user’s sketch of a queuing network into a semi-structured
description;
Stage 2: Translate the semi-structured text description of a model into verifiable structured
data representing a model;
Stage 3: Input structured data representing a model into a software adapter for a simulation
package.
The key contribution of the method is translation of unstructured data into structured data that
can be inspected and verified. This is very different from attempting to directly generate simulation
logic in a language such as Python or R.
A further advantage of our method is that it can be simplified or extended. For example, Stage 1
could be omitted if the description of the model already exists or has been generated in some other
way, such as via ambient AI that summarises a problem structuring meeting where the system is
described. In this study, executable models (Stage 3) are generated using ciw, an open-source Python
library for queuing network simulation whose network representation aligns naturally with a JSON
schema (Palmer et al., 2019). However, as the structured data we propose is software agnostic, it can
be extended across simulation packages simply by creating new adapters. This means the method
is generalisable across both commercial off-the-shelf tools and free and open source software. This
approach shares a philosophy with the XMILE standard used across System Dynamics packages
(Martinez-Moyano, 2024). We describe the method in detail below and summarise the steps visually
in Figure 1. Following our description of the method, we illustrate its implementation with two
applied examples in Section 5 and evaluate the method across eight examples in Section 6.
4.1
Stage 1: Semi-structured description generation
The first stage of the workflow uses a multimodal LLM to generate a natural language description of
a model from an input diagram. The LLM is provided with a prompt that defines the task, specifies
diagram interpretation rules, and enforces a fixed output structure. The diagram image is supplied
alongside this prompt. The model produces a description capturing key discrete-event simulation
elements, including activities, resources, arrival processes, routing logic, and reneging behaviour.
8


--- Page 9 ---
Figure 1: Overview of the three-stage Sketch2DES workflow implemented for the Ciw DES package
The output is semi-structured: it remains human readable, while grouping related concepts (e.g.,
activities and routing) under fixed headings. This design supports human-in-the-loop verification,
while enabling reliable parsing in the subsequent model extraction stage.
The prompt is tailored to DES and includes domain-specific rules, such as distinguishing ac-
tivities from non-activity nodes, extracting parameterised distributions, and constructing routing
probabilities. Table 1 provides a summary of the prompt structure, with the full prompt included
in Appendix A.1.
The inclusion of domain rules increases consistency and accuracy (reliability) of the method.
As an example, consider a healthcare analyst who has hand drawn a diagram of a hospital’s emer-
gency department (ED) queuing network. A challenge with LLMs is that they may contain general
knowledge about EDs and could represent the ED in multiple varying ways. For example, an LLM
may describe the ED in numbered process steps that a patient could follow, narrative prose and
paragraphs, arbitrary groupings of concepts or patient groups, data formatted as markdown tables
or bullet points, mermaid diagrams (a text-based standard for diagrams), or even programming
language code. As we found when directly generating code to represent a DES model (Monks et al.,
2025), each time the LLM is prompted to describe the diagram, the output format is likely to be
different. To increase the predictability of the LLM’s response, our prompting approach defines
a specialised LLM task, analysis requirements, and output format. In other words, each time a
diagram is processed through Stage 1, the response is familiar and predictable.
4.2
Stage 2: Structured data generation
To address the verification and reliability challenges of models generated by AI tools, the core of
our model building approach focuses on structured data.
We chose JavaScript Object Notation
(JSON), an open and human-readable standard for information exchange. The advantage of this
approach is that structured data can be automatically verified against a pre-specified data schema.
It is also agnostic to simulation software and programming languages. Listing 1 illustrates a simple
urgent care process model in JSON. Appendix A.2 details the stage 2 prompt template, which can
be applied across different JSON schemas and stage 1 model descriptions.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Table 1: Summary of Stage 1 prompt sections, their purpose, and illustrative examples.
Section
Purpose
Example
Role declaration
Primes the model as a DES and
process flow expert
“You are an expert in analysing process
flow diagrams. . . ”
Activity
extraction
(Rules 1, 7)
Identifies named process nodes
and associated resources
Activity: Triage; Resource: Nurse (ca-
pacity=2)
Distribution
extrac-
tion (Rules 2, 5, 6)
Captures service, arrival, and
reneging distributions with eval-
uated parameters
exponential(mean=0.333)
converted
from rate=3/hour
Arrival logic (Rule 3)
Distinguishes external arrivals
from internal routing
Poisson arrival at first queue vs. “none
– internal routing only”
Reneging/abandonment
(Rule 4)
Extracts patience distributions
only when explicitly shown in
the diagram
uniform(min=5, max=20) minutes pa-
tience
Node
classification
(Rules 9–12)
Prevents hallucinated activities
by defining what is not an ac-
tivity
Exits, arrival nodes, reneging nodes,
and timeless decision points excluded
Routing matrix (Rules
13–14)
Builds a probabilistic transition
table across activities and exits
After Triage: Ward (0.7), EXIT (0.3);
probabilities sum to 1.0
Ambiguity
handling
(Rule 15)
Requires explicit flagging rather
than silent inference
“Service time illegible on Activity 3”
Output format
Provides a semi-structured re-
sponse template
Fixed headings: Process Overview, Ac-
tivities, Activity Routing, Flow Logic
We aim to improve reliability through an LLM workflow called the reflection pattern. The LLM
is provided with a system prompt specifying its purpose and task, a data schema, and a written
description of the model (from stage 1). The generated structured data is then automatically tested
for adherence to the schema. Example checks include whether the JSON is formatted correctly,
whether JSON fields are of the appropriate types, and whether the field values are allowable. As an
example of the latter, the verification step might check that valid distributions have been selected,
and each distribution has a valid parameter, or in a queuing network all of the transition probabilities
sum to one.
If the verification fails, an informative verification error message is generated, and the reflection
loop is triggered. The LLM is reprompted with a context including the original prompt, AI response,
verification error and a request to fix. This loop is repeated until either the structured data passes
verification or a maximum number of retries is reached. The latter condition might trigger a revision
of the model description.
Common problems might include LLMs generating structured data inside formatted braces (e.g.
“‘) or prefixed with redundant conversational text such as “here is your formatted JSON".
An
optional step within the reflection cycle could therefore use deterministic text formatting rules to
avoid expensive LLM calls.
The structured data is a digitally verifiable artefact representing the original sketch. The JSON
can be stored and inspected by a human user, such as via a simple text editor. To aid human-in-
the-loop verification, our approach also provides a visual representation of the JSON as a graph
10


--- Page 11 ---
supplemented with extracted tables representing model parameters: distributions, resources, and
routing matrices.
Listing 1: Example intermediate model artefact in JSON
{
"name": "Example
urgent
care
process",
" description ": "Toy
model
with
triage
and
treatment",
" activities": [
{
"name": "Triage
nurse",
"type": "activity",
"resource": {
"name": "Nurse",
"capacity": 2
},
" service_distribution ": {
"type": " exponential",
" parameters": { "mean": 5.0 }
},
" arrival_distribution ": {
"type": " exponential",
" parameters": { "mean": 3.0 }
},
" renege_distribution ": null
}
],
" transitions ": [
{
"from": "Triage
nurse",
"to": "Doctor
consultation ",
" probability ": 1.0
}
]
}
4.3
Stage 3: Structured data to simulation model
The final stage of our LLM workflow does not require an LLM or any other form of GenAI. To in-
crease the reliability of our method, we propose a deterministic approach where we define a mapping
between our software-independent JSON format and the inputs required for a simulation package.
We call this the adapter pattern. Each software package would require its own adapter; for exam-
ple, SimPy and Ciw would have adapters in Python, Simmer would have an adapter in R. COTS
packages, such as Simul8 and AnyLogic, could similarly implement import routines that translate
the structured representation into executable models, allowing users to open structured model spec-
ifications in much the same way as opening an existing model file.
To illustrate how an adapter layer works, consider the DES software Ciw. An adapter layer must
implement a deterministic mapping between JSON schema elements and Ciw network constructs.
Activities are translated into queuing nodes, resource capacities into server counts, arrival, service
and reneging distributions into the corresponding Ciw distribution objects, and transitions into
a routing probability matrix.
Because this transformation is rule-based rather than generative,
identical JSON specifications always produce identical simulation models, ensuring that once a
specification has been validated, model construction is fully reproducible. An adapter also performs
deterministic consistency checks during model construction, for example validating that referenced
nodes exist and that supported distribution types have been correctly specified. The current schema
11


--- Page 12 ---
targets open queuing-network style DES models and supports arrivals, services, resources, routing,
and reneging behaviour. Extension to other DES constructs such as schedules, batching, priorities,
and state-dependent logic is left for future work.
5
Applied examples
Before providing the results of a full evaluation of the method, we provide two end-to-end worked
examples to illustrate the method in action, artefacts generated at each stage, and demonstrate the
equivalence of key performance measures outputted by the LLM generated simulation model to one
coded by a human. We emphasise that these results are intended to be explanatory and illustrative
of the method. Section 6 provides a more detailed evaluation of each stage across different case
studies.
5.1
LLM, software and hardware environment
We used open-weight LLMs on our own hardware, with no internet search capability or RAG, as
part of our workflow using vLLM v0.19 for model inference and podman v5.6.0 to containerise them.
All models were downloaded from Hugging Face. We used Qwen3.5-35B-A3B (a mixture-of-experts
architecture with 35B total parameters and 3B parameters active per token), at full precision, as a
multimodal LLM and the smaller instruction-tuned Google’s gemma-4-26b-A4B-it (a full precision,
26B parameters mixture of experts architecture with 4B active parameters) for structured data
generation. All steps were coded in Python 3.12. Langchain-openai 1.1.12 was used to interact with
Qwen3.5. We defined the JSON schema in Python using the pydantic package v2.12.5. This allowed
both automatic verification of the generated JSON and the use of the instructor v1.15.1 package to
implement the reflection pattern with up to 4 retries. In the evaluation, we set a random seed as
part of each LLM call to allow our results to be reproduced.
In Stages 1 and 2 LLMs process information as tokens, which are subword units representing
fragments of text, words, punctuation, or other symbols. Both input and output sequence lengths
are measured in tokens, making token counts a useful hardware independent proxy for computational
effort, memory usage, inference cost, and latency. Throughout this study we therefore report input,
reasoning, and output token usage for each stage of the workflow.
For multimodal inputs, an LLM first converts an image into a sequence of visual embeddings
using a vision encoder. The visual embeddings are then projected into the same representational
space as language tokens, allowing the model to process image and text information jointly within
a single transformer architecture. Consequently, the token counts reported for Stage 1 include both
textual prompt tokens and image-derived visual tokens generated from the input diagram.
For Stage 3, we wrote a small Python package called json2ciw v0.10.0 (Monks, 2026) with
functionality that adapts our JSON format to a DES model in the Ciw v3.2.7 Python package. We
chose Ciw for this pilot as it has a permissive MIT open source license, good performance (Palmer
et al., 2019), a clean usable interface based on a complex data structure, has automatic performance
measure collection, and replications are simple to run across multiple CPUs. We designed json2ciw
to provide functionality to support human-in-the-loop verification of models by representing a JSON
file as a Mermaid network diagram, and extract parameter, routing, and resource count tables.
The workflow and evaluation was executed on a Dell PowerEdge with an Intel Xeon Gold pro-
cessor, 550GB RAM, NVIDIA H100 GPUs (a single H100 has 80GB of VRAM) running Red Hat
Enterprise Linux (RHEL) 9.7.
The code to recreate the two applied examples is documented in Jupyter notebooks (Monks
et al., 2026).
12


--- Page 13 ---
5.2
Example 1: A hand-drawn call centre model
For this example, we adapted the simple call centre model from Monks and Harper (2023). The
diagram of the model, Figure 2, was hand drawn by the authors.
5.2.1
Stage 1
In Stage 1, the image was rotated by 90 degrees, converted to an in-memory PNG byte stream, and
base64-encoded into a UTF-8 string. This encoded representation, together with a system prompt,
was then provided to the LLM workflow to generate a semi-structured textual description of the
process diagram.
As shown in Figure 2, the model output is human-readable but semi-structured. Activities are
defined individually, together with their associated resources, capacities, and arrival, service, and
reneging distributions, while routing is described through explicit branching statements. The output
also includes a higher-level textual overview of the process logic, making the overall flow of entities
through the system easier to interpret. In total stage 1 used 5,569 tokens: 2,769 inputted, 2,346
tokens used by Qwen3.5 for thinking, and 554 tokens to write the description.
5.2.2
Stage 2
In Stage 2 we combined our Stage 1 generated process description and the second prompt (see
Appendix A.2). This was passed to the second LLM to generate a structured JSON file that is a
specification of the simulation model to build.
Figure 3 illustrates the generated JSON file. It passed our automatic validation checks. If it
had failed, for example, due to an incorrect structure, the LLM would have been automatically re-
prompted with the original prompt, output and details of the mistake to fix. Figure 3 also illustrates
the Mermaid diagram built automatically from the JSON. A total of 2,761 tokens were used in stage
2: 2,344 were input as the prompt, 0 were used for thinking, and 417 were output by Gemma4.
5.2.3
Stage 3
The JSON representing the simulation model was deterministically converted into a Python data
structure suitable for Ciw. Figure 3 illustrates the data structure created in order to create and run
a network model in Ciw. As a validation step, in this example we followed the model comparison
procedure recommended by Sargent (2013), and the simultaneous confidence-interval procedure de-
scribed by Balci (1994). That is, we manually coded, tested and validated the call centre model
using Python and SimPy v4.1.1 and used this as a reference implementation for the model generated
through our LLM workflow. We used SciPy v1.17.1 functionality to construct Bonferroni-adjusted
confidence intervals for the mean differences between the two implementations in waiting time, queue
length and resource utilisation metrics.
Table 2 reports the statistics obtained from the AI-generated model in Ciw, with the human coded
and validated version of the model in SimPy. Each model had a warm-up period of 350 days, a run
length of 10 days and 115 multiple replications. All of the Bonferroni-adjusted confidence intervals
constructed contained zero, i.e., no statistically significant differences were detected between the AI
generated model and our hand-coded SimPy model for any of the six performance measures.
5.3
Example 2: three node open Jackson Network
We adapted an Open Jackson Network example from Hillier and Lieberman (2024). A Jackson
Network consists of a set of servers (nodes) that can be modelled as set of connected M/M/s queues.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Process Overview: This diagram depicts a discrete event simulation model for an urgent care
call center. The process begins with new callers arriving at the system. They first undergo a “Call
triage” process handled by call operators. Following triage, a probabilistic routing decision determines
whether a caller is referred to a nurse for consultation or exits the system immediately. If referred,
they wait for and see a nurse before exiting.
Activities:
• Activity 1: Call triage
– Service distribution: Triangle(min=5, mode=7, max=10) [units: mins]
– Arrival
distribution:
Exponential(rate=100/hr)
[Converted
to
minutes:
Exponen-
tial(mean=0.6 mins)]
– Reneging distribution: none
– Resource: call operators (capacity=13)
• Activity 2: nurse consultation
– Service distribution: Uniform(min=10, max=20) [units: mins]
– Arrival distribution: none – internal routing only
– Reneging distribution: none
– Resource: nurses (capacity=11)
Activity Routing:
• Routing 1 (after Call triage):
– Branch A (probability: 0.4) →nurse consultation
– Branch B (probability: 0.6) →EXIT
• Routing 2 (after nurse consultation):
– Branch A (probability: 1.0) →EXIT
Flow Logic:
1. Arrival: New callers enter the system with an inter-arrival time following an exponential distri-
bution with a rate of 100 per hour (mean inter-arrival time of 0.6 minutes).
2. Triage: Callers enter the “Call triage” queue (or are served immediately if resources are available).
This activity is performed by 13 call operators. The service time is triangularly distributed between
5 and 10 minutes, with a most likely duration (mode) of 7 minutes.
3. Routing Decision: After triage, callers reach a decision point.
• 40% of callers are routed to “nurse consultation”.
• 60% of callers proceed directly to EXIT.
4. Consultation: The 40% of callers referred to a nurse wait for one of the 11 available nurses. The
service time for the consultation is uniformly distributed between 10 and 20 minutes.
5. Exit: After the consultation (or after the 60% routing branch), all callers leave the system.
Figure 2: Image provided to the workflow for example 1, with LLM-generated description.
14


--- Page 15 ---
1
{
2
"name": "Urgent
Care
Call
Centre",
3
" description": "Simulation
model
for an
Urgent
Care
Call
Centre.",
4
"activities": [
5
{
6
"name": "Call
triage",
7
"type": "call_triage ",
8
"resource": {
9
"name": "Call
operators",
10
"capacity": 13
11
},
12
" service_distribution ": {
13
"type": "triangular",
14
" parameters": {
15
"min": 5.0,
16
"mode": 7.0,
17
"max": 10.0
18
}
19
},
20
" arrival_distribution ": {
21
"type": "exponential ",
22
" parameters": {
23
"mean": 0.6
24
}
25
}
26
},
27
{
28
"name": "Nurse
consultation ",
29
"type": " nurse_consultation ",
30
"resource": {
31
"name": "Nurses",
32
"capacity": 11
33
},
34
" service_distribution ": {
35
"type": "uniform",
36
" parameters": {
37
"min": 10.0 ,
38
"max": 20.0
39
}
40
},
41
" arrival_distribution ": null
42
}
43
],
44
" transitions": [
45
{
46
"from": "Call
triage",
47
"to": "Exit",
48
" probability ": 0.6
49
},
50
{
51
"from": "Call
triage",
52
"to": "Nurse
consultation ",
53
" probability ": 0.4
54
},
55
{
56
"from": "Nurse
consultation ",
57
"to": "Exit",
58
" probability ": 1.0
59
}
60
]
61
}
Ciw network model Python code
import
ciw
{
'number_of_servers ': [13, 11],
'arrival_distributions ': [
ciw.dists. Exponential (rate
=1.6666666666666667) ,
None
],
'service_distributions ': [
ciw.dists.Triangular (lower =5.0 , mode
=7.0 ,
upper =10.0) ,
ciw.dists.Uniform(lower =10.0 ,
upper
=20.0)
],
'reneging_time_distributions ': [None , None
],
'routing ': [[0.0 , 0.4] , [0.0 ,
0.0]]
}
Figure 3: JSON model specification, Mermaid rendering, and final Ciw model generated in Stage 2
and 3.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Table 2: Comparison of mean performance measures between AI-generated and human-coded sim-
ulation models for example 1 (α = 0.05/6).
Simulation KPI
LLM
Human
|∆|
99.17%∗CI Diff
Mean Waiting Time (operator)
3.79
3.71
0.08
(-0.20, 0.35)
Operator Utilisation
94.01
93.93
0.08
(-0.08, 0.24)
Operator Queue Length
6.31
6.18
0.13
(-0.35, 0.61)
Mean Waiting Time (nurse)
4.48
4.18
0.30
(-0.02, 0.63)
Nurse Utilisation
90.90
90.89
0.02
(-0.24, 0.27)
Nurse Queue Length
2.99
2.79
0.20
(-0.02, 0.43)
∗95% confidence intervals for the mean difference are Bonferroni corrected for 6 simultaneous comparisons
α∗= 0.05/6. A CI containing zero indicates no significant difference between models.
We created Figure 4, a PNG image of the network in the software draw.io, and passed it to the
three-stage workflow as used in example 1. To validate the LLM generated model in this example,
we compared the simulation results to the exact analytical solutions using a two-sided one-sample
t-test. The results are presented in Table 3. The AI-generated model had a warm-up period of 2880
time units, a run length of 14400 time units and 100 multiple replications. All of the Bonferroni-
adjusted confidence intervals for the difference contained zero. This indicates that the performance
metrics of the AI-generated simulation were statistically indistinguishable from the exact analytical
solution of the Jackson Network. Stage 1 used a total of 12,438 tokens (input=3,248, think=8,358,
output=832) and stage 2 used a total of 3396 tokens (input=2,629, output=766).
Table 3: Comparison of LLM-generated simulation model and analytical queuing model across nine
performance metrics (Wq = mean waiting time; ρ = server utilisation (%); Lq = mean queue length).
LLM Generated
Analytical Model
|∆|
p-value
99.44% CI Diff
Simulation KPI
Wq [service 1]
0.10
0.10
0.00
0.2364
(-0.0, 0.0)
Wq [service 2]
0.03
0.03
0.00
0.7299
(-0.0, 0.0)
Wq [service 3]
0.30
0.30
0.00
0.4899
(-0.0, 0.0)
ρ [service 1]
49.98
50.00
0.02
0.5820
(-0.1, 0.07)
ρ [service 2]
50.01
50.00
0.01
0.6324
(-0.05, 0.07)
ρ [service 3]
75.01
75.00
0.01
0.8840
(-0.12, 0.13)
Lq [service 1]
0.50
0.50
0.00
0.3728
(-0.0, 0.0)
Lq [service 2]
0.33
0.33
0.00
0.7713
(-0.0, 0.0)
Lq [service 3]
2.26
2.25
0.01
0.4375
(-0.02, 0.03)
Note: Bonferroni correction applied across 9 simultaneous comparisons: α∗= 0.05/9 ≈0.006. A CI for the mean
difference containing zero indicates no significant difference between the LLM-generated simulation and the
analytical model.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Figure 4: Example 2 image passed to the Stage 1 LLM
6
Stage-wise evaluation of the workflow
To demonstrate the feasibility of our method, we implemented a pilot of the three-stage workflow for
eight sketches of models, each of which were open queuing networks. Each node in a network could
have its own stochastic arrival process, service distribution, and resource. To test an extension of
the method beyond basic open networks we also allowed stochastic reneging (leaving queues before
service).
Entities leaving a node can probabilistically transition to one of n linked nodes.
All
transitions leaving a node must sum to one. We used the same LLMs, plus software and hardware
setup as described in the applied examples. Although human verification after Stages 1 and 2 is
intrinsic to the workflow, the evaluation was conducted fully autonomously to assess the end-to-end
performance of the automated pipeline.
6.1
Overview of evaluation
We conducted a stage-wise evaluation of the workflow that allowed us to analyse performance at
each workflow stage before assessing end-to-end worflow.
1. Stage 1: Accuracy, reliability, and efficiency of the model description generation using LLM-
as-a-judge classification, token tracking, and latency.
2. Stage 2: Reliability and efficiency of generating the structured JSON and parallel Ciw model
from a valid description of a queuing network.
3. End-to-end workflow: reliability of generating a Ciw model from an image without a human-
in-the-loop.
17


--- Page 18 ---
Table 4: The eight process flow diagrams used in the LLM workflow evaluation
Case
Image
Sources
Nodes
Edges
Loops
Reneges Dist
Types
Units
1. Call Centre
draw.io
1
2
4
0
0
3
1
2. Jackson Network
draw.io
3
3
12
3
0
1
1
3. Call Centre 2
hand
1
2
4
0
0
3
2
4. Treatment centre
hand
1
6
11
0
0
3
2
5. MM1 with renege
hand
1
1
2
0
1
1
1
6. Call centre renege
draw.io
1
2
4
0
1
3
1
7. Jackson 2
hand
1
3
7
2
0
1
3
8. Ten node network
hand
2
10
14
2
2
1
1
6.2
Evaluation cases
We created eight increasingly difficult open queuing network problems to test our workflow. Each
of these was created either by the draw.io software or drawn by hand on paper (see appendix
for all images). These were designed to test the workflow’s ability to handle different numbers of
network nodes (activities; i.e. 1-10), edges (routing), routing with loop backs to nodes, multiple
arrival processes, multiple statistical distributions, parameters expressed with different time units
and sources with different arrival rate notation (i.e., rates versus inter-arrival times), reneging, and
different approaches to representing routing decisions in the process flow diagram. Our expectations
were that hand-drawn diagrams, with more activities and routing, would pose the most challenge
for the workflow. For each case we created a ground truth description, i.e., the process flow diagram
described in words, and simulation model in Ciw.
Table 4 lists the eight case images in the evaluation set along with their characteristics. For
example, case eight was hand drawn with 2 external arrivals sources, a 10 node network with 14
edges (connections between nodes) of which 2 were looping entities back to prior nodes, 2 queues with
renege distributions, and all distributions were Exponential with parameters expressed in a single
format. In contrast case four, also hand drawn, had a single arrival source, 6 nodes, 11 edges with no
looping back, 3 different distribution types (lognormal, exponential, and normal), with parameters
expressed in one of 2 different time units (rate per day versus minutes). Case 4 was adapted from
Nelson (2013) and case 7 from Gross and Harris (1998).
6.3
LLM-as-a-Judge
The aim of Stage 1 evaluation is to assess whether the image-to-text stage produces faithful, usable
model descriptions. We quantify this along three dimensions: correctness, reliability across repeated
runs, and efficiency (latency and token usage).
As Stage 1 outputs are free-form text and there are many acceptable ways to describe the same
process, exact string matching is not suitable. We therefore adopt an LLM-as-a-judge approach,
using multiple independent LLMs of different families to assess whether a candidate description
is faithful to a ground truth description of the queuing network. The judge’s task is to act as a
binary classifier (correct vs incorrect) and to categorise any discrepancies into hallucinated activi-
ties, missing activities, misclassified nodes, missing distributions, parameter errors, routing errors,
resource-capacity errors, or LLM generation failure. A failed description could contain multiple dis-
crepancies, e.g., two routing errors in one description, hence the error-classification counts we present
for each case represent the number of identified errors rather than the number of descriptions that
contained that type of error. See Appendix B for the judge prompt and error schema.
18


--- Page 19 ---
We included three judges from different families. Two primary: OpenAI’s gpt-oss-120b (117B
parameters with 5B active parameters per token) plus Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506 (a 24B
parameter dense model, full precision); and one tiebreaker judge for when the primaries disagreed:
Google’s gemma-4-26b-A4B-it. We calibrated the judges by creating nine synthetic descriptions with
known errors, i.e., human-modified ground truths to include different phrasing and mistakes. For
these simple queuing network problems, the judges scored a perfect 100% in binary classification,
but there was some variance in the classification of the category of errors. For example, there was
sometimes variance if a judge classified a node as misclassified or if it was hallucinated.
When
applied to the case studies we randomly sampled 25 LLM judgements for human review. In each
case the LLM-as-a-judge and human reviewer agreed.
6.4
Evaluation metrics
Generative AI is stochastic when temperature is greater than zero. This means that the same LLM
will generate a different description given the same prompt. For each evaluation case and stage, we
therefore conducted multiple independent runs (Stage 1 = 50; Stage 2 = 20; end-to-end = 50). We
held prompts constant across all experiments, controlled random seeds and used default temperatures
across all models (Qwen3.5-35B-A3B = 1.0; gpt-oss-120b=1.0; gemma-4-26b-A4B-it=1.0; Mistral-
Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506 = 0.15). We measure the repeated-sampling performance using Pass@k
that estimates the probability that at least one of k sampled outputs would be correct. In stage 1
this corresponds to the correct description, in stage 2 and the end-to-end evaluation this corresponds
to the correct Ciw model. Chen et al. (2021) define Pass@k as:
\
Pass@k = Eproblems
"
1 −
 n−c
k

 n
k

#
Here, n is the number of samples generated for the problem, c is the number classified as correct,
and k is the number of candidate outputs considered. In simple terms, you can interpret Pass@1 =
0.80 as a system with an 80% chance of getting a valid description of your queuing network on the
first attempt. Pass@2 = 1.00 means that, when two outputs are sampled, the estimated probability
that at least one of them is correct is 100%. We report Pass@k for each case, and overall (the mean
of the case-level estimates) for k = 1, and 2.
Our final two metrics focussed on efficiency. Latency, measured in seconds, was calculated from
prompt submission to completion of the final token and excluded image preprocessing. Token usage
was collected for input (image + prompt template), model reasoning (Qwen3.5 uses thinking tokens
before generating an answer) and output (the response shown to the user). For multimodal inputs,
image content contributes substantially to token usage because the vision encoder represents image
regions as visual tokens in addition to the textual prompt and generated response.
6.5
Evaluation Results
Overall, the workflow converted images in our evaluation set of queuing networks into expected
simulation models and intermediate JSON artefacts with high reliability. Tables 5, 6 and 7 break
the results down for Stage 1, 2, and the end-to-end workflow respectively.
For Stage 1 the observed Pass@1 was 0.97 (389/400 descriptions judged as correct; range =
0.9-1.0). If we selected 2 of these runs at random then it was very certain that one would be a fully
accurate description (Pass@2 = 1.0; range = 0.99-1.0). The most likely failure mode was incorrect
routing between nodes. Case 8, with 10 nodes, reneging, and routing loop backs, had the most
19


--- Page 20 ---
Table 5: Performance of Stage 1 image to text; overall and across all evaluation cases.
Error Classification
Case
Pass@1 Pass@2 Latency (s)
Tokens Hallu. Misclass. MisNode MisDist Param. Route Res Gen.
Passes
1
1.00
1.00
17.6
6251.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50/50
2
1.00
1.00
32.1
9326.6
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50/50
3
1.00
1.00
16.5
5859.4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
50/50
4
0.96
1.00
34.0 18815.7
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
48/50
5
0.96
1.00
39.6 19886.7
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
48/50
6
0.98
1.00
29.0
8493.8
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
49/50
7
0.98
1.00
19.2 16032.2
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
49/50
8
0.90
0.99
53.4 22461.3
0
0
0
0
3
2
0
0
45/50
OVERALL 0.97
1.00
30.2 13390.9
0
2
0
0
3
6
2
0 389/400
Note: Error classification columns count discrepancy instances rather than failed runs. A single failed output may
contain multiple errors, including more than one error of the same type.
failures (5/50) and also required the most tokens (mean=22461, stdev=2270). On our hardware it
took an average of 30 seconds (stdev=9s, range 17-54s) to generate a description.
In Stage 2 we tested two models: Gemma 4 and Mistral Small 3.2. Accuracy and reliability of the
models was identical: in each case tested the method returned the expected Ciw model (Pass@1 =
1.0). The workflow was fast for both models ranging between 4 seconds and 17 seconds to generate
a valid JSON structure representing the simulation model, but notably quicker for Gemma 4 (mean
= 5s) compared to Mistral Small 3.2 (mean = 10s). Total token usage was lower than Stage 1 with
average usage ranging from 2733 to 4404 across the eight cases.
The end-to-end workflow successfully generated the expected Ciw models in 388 of the 400 runs
across the eight cases (Pass@1 = 0.97 and Pass@2 = 1.0).
There were no instances where the
workflow failed to complete. On average time to complete the workflow was 35 seconds (std = 16s)
and ranged from 21 to 65 seconds across the eight cases. The total number of tokens used averaged
16942 (range 9053-27514).
Table 6: Stage 2 Evaluation Results by case∗
Case ID / Model Name
Pass@1
Passes
Latency (s)
Tokens
1 and 3
1.0
20/20
4.4 (1.5)
2733 (110)
2
1.0
20/20
8.4 (3.2)
3479 (93)
4
1.0
20/20
10.6 (4.2)
3712 (95)
5
1.0
20/20
2.7 (0.8)
2433 (98)
6
1.0
20/20
4.9 (1.5)
2870 (115)
7
1.0
20/20
6.8 (2.4)
3031 (102)
8
1.0
20/20
16.9 (6.0)
4404 (148)
gemma-4-26B-A4B-it
1.0
80/80
4.8 (2.8)
3271 (624)
Mistral-Small-3.2-24B-Instruct-2506
1.0
80/80
9.9 (5.9)
3067 (606)
∗Latency and Tokens are mean (Std) figures.
7
Discussion
This study tested whether free and open-source software, combined with open-weight LLMs, could be
used to convert diagrams of open queuing networks with reneging into verifiable computer simulation
20


--- Page 21 ---
Table 7: Performance of end to end workflow: overall and across evaluation cases∗
Case ID
Passes
Pass@1
Pass@2
Latency (s)
Tokens
1
50/50
1.00
1.00
21 (7)
9258 (1403)
2
50/50
1.00
1.00
37 (8)
12914 (1492)
3
50/50
1.00
1.00
20 (5)
9053 (1272)
4
47/50
0.94
1.00
41 (9)
23025 (1933)
5
47/50
0.94
1.00
42 (11)
22789 (2091)
6
49/50
0.98
1.00
32 (8)
11625 (1538)
7
50/50
1.00
1.00
23 (6)
19354 (1165)
8
45/50
0.90
0.99
65 (12)
27514 (2280)
OVERALL
388/400
0.97
1.00
35 (16)
16942 (6873)
∗Latency and Tokens are mean (Std) figures rounded to nearest integer.
Pass@k rounded to 2dp.
models. We proposed and evaluated a three-stage workflow: first, a multimodal LLM translates an
image of a queuing-network diagram into a semi-structured textual description; second, an LLM
translates this description into schema-validated JSON; third, our own rule-based software json2ciw
automatically converts the generated JSON model data into a Ciw simulation model. The central
design choice was to avoid direct generation of simulation code and instead to create an intermediate,
inspectable model representation that can be automatically validated and reviewed by a human
modeller. We emphasise that our automatic schema validation ensures that the JSON is structurally
valid and conforms to allowable distributions, parameters, and routing constraints.
However, a
schema-valid specification is not necessarily conceptually correct. A human-in-the-loop approach is
still essential to ensure the model has been translated correctly.
Across the eight evaluation cases, our workflow showed high reliability. End-to-end, the workflow
generated the expected Ciw model in 388 of 400 runs, giving an overall Pass@1 of 0.97 and Pass@2
of 1.00. These results suggest that, for the class of models evaluated here, an open-weight LLM
workflow can generate usable simulation-model specifications with a high probability of success,
while preserving intermediate artefacts that support verification.
We acknowledge that use of LLMs in the simulation modelling process introduces additional
energy usage above and beyond traditional software tools and there is growing consensus that carbon
footprint should be considered in LLM research (Jeanquartier et al., 2026). On average, our workflow
took 35 seconds to run on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU, with 80 GB of allocated memory. We did
not measure energy usage directly, but a conservative estimate can be given using the Lannelongue
et al. (2021) method that adjusts for GPU type, cloud versus on-site server location, and the carbon
intensity of the national electricity grid. Assuming full GPU VRAM utilisation during a run, the
workflow was estimated to consume an average of 5.73 Wh. In the United Kingdom, this corresponds
to a carbon footprint of 939 mgCO2e (milligrams of CO2 equivalent), equivalent to 1.02×10−3 tree-
months, where one tree-month represents the volume of CO2 absorbed by a single mature tree
over one month1. Case 8, our longest running test, took 65s on average with an estimated carbon
footprint of 1.8 gCO2e.
7.1
Failure modes
The main source of error we observed was in the image-to-description stage. Failures were con-
centrated in the more complex cases, particularly those involving the larger networks and routing
1Calculated using green-algorithms.org v3.1; Lannelongue et al. (2021)
21


--- Page 22 ---
loops. The most common discrepancies involved routing and parameter interpretation, rather than
hallucinated activities or complete generation failures.
Routing errors occurred in hand-drawn networks with nodes that looped back to prior nodes
(cases 5, 7 and 8). In simple terms the LLM misinterpreted where the edges were pointing. It is
unclear whether this was due to the proximity of lines or nodes to each other.
Case 8, the largest network, was the most challenging for our workflow. In addition to routing
errors the lower reliability is also explained by case 8 having 2 external arrival sources. In a small
number of cases the LLM generated a node arrival rate equal to the outflow of a prior node with the
external arrival rate. In contrast, Case 2, a computer-drawn Jackson network with three external
arrival sources and multiple routing loops, achieved perfect reliability across all 50 runs. One possible
explanation is an interaction between the hand-drawn presentation and the higher node count.
7.2
Implications for the workflow
The pattern of success and failures in our results demonstrates that Stages 2 and 3 of the workflow
can be robust once a faithful description has been obtained, but that visual interpretation remains
an area where the most caution is needed. In practical terms, this supports a workflow in which
users inspect the generated description, process diagram, parameter tables, or JSON representation
before accepting the model as a basis for simulation. Another approach, for more complex diagrams,
is to generate two simulation models, and intermediate artefacts, in parallel, as in our test cases we
observed that at least one of generated models was correct with a high probability. Our workflow
could be adapted to compare the two models. If two independent runs produce different simulation
artefacts then the workflow could prompt for human review of specific details and quickly select the
correct translation.
A second implication is that Stage 3 should be understood as an adapter layer rather than as
a commitment to a single simulation package. In this study we used Ciw as the target simulation
package and implemented the json2ciw adapter to convert JSON model specifications into executable
simulation models. This choice reflected the aims of the study: Ciw is free and open-source, has a
concise Python interface, and is well suited to representing open queuing networks. It also supports
the wider reproducibility aims of the workflow, because the model-generation process, intermediate
representation, conversion rules, and simulation implementation can all be inspected and re-run.
The separation of the adapter creates a route for extending the workflow beyond Ciw. The JSON
representation is intended to act as a package-agnostic intermediate model specification, with the
simulation package treated as the target of a deterministic adapter rather than as the centre of
the workflow.
Stage 3 could therefore be implemented for other simulation tools by developing
alternative adapters. These could include adapters for other free and open-source tools, such as
SimPy or simmer, or import routines for commercial simulation packages such as Simio, Simul8,
or AnyLogic. This has practical implications for adoption: organisations committed to reproducible
open-source workflows could use FOSS adapters, while organisations already invested in commercial
simulation software could potentially use the same upstream Sketch2DES workflow with a different
Stage 3 adapter. This flexibility does come at a maintenance cost. The reliability of the adapter is
achieved because it is a set of deterministic rules implemented in software. As the JSON schema
representing models is expanded, or the simulation package evolves, so must the adapter.
The architecture we have designed also positions our work differently from approaches that
integrate LLM functionality directly within a specific simulation environment, such as SimGPT
with Simio (Dehghani, 2026). Our emphasis is on generating an intermediate representation of a
DES model that, in theory, can be mapped to many simulation packages. We also aim to allow users
more flexibility in the diagrams of queuing networks they use, including hand-drawn diagrams, and
22


--- Page 23 ---
as such do not require diagrams that are specific to a simulation package such as Simulink (Ren
et al., 2025).
7.3
Infrastructure and accessibility
A motivation for using open-weight LLMs and free and open-source software is that the workflow
should not depend on commercial API access or externally hosted AI services. This is important
for reproducibility, because commercial model interfaces, pricing, licensing terms, and underlying
model behaviour may change over time. It is also important for privacy-sensitive organisations,
including those working with health-service processes, where data governance requirements may
restrict the use of externally hosted AI systems. Local deployment therefore forms part of the wider
methodological rationale for the workflow, rather than being only an implementation detail.
The formal evaluation was conducted on institutional GPU infrastructure because it provided
the compute environment required for repeated runs, latency measurement, and comparison across
evaluation cases. However, a motivation for using open-weight models and free and open-source soft-
ware is that our workflow should not be restricted to HPC infrastructure. Informally, we confirmed
that the workflow can be executed end-to-end on a desktop workstation equipped with an NVIDIA
RTX 5090 GPU (hardware typically used for playing video games), using quantised versions of the
Qwen and Gemma LLMs and the Ollama inference engine. Quantisation reduces the memory and
computational requirements of an LLM by representing model weights at lower numerical precision,
in our case 4-bit values rather than full-precision floating point. This suggests that private, local
Sketch2Sim workflows may be technically feasible beyond HPC environments. We included the code
to run the LLM workflow on a desktop PC in our archived code.
Our desktop deployment test is not intended as a second reliability evaluation. The reliability
results reported in this study are therefore based on the formal experimental setup described above.
Quantisation, GPU memory, and inference engine configuration, may all affect latency and, poten-
tially, model outputs. A systematic comparison of full-precision and quantised deployments across
HPC and desktop hardware is an important area for future work, particularly if the method is to
be adopted by analysts or organisations without access to high-end GPU infrastructure.
7.4
Comparison with direct code generation approaches
A key motivation for this work was to address limitations observed in prior approaches based on
direct LLM generation of simulation code (Monks et al., 2025; Jackson et al., 2024; Schmitt et al.,
2026). Taken with our study, we can now arrange these contributions as a continuum of model-
generation approaches. At one extreme we have direct use of LLM workflows to translate natural
language descriptions directly into executable code (Monks et al., 2025; Jackson et al., 2024). This
approach is the most flexible, but also introduces the highest risk of mistakes and the highest user
knowledge and skill requirements. Schmitt et al. (2026)’s approach is a mid-point on the continuum,
and aims to improve the reliability of GenAI by blending pre-written blue-print model code with
LLM code writing capabilities. This anchors the generated models in a specific domain to increase
reliability, but allows adaptation and extension via code generation, and hence still suffers from
LLM hallucination and mistakes although less than pure code generation. Our new study sits at the
other end of the continuum. Our approach constrains the LLM to narrow translation tasks and does
not generate any simulation model code. Our approach is therefore similar to the use of LLMs as
smart translators proposed by Giabbanelli et al. (2025) and takes Schmitt et al. (2026)’s determinism
further to substantially increase reliability. The approach can be applied to any queuing domain,
and requires less direct programming knowledge, but is limited by what has been defined in the
23


--- Page 24 ---
Stage 2 simulation schema, the rules in the Stage 3 simulation package adapter, and the capability
of the Stage 1 vision LLM.
7.5
Strengths
Our approach was motivated by the longer-term aim of lowering the programming barrier for sim-
ulation users who have high system and data knowledge, but potentially limited model-building
skills. Such users might include analysts who work in health services. By embedding the method in
the emerging Sketch2Sim paradigm, the workflow provides a technical foundation for model devel-
opment that begins with visual representations of process logic and data assumptions, rather than
with simulation code. In a future applied setting, this could support problem-structuring meetings
in which a process is sketched, photographed, uploaded, and converted into a draft simulation model
for human review. However, the present study does not evaluate this end-user workflow directly.
Our results should therefore be interpreted as evidence for the feasibility and reliability of the un-
derlying technical architecture, rather than as evidence that the approach has lowered barriers for
novice modellers in practice.
For the eight case study models included in our evaluation, we observed high reliability and speed
on private infrastructure using open-weight models. Although only a small number of cases were
used, a strength of our evaluation is that the sample is larger than those in several existing studies
of generated simulation models, which typically use no more than one run of one or two case studies
(Monks et al., 2025; Jackson et al., 2024; Schmitt et al., 2026). Another strength of our evaluation
methodology is that it measures both accuracy and reliability through multiple runs of each case and
the Pass@k metric. We therefore believe that our results provide evidence that this architecture is
a promising foundation for more transparent GenAI-assisted model building, with lower risks than
direct code generation approaches.
A further strength of our study is the use of only open-weight LLMs. This methodology offers
considerable advantages for transparency and reproducibility compared with existing studies, in-
cluding our own initial work, that used proprietary LLMs. Not only can our approach be recreated
in academic and industry settings, but we can also re-run the workflow at a future date with the
same models, updated prompts, or different open-weight LLMs as the technology progresses.
7.6
Limitations
The objective of this study was to establish the feasibility of a staged, verifiable workflow architec-
ture, rather than to demonstrate fully-automated simulation model generation. The queuing-network
examples therefore serve as a proof-of-concept testbed for evaluating the reliability of the approach.
Although we used a variety of diagrams with differing levels of complexity and notation, our evalu-
ation remains small and may not be fully representative of process flow diagrams drawn in practice.
Real stakeholder-generated diagrams may be incomplete, ambiguous, inconsistent, or use informal
notation that differs from the diagrams included in this evaluation. The results should therefore
be interpreted as evidence that the workflow is feasible for a defined class of open queuing-network
diagrams, rather than as evidence that it can automatically formalise arbitrary stakeholder sketches
into simulation models.
An opportunity for future research would be to consider image pre-processing before passing to
the Stage 1 LLM. In our experiments, the only pre-processing we conducted was to rotate the image,
if required, so that it was horizontal. This meant that we passed varying sizes of image to the LLM.
Images could be standardised in size or enhanced prior to prompting an LLM to describe it.
24


--- Page 25 ---
The current schema and adapter also support only a restricted class of open queuing-network
models, including arrivals, service processes, routing, resources and reneging. They do not yet rep-
resent features such as resource schedules, priorities, batching, shared resources or state-dependent
logic. The findings therefore cannot be assumed to extend to more complex DES structures without
corresponding extensions to the schema and software adapters.
Finally, because the evaluation used a fixed and documented experimental design, using spe-
cific LLM models and GPU hardware, the results should be interpreted as conditional on that
configuration. This supports reproducibility, but does not by itself establish robustness across all
possible model families, inference engines, hardware environments, quantised deployments, or dia-
gram sources. We note that we did observe some robustness in Stage 2: both Gemma 4 and Mistral
Small 3.2 generated the expected structured model representations in all tested cases, with Gemma
4 providing lower latency. However, this comparison was limited to the text-to-JSON stage, and the
main source of end-to-end error in our evaluation was the multimodal image-to-description stage.
Further work is therefore needed to evaluate whether similar reliability is observed across alternative
multimodal models, deployment environments, and diagrams produced by users outside the study
team.
8
Conclusion
This study explored the feasibility of using open-weight LLMs and free and open-source software to
convert diagrams of open queuing networks into verifiable simulation models. Beyond demonstrat-
ing feasibility, the study introduces a staged workflow in which intermediate, software-independent
model specifications can be inspected and verified before deterministic model construction. This
contrasts with direct code generation approaches by making each transformation step transparent
and independently verifiable.
Our findings demonstrate the feasibility of this approach for the class of models evaluated here,
with the proposed three-stage workflow generating the expected Ciw model in 388 of 400 end-to-end
executions. The results show the value of using LLMs for constrained translation tasks, from image
to description and from description to structured JSON, while reserving final model construction for
deterministic software. This design creates intermediate artefacts (data tables and diagrams) that
support human verification and reduces some of the risks associated with direct simulation code
generation. However, the study also highlights important limitations. Errors were concentrated in
the visual interpretation stage, particularly for larger hand-drawn networks with routing loops and
multiple arrival sources.
Further research is needed to evaluate the workflow with real stakeholder-generated diagrams,
extend the JSON schema and adapters to more complex classes of simulation models, and assess
deployment across alternative hardware, quantised models, and target simulation packages. More
broadly, the staged architecture provides a foundation for reproducible, transparent and verifiable
AI-assisted simulation model generation across a wider range of simulation domains and software
platforms.
Code availability
The pilot evaluation is available on GitHub https://github.com/sim-agent/sketch-to-des-pilot and
archived in Zenodo (Monks et al., 2026).
Our ciw adapter package json2ciw can be installed
from Github; we used version 0.10.0 for the evaluation https://github.com/sim-agent/json2ciw and
archived on Zenodo (Monks, 2026).
25


--- Page 26 ---
Disclosure statement
The authors confirm there is no conflict of interest.
Funding
This work was supported by the Medical Research Council [MR/Z503915/1].
CRediT
Conceptualization: TM; Data curation: TM; Formal Analysis: TM; Funding acquisition: TM, AH,
NM; Investigation: TM, AH; Methodology: TM; Project administration: TM, AH; Resources: TM,
AHe; Software: TM, AH, AHe; Supervision: TM; Validation: TM, AH, AHe; Visualization: TM,
AH; Writing – original draft: TM, AH, AHe, NM; Writing – review & editing: TM, AH, AHe, NM
References
Ahmed, T. and Choudhury, S. (2024). Lm4opt: Unveiling the potential of large language models in
formulating mathematical optimization problems. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational
Research, 62(4):559–572.
Balci, O. (1994).
Validation, verification, and testing techniques throughout the life cycle of a
simulation study. Annals of operations research, 53(1):121–173.
Bates, A., Vavricka, R., Carleton, S., Shao, R., and Pan, C. (2025). Unified modeling language code
generation from diagram images using multimodal large language models. Machine Learning with
Applications, 20:100660.
Boyle, L. M., Currie, C. S. M., Monks, T., Morgan, L. E., and Rutherford, A. R. (2026). Grand
challenges in healthcare simulation. Journal of Simulation, 0(0):1–23.
Chen, M., Tworek, J., Jun, H., Yuan, Q., Pinto, H. P. D. O., Kaplan, J., Edwards, H., Burda, Y.,
Joseph, N., Brockman, G., et al. (2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2107.03374.
Choi, T.-M., Basu, P., Tiwari, S., Biswas, I., and Kunc, M. (2026). Exploring complementarities
and differences between operational research and generative ai to transform operations. Journal
of the Operational Research Society, 77(7):1665–1674.
Cimino, A., Elbasheer, M., Longo, F., Mirabelli, G., Solina, V., and Veltri, P. (2025). Automatic
simulation models generation in industrial systems: A systematic literature review and outlook
towards simulation technology in the industry 5.0. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 80:859–882.
Dehghani, M. (2026). Simgpt: Unlocking potentials of generative ai in simulation via simio and llm
integration. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 218:112104.
Diker, V. G. and Allen, R. B. (2005). Xmile: towards an xml interchange language for system dynam-
ics models. System Dynamics Review: The Journal of the System Dynamics Society, 21(4):351–
359.
26


--- Page 27 ---
Giabbanelli, P. J. (2023). Gpt-based models meet simulation: How to efficiently use large-scale pre-
trained language models across simulation tasks. In 2023 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC),
pages 2920–2931.
Giabbanelli, P. J. (2026a). A guide to large language models in modeling and simulation: From core
techniques to critical challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.05883.
Giabbanelli, P. J. (2026b).
Text-to-image generative ai for modeling and simulation: Methods,
opportunities, and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.20991.
Giabbanelli, P. J., Beverley, J., David, I., and Tolk, A. (2025). From over-reliance to smart inte-
gration: Using large-language models as translators between specialized modeling and simulation
tools. In 2025 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pages 1119–1130.
Giabbanelli, P. J., Padilla, J. J., and Agrawal, A. (2024). Broadening access to simulations for
end-users via large language models: Challenges and opportunities. In 2024 Winter Simulation
Conference (WSC), pages 2535–2546. IEEE.
Gross, D. and Harris, C. M. (1998). Fundamentals of Queueing Theory. Wiley Series in Probability
and Statistics. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 3rd edition.
Hillier, F. S. and Lieberman, G. J. (2024).
Introduction to Operations Research.
McGraw-Hill
Education.
Huang, C., Tang, Z., Hu, S., Jiang, R., Zheng, X., Ge, D., Wang, B., and Wang, Z. (2025a). Orlm: A
customizable framework in training large models for automated optimization modeling. Operations
Research, 73(6):2986–3009.
Huang, Z., Gao, C., Shan, Y., Hu, H., Li, Q., Deng, X., Ma, C., Lai, Y.-K., Liu, Y.-J., Tian, F., et al.
(2025b). Sketchgpt: A sketch-based multimodal interface for application-agnostic llm interaction.
In Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
pages 1–18.
Jabal, M. S., Warman, P., Zhang, J., Gupta, K., Jain, A., Mazurowski, M., Wiggins, W., Magudia,
K., and Calabrese, E. (2025). Open-weight language models and retrieval-augmented generation
for automated structured data extraction from diagnostic reports: assessment of approaches and
parameters. Radiology: Artificial Intelligence, 7(3):e240551.
Jackson, I., Jesús Saénz, M., Ivanov, D., and Ma, B. J. (2026). Supply chain mapping through
retrieval-augmented generation: applications to the electronics industry. Journal of the Opera-
tional Research Society, 77(7):1798–1818.
Jackson, I., Saenz, M. J., and Ivanov, D. (2024). From natural language to simulations: applying
ai to automate simulation modelling of logistics systems. International Journal of Production
Research, 62(4):1434–1457.
Jeanquartier, F., Jean-Quartier, C., Rieder, P., Misirlić, V., Pasero, C., Hohensinner, R., Müller,
H., and Holzinger, A. (2026). Assessing the carbon footprint of language models: Towards sus-
tainability in ai. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 226:108670.
Kara, L. B. and Stahovich, T. F. (2004). Sim-u-sketch: A sketch-based interface for simulink. In
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, pages 354–357.
27


--- Page 28 ---
Kute, S., Ma, D., Reider, R., Müller, M., and Lang, S. (2025). Generative ai for automatic simulation
model generation in factory planning: A framework and prototype. Procedia Computer Science,
274:1024–1033.
Lannelongue, L., Grealey, J., and Inouye, M. (2021). Green algorithms: Quantifying the carbon
footprint of computation. Advanced Science, 8(12):2100707.
Manchanda, J., Boettcher, L., Westphalen, M., and Jasser, J. (2024). The open source advantage
in large language models (llms). arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12004.
Martinez-Moyano, I. J. (2024). Increasing model transparency in system dynamics models. In 2024
Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pages 1383–1397.
Monks, T. (2026). json2ciw. Version v0.10.0 [Computer software]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.19671516.
Monks, T. and Harper, A. (2023). Improving the usability of open health service delivery simulation
models using python and web apps. NIHR Open Research, 3:48.
Monks, T., Harper, A., and Heather, A. (2025). Unlocking the potential of past research: using
generative ai to reconstruct healthcare simulation models. Journal of the Operational Research
Society, 0(0):1–24.
Monks, T., Heather, A., and Harper, A. (2026). Sketch2des pilot - an evaluation of generative ai
for building discrete-event simulation models from diagrams. Version v1.0.0 [Computer software].
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.21605622.
Morandini, L., Winter, S., and Sinnott, R. O. (2024). Correctness comparison of open-weight and
proprietary llms for spatial tasks. In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Future Machine
Learning and Data Science (FMLDS), pages 91–95. IEEE.
Mostajabdaveh, M., Yu, T. T., Ramamonjison, R., Carenini, G., Zhou, Z., and Zhang, Y. (2024).
Optimization modeling and verification from problem specifications using a multi-agent multi-
stage llm framework. INFOR: Information Systems and Operational Research, 62(4):599–617.
Nelson, B. (2013).
Foundations and methods of stochastic simulation: a first course.
Springer,
London.
Nie, W., Li, F., Tsolakis, N., and Kumar, M. (2026). Integrating digitally enhanced data extraction
and simulation modelling for ai-driven supply chain resilience: an operational research frame-
work for strategic stockpiling of critical minerals. Journal of the Operational Research Society,
77(7):1770–1797.
Nowak, Sebastian et al. (2025). Privacy-ensuring open-weights large language models are compet-
itive with closed-weights gpt-4o in extracting chest radiography findings from free-text reports.
Radiology, 314(1):e240895. PMID: 39807977.
Onggo, B. S. and Karpat, O. (2011). Agent-based conceptual model representation using bpmn. In
Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC), pages 671–682. IEEE.
Palmer, G. I., Knight, V. A., Harper, P. R., and Hawa, A. L. (2019). Ciw: An open-source discrete
event simulation library. Journal of Simulation, 13(1):68–82.
28


--- Page 29 ---
Ren, X., Zang, Q., and Guo, Z. (2025). Simugen: Multi-modal agentic framework for constructing
block diagram-based simulation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.15695.
Riedemann, L., Labonne, M., and Gilbert, S. (2024). The path forward for large language models
in medicine is open. npj Digital Medicine, 7(1):339.
Sargent, R. G. (2013). Verification and validation of simulation models. Journal of Simulation,
7(1):12–24.
Schmitt, T., Gegenmantel, N., Moris, M. U., Mårtensson, P., and Amouzgar, K. (2026). Llm-driven
discrete-event simulation: A generative ai framework for automated model generation, adaptation,
and evaluation in manufacturing. Journal of manufacturing systems, 85:642–661.
Shinn, N., Cassano, F., Gopinath, A., Narasimhan, K., and Yao, S. (2023). Reflexion: Language
agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems,
36:8634–8652.
Smith, R. A. and Schneider, P. P. (2020).
Making health economic models shiny: A tutorial.
Wellcome Open Research, 5:69. Version 2; peer review: 2 approved.
Spaanderman, D. J., Prathaban, K., Zelina, P., Mouheb, K., Hejtmánek, L., Marzetti, M., Schurink,
A. W., Chan, D., Niemantsverdriet, R., Hartmann, F., et al. (2025). Evaluating open-weight large
language models for structured data extraction from narrative medical reports across multiple use
cases and languages. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10658.
Su, H.-M. and Kachitvichyanukul, V. (1989). A natural language system to aid simulation model
formulation. Computers & industrial engineering, 16(4):535–543.
Zhang, L., Zhang, Y., Niyato, D., Ren, L., Gu, P., Chen, Z., Laili, Y., Cai, W., and Bruzzone, A.
(2025). Intelligent system modeling using genai: A methodology for automated simulation model
generation. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory, page 103236.
Zhou, Q. and Sheu, J.-B. (2025). The use of generative artificial intelligence (genai) in operations
research: review and future research agenda. Journal of the Operational Research Society, 0(0):1–
21.
29


--- Page 30 ---
Appendices
A
LLM Workflow Prompts
A.1
Stage 1 Prompt
You are an expert in analyzing process flow diagrams and discrete event simulation models.
Your task is to analyze the attached process flow diagram image and extract a detailed,
structured description.
ANALYSIS REQUIREMENTS:
1. Identify all activities/processes in the diagram.
2. Extract service time distributions with exact parameters
(e.g., normal(mean=15, sd=3), lognormal(mean=2.5, sd=0.8), exponential(mean=0.25)).
3. For EACH activity, determine whether external entities arrive
into it OR into its waiting queue.
- If an external source feeds an activity or its queue,
extract that as the activity’s Arrival distribution.
- Only output ’none - internal routing only’ if the activity exclusively receives
entities from other upstream activities.
4. For EACH activity, determine whether the diagram explicitly shows a reneging,
abandonment, patience, timeout, or maximum waiting-time distribution associated
with that activity or its queue.
- If yes, extract it exactly as a reneging distribution.
- If not shown, do NOT infer one and do NOT include one.
5. For exponential distributions, determine carefully whether the parameter
is a RATE or a MEAN (inter-arrival times imply MEAN, arrival rates imply RATE →convert).
e.g., "rate=3/hour →mean=1/3=0.333 hours"
6. Evaluate ALL mathematical expressions to their decimal value before inclusion.
Examples: 1/3 →0.3333, 10*2 →20.
7. Note resources associated with each activity (name and capacity).
8. Ensure all distributions use consistent time units throughout.
9. Exits/sinks are NOT activities. Always refer to them as EXIT.
Do not include in the list of Activities.
10. Arrival/inter-arrival time distribution nodes are NOT activities.
11. Reneging/abandonment/patience distribution nodes are NOT activities.
30


--- Page 31 ---
12. Decision points without a time are NOT activities.
13. Extract a routing matrix between ALL activities and EXIT that follows the logic
in the diagram exactly.
- Do not use your own knowledge of processes to infer what the user should have drawn.
- Your final description of this must only include Activities and Exits.
I.e. Do not include arrival/service/reneging distributions, resources or nodes
that act as splitters.
- Ensure all edge probabilities sum to 1.0 for each node. Use exact activity names.
- Perform a final double check that only Activities and EXITs are
included in the routing matrix.
14. For each link between activities pay careful visual attention to the arrowheads
of intersecting lines and feedback loops to ensure you do not reverse directions.
15. If any information is ambiguous, illegible, or missing, state this explicitly.
OUTPUT FORMAT:
Provide a structured description organised exactly as follows.
**Process Overview:**
[Brief description of what the process represents and its overall structure]
**Activities:**
- Activity 1: [name]
- Service distribution: [type(param=value, ...)]
- Arrival distribution: [type(param=value, ...)] OR "none - internal routing only"
- Reneging distribution: [type(param=value, ...)] OR "none"
- Resource: [resource name] (capacity=[N])
[continue for ALL activities]
**Activity Routing:**
- Routing 1 (after [activity name]):
→Branch A (probability: 0.X) →[destination activity name or EXIT]
→Branch B (probability: 0.X) →[destination activity name or EXIT]
- Routing 2 (after [activity name]):
→Branch A (probability: 1.0) →[EXIT]
[continue for ALL activities]
**Flow Logic:**
[Step-by-step narrative of how entities move through the system from arrival to exit.]
31


--- Page 32 ---
A.2
Stage 2 prompt template
{{ json_schema }}
You are an expert at converting process descriptions into structured JSON
for discrete event simulation models.
### Process Overview
{{ process_description }}
CRITICAL RULES:
1. **EVALUATE ALL EXPRESSIONS**:
- ANY mathematical expressions (e.g., 60/200, 1/2, 10*2) MUST be evaluated
to their decimal value before inclusion. Do the calculation step by step.
- Examples: 1/2 →0.5, 10*2 →20
2. **STANDARD PARAMETER NAMING**:
- Use standard parameter names: ’min’, ’max’, ’mean’, ’sd’, ’rate’, ’mode’
- NEVER use synonyms like ’minimum’, ’maximum’, ’average’, ’standard_deviation’
- Preserve exact parameter names as they appear in the description
- NEVER use numbers as parameter names (e.g., "5", "7", "10" are invalid keys).
3. **NODE CONSISTENCY AND EXIT NODES**:
- The "from" field in transitions must be an activity name from the "activities" array.
- The "to" field in transitions must be either an activity name from the
"activities" array or "Exit".
- DO NOT reference or create other sink or end node names such as "Start", "End",
"call ended", "finished", "completed", etc.
- When a process leaves the system after an activity, ALWAYS use "Exit" as the "to" value.
- Do NOT add "Exit" to the "activities" array unless it is explicitly defined as
an activity in the description.
4. **INTER-ARRIVAL TIME HANDLING**:
- THERE MUST BE AT LEAST ONE ACTIVITY with an inter-arrival process in the model.
- Prefer assigning the inter-arrival distribution to the first activity in the flow
(e.g., "call triage" for arrival of calls).
- If inter-arrival time is NOT SPECIFIED anywhere in the description,
you MUST still create an inter-arrival distribution for exactly one activity, using:
{
"type": "exponential",
"parameters": {
"rate": 1.0
}
}
- Never leave all "arrival_distribution" fields as null.
32


--- Page 33 ---
5. **PROBABILITY VALIDATION**:
- Ensure ALL probabilities are decimal numbers between 0.0 and 1.0
- For each source node, all outgoing transition probabilities must sum to exactly 1.0
6. **STRICT JSON COMPLIANCE**:
- Output ONLY valid JSON with no additional text
- Use proper JSON syntax (commas, brackets, quotes)
- No trailing commas, comments, or explanations
7. **DISTRIBUTION NOTATION**:
- Use parameter names exactly as supplied in the description.
- If the description omits parameter names but gives values in a standard order,
you MUST infer the correct names rather than using raw numbers as keys.
- Examples of standard mappings:
- triangular(a, b, c) →"min": a, "mode": b, "max": c
- uniform(a, b) →"min": a, "max": b
- lognormal(m, s) where the description says "mean" and "sd"
→"mean": m, "sd": s
- NEVER use numeric strings as keys in the "parameters" object
(e.g., "5", "7", "10" are invalid parameter names).
OUTPUT INSTRUCTIONS:
- Begin with the opening curly brace
- End with the closing curly brace
- Include NO text before or after the JSON
B
LLM-as-a-judge
B.1
JSON schema used by Judges
{
"description": "Evaluates a generated process description against a ground-truth rubric.",
"properties": {
"reasoning": {
"description": "Detailed step-by-step reasoning evaluating Activities, Distributions, Parameters, Resources,
and Routing. Identify specific errors before tallying them below.",
"title": "Reasoning",
"type": "string"
},
"misclassified_nodes": {
"description": "COUNT of nodes incorrectly listed as an Activity. CRITICAL: Use this category
if the concept/text actually exists SOMEWHERE in the Ground Truth (like a Decision, Arrival, or Exit),
but was just given the wrong label. Do not count parameter/resource errors for these.",
"title": "Misclassified Nodes",
"type": "integer"
},
"hallucinated_nodes": {
"description": "COUNT of completely invented activities. CRITICAL: Use this category ONLY
if the concept/text does NOT exist ANYWHERE in the Ground Truth. If it exists as a Decision/Arrival,
it is Misclassified, NOT Hallucinated. Do not count parameter/resource errors for these.",
"title": "Hallucinated Nodes",
33


--- Page 34 ---
"type": "integer"
},
"missed_nodes": {
"description": "COUNT of activities in the Ground Truth that are completely missing
from the generated Activities list.",
"title": "Missed Nodes",
"type": "integer"
},
"missed_distributions": {
"description": "COUNT of distributions in the Ground Truth that are completely missing
from the generated description including arrivals, service and renege distributions.",
"title": "Missed Distributions",
"type": "integer"
},
"parameter_errors": {
"description": "COUNT of incorrect distribution parameters (e.g. wrong mean, wrong min/max,
wrong distribution name).",
"title": "Parameter Errors",
"type": "integer"
},
"routing_errors": {
"description": "COUNT of incorrect routing probabilities, missing branches, or probabilities
that fail to sum to 1.0.",
"title": "Routing Errors",
"type": "integer"
},
"resource_capacity_errors": {
"description": "COUNT of incorrect integer capacities (N) assigned to resources.",
"title": "Resource Capacity Errors",
"type": "integer"
},
"generation_error": {
"description": "1 if the LLM failed to generate a valid process description e.g. ran out of tokens
during thinking;If one then ALL other categories of error should be set to 0; 0 otherwise.",
"title": "Generation Error",
"type": "integer"
},
"score": {
"description": "1 if perfectly matches Ground Truth (0 errors). 0 if ANY errors exist.",
"title": "Score",
"type": "integer"
}
},
"required": [
"reasoning",
"misclassified_nodes",
"hallucinated_nodes",
"missed_nodes",
"missed_distributions",
"parameter_errors",
"routing_errors",
"resource_capacity_errors",
"generation_error",
"score"
],
"title": "DiagramJudgement",
"type": "object"
}
34


--- Page 35 ---
B.2
Judge prompt
You are an expert evaluator grading an AI’s ability to extract discrete event
simulation data from a process flow diagram.
You will compare a ’Generated Description’ against a ’Ground Truth Description’.
The generated text follows a structured format containing **Activities**
and **Activity Routing**
Your job is to find any discrepancies and categorize them strictly into eight error types
using the provided JSON schema.
CRITICAL EVALUATION RULES:
- **Routing Logic**:
Extract and compare routing strictly as unordered {Destination: Probability} pairs
(e.g., {Service 1: 0.4, Service 2: 0.4}).
Ignore arbitrary branch labels and list order.
Mathematical equivalence means there is NO error. Check if probabilities fail to sum to 1.0.
SCORING RULE:
- Score 1 ONLY if the generated extraction perfectly matches the Ground Truth logic
(ignoring minor formatting differences).
- Score 0 if you find ANY hallucination, omission, misclassification, resource error,
or parameter/routing error.
Always write your step-by-step ‘reasoning‘ checking the Activities, Distributions,
Parameters, Resources, and Routing before you output the final score and error lists.
## Ground Truth Description
{{ ground_truth }}
## Generated Description (to evaluate)
{{ generated }}
C
Images used in evaluation
35


--- Page 36 ---
Figure C.1: Case 1: Call Centre
Figure C.2: Case 2: Jackson Network 1
36


--- Page 37 ---
Figure C.3: Case 3: Hand drawn call centre
37


--- Page 38 ---
Figure C.4: Case 4: Treatment centre
Figure C.5: Case 5: MM1 with renege
38


--- Page 39 ---
Figure C.6: Case 6: Call centre renege
Figure C.7: Case 7: Jackson Network 2
39


--- Page 40 ---
Figure C.8: Case 8: Ten node network
40
