--- Page 1 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using
Simplification-based Verification
Sumaya Abdul Rahman 1 Seckhen Ariel Andrade Cuellar 2
Ghani Raissov 2 Mohammad Raza 3
Abstract
Natural language interfaces can greatly benefit the
accessibility and usability of optimization model-
ing, and recent advances in large language models
(LLMs) show promise in automatically translat-
ing textual problem descriptions into executable
solver formulations. However, a key challenge for
existing approaches is to ensure that the inferred
formulation correctly implements the intended
task, even if it may execute without errors. We
introduce VERISIMPL, a solver–LLM framework
for robust natural-language-to-optimization for-
malization. Our approach is based on the idea of
simplification-based verification, where the opti-
mization solver is leveraged to generate simpli-
fied diagnostic queries about a candidate formula-
tion to allow the LLM to tractably reason about
the correctness of the formulation with respect
to the task description. We present such simplifi-
cation strategies along different dimensions with
respect to problem constraints and decision vari-
ables, which allow the LLM to reason locally un-
der fixed global contexts. Evaluations on a range
of optimization benchmarks show how our ap-
proach provides consistent improvements in accu-
racy over existing methods, while also providing
a novel high-precision self-verification signal.
1. Introduction
Optimization plays a central role in decision-making across
a wide range of industries, including manufacturing, logis-
tics, supply chains, energy systems, healthcare, and finance
(Sadana et al., 2025). Many of these real-world decision
problems are naturally formulated as mathematical optimiza-
1Texas A&M University at Qatar, Doha, Qatar 2Carnegie Mel-
lon University in Qatar, Doha, Qatar 3Qatar Computing Research
Institute, Doha, Qatar. Correspondence to: Mohammad Raza
<mraza@hbku.edu.qa>.
Proceedings of the 43 rd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Seoul, South Korea. PMLR 306, 2026. Copyright 2026
by the author(s).
tion models, such as Mixed-Integer Linear Programming
(MILP) problems, which are one of the most widely used
and expressive paradigms (Williams et al., 2009).
Despite their practical importance, optimization modeling
remains difficult to access for non-expert users. Formulat-
ing a correct optimization problem typically requires deep
expertise in operations research to translate a real-world sce-
nario into mathematical constraints and objectives, as well
as programming expertise to implement the formulation
using solver-specific APIs such as Gurobi (Gurobi, 2026),
CPLEX (IBM, 2026), or SCIP (Achterberg, 2009). This
dual expertise requirement creates a significant barrier for
many potential users, including small businesses, planners,
and domain specialists, who may understand their opera-
tional needs well but lack the technical background required
to formalize them.
Recent advances in Large Language Models (LLMs) offer
a promising pathway toward lowering this barrier. By gen-
erating solver code from natural language descriptions of
optimization problems, LLM-based interfaces have the po-
tential to expand access to optimization technology and also
improve usability for expert users (Liu et al., 2024). Initial
approaches were based on direct prompting (Yang et al.,
2024), while more advanced techniques such as agentic sys-
tems (Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024; Xiao et al., 2024) and
fine-tuned domain-specific models (Tang et al., 2024; Jiang
et al., 2025) have shown notable improvements in accuracy.
However, a key challenge remains: even when an LLM-
based system produces solver code that may execute without
errors, the generated formulation may not correctly formu-
late the intended problem, leaving the burden of verification
entirely on the user in all cases. Optimization models are
particularly prone to subtle semantic errors: a constraint
may be slightly misspecified, an index mishandled, or an
objective incorrectly aggregated. For example, Figure 1
illustrates an example optimization problem and two solver
code formulations: one correct and one incorrect. While the
two formulations appear very similar, the incorrect version
contains subtle semantic mistakes in the objective function
and one of the constraints that fundamentally change the
meaning of the model. Such errors are difficult to detect and
can lead to invalid optimization results. While standard code
1
arXiv:2607.20474v1  [cs.AI]  24 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 1. A sample optimization modelling problem. For a given natural language problem description, the LLM may generate the correct
solver formulation or an incorrect one that looks very similar but contains subtle semantic errors that are difficult to detect.
generation approaches often utilise unit tests or behavioral
test cases generated from the task specification, such ap-
proaches are infeasible for optimization code formulations:
since correctness depends on global interactions between
decision variables, constraints, and objectives, generating
reliable test instances that satisfy feasibility or optimality
conditions in high-dimensional spaces is itself a hard opti-
mization problem.
In this work, we address this challenge by introducing a
novel solver-LLM framework for natural language optimiza-
tion modeling. Our approach not only improves the accuracy
of NL-to-solver code translation but also provides a self-
verification signal that indicates when there is high confi-
dence in a generated formulation. Our method is based on a
new paradigm of simplification-based verification. The key
idea is that instead of relying on the LLM to generate verifi-
cation tests, we leverage the optimization solver to construct
simplified diagnostic queries about the original problem.
These simplified queries reduce complexity and probe spe-
cific properties while preserving the global semantic struc-
ture of the original formulation. In particular, we reduce
complexity along different problem dimensions represented
by constraints and decision variables, allowing us to probe
feasibility and optimality properties. Thus conceptually,
our approach inverts the conventional verification workflow:
instead of using the LLM to propose test scenarios that
are then checked by the solver, we leverage the solver’s
reliability in constructing feasible and optimal solutions in
high-dimensional space to obtain reduced-complexity prob-
lem instances that are tractable for reasoning by the LLM.
Our evaluation across four benchmark datasets spanning a
range of optimization domains shows consistent improve-
ments in end-to-end formalization accuracy over existing
state of the art baseline methods. Moreover, our novel self-
verification mechanism identifies a substantial subset of
cases where the system can signal high confidence on the
generated formulation, which can help to reduce the burden
of manual inspection in many cases in practice.
In summary, we make the following key contributions in this
work: (1) We introduce simplification-based verification, a
framework for verifying natural language optimization mod-
els via solver-guided diagnostic problem simplifications
that probe semantic correctness. (2) We present concrete
simplification strategies along different dimensions of com-
plexity represented by problem constraints and decision-
variable dimensions, enabling tractable LLM-based reason-
ing about feasibility and optimality. (3) We provide an
extensive empirical evaluation over four optimization bench-
marks, demonstrating consistent improvements in accuracy
over existing NL-to-solver systems, as well as a novel high-
confidence self-verification signal.
2. Simplification-based Verification
In this section, we present a high-level overview of our
simplification-based verification approach. Given a natural
language description of an optimization problem together
with associated input data, the goal is to compute the optimal
solution. Standard approaches generally follow a sequential
process where the LLM or LLM-based agentic system first
formulates the problem as code which is then executed by
the optimization solver to compute the optimal solution. In
contrast, our approach integrates the solver and the LLM in
2


--- Page 3 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 2. The simplification-based verification pipeline: using solver-generated simplified queries for effective LLM reasoning
a deeper way, using them jointly for formulation verification
rather than relying on the solver solely for execution.
Outline. Figure 2 illustrates the overall pipeline. Our sys-
tem first generates multiple candidate solver programs using
the LLM, such as the correct and incorrect programs shown
for the timber example in Figure 1. Each program is sent
through a verification process, which starts with using the
solver to generate a set of simplification queries from the
candidate program, where each simplified problem isolates
a particular aspect of the full problem. For each simplifica-
tion query, the solver computes a ground-truth result, and
the LLM is asked to independently reason about the query
and its expected outcome based only on the natural language
problem description. Hence simplification queries are not
test cases in the standard sense of input-outputs that specify
the expected behaviour of the program, but are instead prop-
erties that are derived from the program using the solver in
order for the LLM to reason about the expected problem
behaviour with respect to the task description. Consistency
between the LLM’s reasoning result and the solver’s out-
put yields a positive verification signal. Verification results
across multiple simplified queries are aggregated into final
a verification score for each candidate program, which re-
flects how consistently the program aligns with the natural
language specification. The program with the highest veri-
fication score is selected and executed on the input data to
return the optimal solution.
Simplification process. Our method uses the solver to gen-
erate simplified problem instances along two key problem
dimensions: constraints and decision variables. Constraints-
based simplification focuses on validating whether individ-
ual constraints in the candidate program capture the seman-
tics described in the natural language description. The key
idea is to consider one constraint at a time while keeping
others fixed, mutating it with respect to distinct semantic
possibilities (strict satisfaction, boundary or violation) and
generating concrete valuations for each possibility using
the solver. These concrete valuations are then presented
to the LLM, along with the natural language description
of the problem, and the LLM is asked to reason about the
feasibility of the valuation.
For example, for the storage capacity constraint in the incor-
rect program in Figure 1, the formulation wrongly enforces
division of capacity (200000) by 10000, effectively requir-
ing that inventory should always be less than 20 (which does
not follow from the problem description). The solver will
generate concrete valuations for the inventory according to
this formulation, e.g. an inventory of 19 and 20 should be
feasible, but 21 should be infeasible. When these simple
queries with concrete inventory values are sent to the LLM,
it can easily reason that all three inventory values should
be acceptable under the problem description, and therefore
the infeasibility query would fail verification. Thus the sim-
ple queries with concrete values allow the llm reasoning to
detect this discrepancy and penalize the incorrect program.
While constraints-based verification checks for feasibility vi-
olations, it does not assess the optimality formulation of the
candidate program. We address this verification aspect with
variable-based simplification. While the full program has
many interacting decision variables that must be mutually
optimized, the key idea behind variable-based simplifica-
tion is to reduce complexity by providing concrete values
for many of these variables and only predict the remaining
ones. Given a candidate program, we first run the solver to
obtain the optimal valuation for all the decision variables,
including the objective. We then produce simplified queries
by providing the values for different subsets of variables
and asking the LLM to predict only the remaining ones.
For instance, for the timber example in Figure 1, the objec-
tive function must maximise the total profit, but the incor-
rect program misformulates the objective calculation using
a double for loop which adds storage costs multiple times
for the same inventory. While asking the LLM to reason
directly about the full problem and all unknown decision
variables is highly complex, when we provide concrete val-
ues for all of the decision variables except the total profit,
then that effectively reduces the complexity of the task to
only focus on the objective calculation. When the LLM
reasons concretely given the values for all other variables
3


--- Page 4 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
(purchases, sales, and inventory), it correctly applies the
storage cost once per quarter. This leads to the same total
profit value inferred in the case of the correct program, but
a differing value in the case of the incorrect program. Such
discrepancy between concrete numerical reasoning and sym-
bolic formulation evaluation serves as a strong error signal.
In this way the simplification based on variable masking
significantly reduces the reasoning complexity for the LLM
to be able to detect such discrepancies.
Together, constraint-based and variable-based simplifica-
tions provide complementary verification signals that probe
both feasibility and optimality aspects of candidate solver
programs. By systematically simplifying the problem and
comparing solver outputs with LLM reasoning grounded in
the natural language description, our approach effectively
detects subtle formulation errors that standard end-to-end
generation methods fail to catch.
3. The VERISIMPL Algorithm
This section presents VERISIMPL as an abstract, solver- and
LLM-agnostic algorithm that implements simplification-
based verification for robust natural language to optimiza-
tion formalization.
Problem Setup. We assume we are given a natural language
specification of an optimization problem x and associated
structured input data d, which may be tabular data and pa-
rameters formatted in a structured format such as JSON
or CSV. A candidate solver program P (e.g. in Gurobi/C-
PLEX/SCIP APIs) executing on data d instantiates an opti-
mization model M(P, d) = (V, C, O) where V is the set of
decision variables, C = {c1, . . . , cm} the set of constraints
and O is the objective function. We assume each indexed
variable element is included as an atomic variable in the set
V, and this set also contains a special variable obj which
represents the objective value. We define a valuation v as a
mapping of variables to values v : V →R ∪Z.
Our approach leverages two black-box components: an
optimization solver S and a large language model L.
Given a model M, the solver interface is defined by
SOLVE(S; M) →(status, v), which returns a status
and a possible valuation v over V.
The status
∈
{OPT, FEAS, INFEAS}, where OPT indicates that v is an op-
timal valuation, FEAS indicates that v is feasible but not
necessarily optimal, while INFEAS indicates that no satisfy-
ing valuation could be found.
The language model interface is defined by two main
functions.
Firstly, solver code generation is done by
LLMGENPROGRAMS(L; x, d, K), which generates K
sample programs (using temperature sampling) for a given
natural language task description x and dataset d. The
function uses standard error-based refinement to generate
Algorithm 1 VERISIMPL(L, S, x, d)
1: {Pk}K
k=1 ←LLMGENPROGRAMS(L; x, d, K)
2: for k = 1 ... K do
3:
Mk ←M(Pk, d)
4:
sc ←CONSTRAINTVERIFY(L, S; x, d, Mk)
5:
sd ←VARVERIFY(L, S; x, d, Mk,

{u}|u ∈V
	
)
6:
sf ←VARVERIFY(L, S; x, d, Mk, {V})
7:
st, Pk ←TYPEVERIFY(L; x, d, Pk)
8:
s(Pk) ←(sc + sd + sf, st)
9: end for
10: k⋆←arg maxk s(Pk)
11: (st, v⋆) ←SOLVE(S; M(Pk⋆, d))
12: return (Pk⋆, st, v⋆)
Algorithm 2 CONSTRAINTVERIFY(L, S, x, d, M)
1: pass ←0; total ←0
2: let M = (V, C, O)
3: for all c ∈C do
4:
for all τ ∈{<, =, >} do
5:
(st, v) ←SOLVE(S; MUTATE(M, c, τ))
6:
if st ∈{OPT, FEAS} then
7:
q ←FEASQUERY(x, d, v)
8:
ˆy ←LLMINFER(L, q)
9:
pass ←pass + 1[ˆy ⇔(τ ∈{<, =})]
10:
total ←total + 1
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
14: return pass/total
executable solver code (Shinn et al., 2023) (prompts shown
in Figures 4 and 5 in Appendix). Secondly, the function
LLMINFER(L, q) →a uses the LLM to reason about a
given verification query q and infer its answer a, where
verification queries are defined as follows.
Verification queries.
A key abstraction in our approach
is the use of simplified verification queries. Each query is a
reduced problem derived from the original instance (x, d)
and a candidate program. We define two kinds of queries.
Firstly, a Feasibility query qf = FEASQUERY(x, d, v) asks
whether a given valuation v satisfies the constraints de-
scribed by (x, d). The answer is a boolean ˆy ∈{T, F}
that is true if the valuation is feasible. The LLM prompt
for reasoning about feasibility queries is shown in Fig-
ure 6 in the Appendix.
Secondly, a Valuation query
qv = VALQUERY(x, d, vV\S, S) asks the LLM to infer
values for a subset of variables S ⊆V given fixed values for
the remaining variables. The answer is a (partial) valuation
ˆvS over S. The LLM prompt for valuation queries is shown
in Figure 7 in the Appendix.
4


--- Page 5 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Algorithm 3 VARVERIFY(L, S, x, d, M, T)
1: pass ←0
2: let M = (V, C, O)
3: (st, v⋆) ←SOLVE(S; M)
4: if st = OPT then
5:
for all t ∈T do
6:
q ←VALQUERY(x, d, v⋆
V\t, t)
7:
ˆvt ←LLMINFER(L, q)
8:
pass ←pass + 1[ˆvt = v⋆
t ]
9:
end for
10: end if
11: return pass/|T|
Algorithm Overview. The main procedure is presented in
Algorithm 1. Given the natural language problem descrip-
tion and data (x, d), we first sample K candidate programs
from the language model (in our experiments we consider up
to K = 10). For each candidate program, we perform three
different kinds of verification which we describe in more
detail below: constraint-based verification, variable-based
verification and type verification. Each of these yield veri-
fication scores, which are aggregated into a lexicographic
ranking, prioritizing semantic correctness (constraints and
variables) followed by type-based correctness. The highest-
ranked formulation is selected for final solving.
Constraint-based Simplification To assess whether a can-
didate program correctly captures the intended semantics of
each constraint, we construct feasibility queries that probe
the constraint under the distinct semantic possibilities that it
presents (strict inequality, equality or violation) while fixing
the remaining global context. We do this by mutating the
constraint and generating witness valuations for these muta-
tions using the solver. Each constraint c ∈C is expressed
in normalized form as e(V ) ≤0 for some expression e(V )
over variables V ⊆V. For a small fixed margin δ > 0, we
define three mutations:
c< : e(V ) ≤−δ
c= : e(V ) = 0
c> : e(V ) ≥+δ
For τ ∈{<, =, >} we define MUTATE(M, c, τ)) to be the
model M where constraint c is replaced by cτ. Algorithm 2
shows the full constraint verification process. For each con-
straint, we construct feasibility queries by using the solver
to create satisfying valuations for the three mutation types.
We then check each feasibility query with the LLM and the
query passes if the LLM reasoning about feasibility of this
valuation is consistent with the constraint implementation.
Variable-based Simplification. While constraint verifica-
tion probes feasibility properties of individual constraints,
it does not assess the constraint interactions and objective
function logic that infers the optimal variable assignments.
We approach this verification aspect with the idea of variable
masking to construct simplified valuation queries. using the
solver. Algorithm 3 describes this process. Given the task
description and data, a candidate model M, and a collection
T of variable subsets to be masked, we first obtain an op-
timal valuation for M using the solver. For each masking
set t ∈T, we then construct a valuation query that reveals
the optimal values of all non-masked variables and asks
the LLM to infer the values of the masked variables in t.
The query is considered successful if the inferred values are
consistent with the solver-derived optimal valuation.
In Algorithm 1, we apply this procedure to all singleton
variable sets to query each variable individually (line 5), and
to the full variable set V (line 6). The latter corresponds
to reasoning about the complete optimization problem and
thus provides a high-precision but low-coverage verification
signal. For efficiency, our implementation also imposes
a fixed upper bound on the number of singleton variables
considered for masking.
Type-based verification.
In addition to semantic ver-
ification, we also apply a lightweight type consistency
check.
The function TYPEVERIFY(L; x, d, P) in Algo-
rithm 1 prompts the LLM to reason about the domain of
each decision variable declared in the program P with re-
spect to the problem description and data (x, d). It returns a
binary score st that indicates if any type discrepancies are
found, and also returns an updated program with the revised
type annotations. The LLM prompt is shown in Figure 8 in
the Appendix.
4. Evaluation
In this section we present an evaluation of our approach
across multiple optimization modelling benchmarks and
compare it against prior methods.
Datasets. We evaluate our method on four popular bench-
mark datasets for optimization modelling from natural lan-
guage, spanning academic and industrial problems across
different domains. NL4Opt consists of natural language
descriptions of linear programming word problems and the
corresponding formulations across multiple application do-
mains, derived from the NL4Opt competition (Ramamonji-
son et al., 2023). We use the test split of the dataset which,
after removing some infeasible cases, contains 269 prob-
lems. NLP4LP is a dataset of 67 problems curated from
optimization textbooks and lecture notes and includes both
LP and MILP problems from domains such as facility lo-
cation, network flow, scheduling, and portfolio manage-
ment (Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024). CompOR (Complex
OR) is a dataset of complex operations research problems
sourced from academic literature and real-world industrial
scenarios, characterized by longer descriptions and multi-
constraint formulations (Xiao et al., 2024). We use the 17
5


--- Page 6 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
System
NL4Opt NLP4LP CompOR IndOR Avg.
BASELLM
75.5
43.5
64.7
42.7
56.8
COE
58.9
-
25.9
-
-
SELFDEBUG
76.5
46.8
70.6
42.7
59.1
OPTIMUS
85.9
37.1
52.9
17.7
48.4
VERISIMPL
88.1
51.6
76.5
45.8
65.5
Table 1. Accuracy of systems, using GPT-4o as base (except COE).
problems that are currently publicly released and checked
with feasible solutions. Finally, IndOR (Industry OR) is
an industry-focused dataset consisting of 100 real-world
problems across domains such as aviation, manufacturing,
logistics, and energy (Tang et al., 2024).
Baselines We compare our approach with existing meth-
ods for optimization modeling from natural language using
mainstream LLMs. Firstly, we evaluate direct LLM prompt-
ing to formulate optimization problems end-to-end without
any additional reasoning frameworks. We use the strong
general-purpose models GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2024) and R1
(Guo et al., 2025), where the models are provided only with
the natural language problem description and data and re-
quired to generate solver code (prompt in Figure 4 in the
Appendix). We also evaluate more advanced frameworks
that incorporate base LLMs modularly. OPTIMUS is a struc-
tured agent-based framework for optimization modeling
with general-purpose LLMs (Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024).
It uses a sequential pipeline of multiple stages and tasks,
calling specialized prompt-based agents for sub-tasks (e.g.
formulator, coder, evaluator, manager). In our experiments,
we ran the authors’ released implementation of OPTIMUS
with the LLM models that we use. We also compare to
Chain-of-Experts (COE) (Xiao et al., 2024), which is an-
other multi-agent reasoning framework designed for solv-
ing complex operations research problems by decomposing
them into expert-level subtasks. Another general-purpose
code generation method that we consider is SELFDEBUG,
which is an iterative self-refinement framework that enables
LLMs to improve performance through execution feedback
from past failures (Chen et al., 2024) which in our case are
error messages from the solver (prompt used for error-based
refinement in Figure 5 in Appendix).
4.1. Main results
Tables 1 and 2 report end-to-end accuracy across the four
datasets, using GPT-4o and R1 respectively as the base
model for all systems (except COE, for which we report
results directly from (Xiao et al., 2024)). Across both base
models, VERISIMPL achieves the highest average accuracy,
outperforming all prior methods. Furthermore, these gains
are consistent across datasets: while some baselines exhibit
strong performance on specific benchmarks but degrade
System
NL4Opt NLP4LP CompOR IndOR Avg.
BASELLM
78.4
51.6
64.7
55.2
62.5
COE
58.9
-
25.9
-
-
SELFDEBUG
82.9
56.5
70.6
61.5
67.9
OPTIMUS
84.4
32.2
47.1
56.3
55.0
VERISIMPL
88.8
58.1
76.5
67.7
72.8
Table 2. Accuracy of systems, using R1 as base (except COE).
VERISIMPL (GPT-4o)
VERISIMPL (R1)
Precision
Coverage
Precision
Coverage
NL4Opt
92.7
32.1
95.7
38.2
NLP4LP
90.0
28.1
75.0
17.1
CompOR
100.0
53.8
66.7
15.3
IndOR
83.3
22.7
76.5
21.3
Avg
91.5
34.2
78.5
23.0
Table 3. Self-verification precision and coverage of VERISIMPL
substantially on others (e.g., OPTIMUS on NL4Opt versus
IndOR), VERISIMPL consistently improves over all sys-
tems.
Comparing base models, average performance is higher
with R1 than with GPT-4o, as expected given R1’s stronger
reasoning-oriented training. However, we note that with
VERISIMPL we get almost the same performance for both
models on NL4Opt (88.1 vs. 88.5), which closes the larger
gap between the base models (75.5 vs. 78.4). Also, on Com-
pOR both base models perform the same and see the same
improvement with VERISIMPL, indicating that factors be-
yond explicit reasoning (e.g. differences in pretraining data
or model architecture) may favor certain problem distribu-
tions. Overall, the consistent improvements of VERISIMPL
across distinct LLMs and benchmarks indicate the robust-
ness of the simplification-based verification approach, as
opposed to model-specific improvements from prompt en-
gineering or fine-tuning. In Appendix C we also report
evaluation using the Mistral large model (Mistral AI, 2024)
which shows similar results.
4.2. Self-verification precision and coverage
Unlike prior systems, VERISIMPL is based on an approach
of self-verification which can offer an additional indicator
of system confidence apart from the answer that the system
returns, which may help reduce manual verification burden
in practice. We investigated the performance of full self-
verification by considering the cases where all verification
queries in Algorithm 1 succeeded. Table 3 reports self-
verification precision and coverage for VERISIMPL under
GPT-4o and R1, where precision is defined as the proportion
of correctly answered cases out of all fully verified cases,
6


--- Page 7 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
System
GPT-4o
R1
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
VERISIMPL
65.5
91.5
34.2
72.5
78.5
22.8
A-CONS
63.9
75.7
78.9
71.4
77.8
76.0
A-SINGLEVAR
64.8
77.2
69.5
68.9
75.2
93.4
A-FULLVAR
62.2
74.0
27.7
69.9
77.5
66.7
A-TYPE
64.2
91.6
31.6
72.3
79.7
23.0
Table 4. Performance of ablation systems averaged over datasets
and coverage is defined as the proportion of fully verified
cases out of all correctly answered cases.
Two trends stand out. First, precision is substantially higher
for both models than the corresponding end-to-end accu-
racy shown in Tables 1 and 2, indicating that when all
self-verification checks succeed, the resulting solutions are
markedly more reliable. In particular, for GPT-4o, preci-
sion exceeds 90% on average, and on NL4Opt precision
is above 90% for both models, highlighting that verifica-
tion provides a strong confidence indicator in many cases.
Second, coverage is comparatively low across benchmarks,
which reflects the strict consistency requirements imposed
by simplification-based verification: the model must align
its natural language reasoning with all solver-grounded di-
agnostic queries, and any mismatches (whether due to prob-
lem description ambiguity or reasoning noise) can cause
otherwise-correct solutions to fail full verification (false
negatives). However, we note that even such limited cov-
erage of 20–30% can provide a substantial reduction in
manual verification burden in practice.
4.3. Ablation studies
We performed an ablation study to examine the effects of
different aspects of our simplification-based verification ap-
proach. We define restricted variants of the VERISIMPL
algorithm that isolate individual verification signals. A-
CONS performs only constraint-based verification (line 4 in
Algorithm 1. A-SINGLEVAR performs only variable-based
verification with singleton variable masks (line 5 in Algo-
rithm 1), while A-FULLVAR performs only variable-based
verification with all masked variables (line 6 in Algorithm
1. Finally, A-TYPE disables type-based refinement (line 7).
Table 4 shows the results of our ablation experiments for
the both GPT-4o and R1. The results highlight the comple-
mentary roles of different verification signals consistently
across both models. Overall, removing components reduces
accuracy and verification precision, indicating that no single
verification signal is sufficient to robustly assess semantic
correctness. In particular, A-CONS shows that constraint
feasibility alone is a weak proxy for correct problem inter-
pretation, while A-SINGLEVAR and A-FULLVAR demon-
Figure 3. Accuracy improvement over the base model across
datasets.
strate that relying on LLM reasoning for optimal valuations
alone provides insufficient robustness. A-TYPE highlights
the benefits of type-level grounding and refinement in im-
proving overall accuracy, although these gains are relatively
smaller in comparison to the semantic verification compo-
nents.
As for coverage, we see that A-SINGLEVAR and A-
FULLVAR exhibit higher coverage rates at the cost of lower
precision, which can be expected from the reduced over-
all constraints that they impose. By contrast, A-FULLVAR
shows consistently low coverage, reflecting the brittleness
of end-to-end objective verification: while effective at filter-
ing incorrect formulations, such tasks are difficult for LLMs
to reason about and can lead to rejection of many otherwise
correct solutions.
Figure 3 shows the accuracy gains for the ablation systems
on each of the benchmark datasets. We observe that there are
varying patterns for the different benchmark domains, show-
ing that no one verification feature performs consistently
best across the different domains. However, A-FULLVAR
mostly performs worse than the other features as can be
expected from its lower coverage.
4.4. Qualitative analysis
In Appendices A and B, we provide detailed cases illustrat-
ing successfully verified formulations as well as verification
failure cases. Success cases illustrate how solver-generated
simplifications expose meaningful local and global structure,
allowing the LLM to reason accurately about feasibility and
optimality across different canonical optimization problem
families, including coverage and facility selection, resource
allocation, combinatorial planning with logical constraints,
and routing and transportation problems. These cases show
how consistency between solver witnesses and LLM reason-
ing provides a strong signal of formulation correctness.
The failure cases illustrate the rare instances when verifi-
cation may pass on incorrect answers. The main reason
for this is a misinterpretation of the natural-language spec-
7


--- Page 8 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
ification that can lead both the symbolic formulation and
the LLM’s concrete reasoning to consistently agree on the
same incorrect model of the problem, e.g. a shared incor-
rect decision-variable interpretation of "start time" in a shift
scheduling problem, or not considering certain costs in a
profit objective calculation. In these instances, the opti-
mization model was internally coherent, and verification
succeeded because the LLM’s reasoning aligned with the
solver’s outputs due to the shared misinterpration. Theses
cases highlight limitations certain aspects not being explic-
itly handled by current verification: decision variables are
assumed as given and shared between the llm reasoning and
solver analysis, and simplification queries do not cover any
aspects of the NL description that may be completely missed
or ignored by the candidate program rather than incorrectly
formulated. These limitations suggest directions for future
work to expand verification to include variable definitions
and coverage-oriented checks to detect unmodeled aspects
of the natural-language description.
5. Related Work
Optimization modeling from natural language. Recent
work has explored the use of LLMs to solve optimization
problems from natural language descriptions. Some tech-
niques are based on directly prompting the LLM to solve
the full optimization problem (Yang et al., 2024), though
scalability to more complex problems is a challenge for
such approaches. To this end, many works have focussed on
translating natural language descriptions of problems into
formal code formulations that can be executed by existing
optimization solvers (Ramamonjison et al., 2023; Li et al.,
2023). The key challenge here is to ensure that the formu-
lation correctly implements the intended task, and recent
works have explored more advanced techniques. Agentic
systems employ multiple interacting agents that play differ-
ent roles such as decomposing the task into intermediate
steps, or iteratively refine, critique, or cross-check generated
formulations, leading to improved performance over single-
pass prompting (Shinn et al., 2023; Ahmaditeshnizi et al.,
2024; Xiao et al., 2024). On the other hand, fine-tuning
LLMs trained on selected optimization datasets strengthens
adherence to solver APIs and common modeling patterns
(Tang et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2025). Despite these ad-
vances, subtle semantic errors such as wrongly formulated
constraints or objectives continue to persist and are difficult
to detect, especially for non-expert users. To address this
gap, our work adopts a verification-centric perspective, us-
ing the optimization solver itself to probe the correctness of
candidate formulations by generating simplified diagnostic
queries for tractable LLM reasoning. We show how this ap-
proach not only improves overall accuracy, but also provides
a high-confidence self-verification signal.
Verification in LLM-based code generation.
Recent
work on improving the robustness of LLM code genera-
tion increasingly adopts a verification-centric view, refin-
ing candidate programs using execution-based feedback
rather than relying on single-shot generation. Prominent
approaches run generated code against unit tests—often
LLM-generated—and use compiler or runtime errors to
guide self-debugging and self-refinement (Chen et al., 2024;
Shinn et al., 2023). However, weak or overfitted tests are
now recognized as a key limitation, motivating stronger ad-
equacy criteria such as mutation-based test strengthening
(Ravi et al., 2025) as well as metamorphic and property-
based testing, which check semantic invariants when ex-
plicit oracles are unavailable (Wang & Zhu, 2024; Bose,
2025). Similar approaches have also been explored for code
generation in reasoning domains, such as strengthening for-
malizations with logical instantiations inferred by the LLM
(Raza & Milic-Frayling, 2025; Kalyanpur et al., 2024).
Our work positions in this general area with the main dis-
tinction being in domain and verification strategy. We focus
on the optimization modeling domain, where generating
reliable tests from the natural language specification is itself
a hard optimization problem. We address this by leveraging
the solver itself to generate simplified diagnostic queries
from the candidate program, including constraint mutations
and variable-masking under solver-optimal contexts, to al-
low tractable reasoning by the LLM. This inverts the stan-
dard “LLM-proposes-tests” workflow and is conceptually
closest to mutation testing (DeMillo et al., 1978; Jia & Har-
man, 2011), with the main distinction being that the solver
not only supplies the oracle, but also constructs seman-
tically targeted simplifications that enable high-precision
self-verification in this domain. Similar to the optimization
domain, code-based tool-augmented approaches are also
prevalent in related areas such as planning (Kambhampati
et al., 2024; Guan et al., 2024), logical reasoning (Ye et al.,
2023; Pan et al., 2023) and auto-formalization (Wu et al.,
2022; Jiang et al., 2023), where LLMs are used in conjunc-
tion with powerful backend solvers, planners or theorem
provers. While our focus here has been on the optimization
domain, the underlying principle of solver-guided verifica-
tion query generation and simplification could in principle
be applicable in other such domains, and this will be inter-
esting exploration for future work.
6. Conclusion
We
introduced
simplification-based
verification,
a
novel solver–LLM framework for natural-language-to-
optimization modeling. By leveraging solver-generated
simplified queries to enable tractable LLM reasoning, our
method improves formulation accuracy and also provides a
high-precision self-verification signal. A comprehensive
8


--- Page 9 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
evaluation across different benchmark datasets and base
models demonstrates consistent gains over prior methods
and highlights the effectiveness of our method for robust
optimization modeling from natural language.
7. Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to improve the relia-
bility of natural language interfaces for optimization mod-
eling. By reducing silent semantic errors in automatically
generated optimization formulations, the proposed approach
may help make advanced optimization tools more accessible
to non-expert users without formal training in operations
research or solver programming, while also supporting ex-
pert users in rapidly prototyping and validating optimization
models. The methods are general-purpose and intended for
decision-support settings, and they do not introduce new
ethical concerns beyond those commonly associated with
machine learning and AI-assisted optimization technologies.
Accordingly, we do not identify broader societal risks that
require specific discussion beyond standard considerations.
References
Achterberg, T. Scip: solving constraint integer programs.
Mathematical Programming Computation, 1(1):1–41,
2009.
Ahmaditeshnizi, A., Gao, W., and Udell, M. OptiMUS:
Scalable optimization modeling with (MI)LP solvers and
large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, pp. 577–596. PMLR, 21–
27 Jul 2024. URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/ahmaditeshnizi24a.html.
Bose, D. B. From prompts to properties: Rethinking llm
code generation with property-based testing. In Mon-
tecchi, L., Li, J., Poshyvanyk, D., and Zhang, D. (eds.),
SIGSOFT FSE Companion, pp. 1660–1665. ACM, 2025.
ISBN 979-8-4007-1276-0.
Chen, X., Lin, M., Schärli, N., and Zhou, D. Teaching large
language models to self-debug. In ICLR. OpenReview.net,
2024.
DeMillo, R. A., Lipton, R. J., and Sayward, F. G. Hints on
test data selection: Help for the practicing programmer.
IEEE Computer, 11(4):34–41, 1978.
Guan, L., Valmeekam, K., Sreedharan, S., and Kambham-
pati, S. Leveraging pre-trained large language models
to construct and utilize world models for model-based
task planning. In Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2024. Curran Associates
Inc.
Guo, D., Yang, D., Zhang, H., Song, J., Zhang, R., Xu, R.,
Zhu, Q., Ma, S., Wang, P., Bi, X., et al. Deepseek-r1: In-
centivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948, 2025.
Gurobi.
Gurobi optimizer, 2026.
URL https://www.
gurobi.com/solutions/gurobi-optimizer/.
Ac-
cessed: 2026-01-15.
IBM.
Ibm
ilog
cplex
optimization
studio,
2026.
URL
https://www.ibm.com/products/
ilog-cplex-optimization-studio.
Accessed:
2026-01-15.
Jia, Y. and Harman, M. An analysis and survey of the
development of mutation testing. IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, 37(5):649–678, 2011. doi: 10.
1109/TSE.2010.62.
Jiang, A. Q., Welleck, S., Zhou, J. P., Lacroix, T., Liu, J., Li,
W., Jamnik, M., Lample, G., and Wu, Y. Draft, sketch,
and prove: Guiding formal theorem provers with informal
proofs. In ICLR. OpenReview.net, 2023.
Jiang, C., Shu, X., Qian, H., Lu, X., Zhou, J., Zhou, A.,
and Yu, Y. Llmopt: Learning to define and solve general
optimization problems from scratch. In ICLR, 2025.
Kalyanpur, A., Saravanakumar, K., Barres, V., Chu-
Carroll,
J.,
Melville,
D.,
and
Ferrucci,
D.
A.
Llm-arc:
Enhancing llms with an automated rea-
soning critic.
CoRR, abs/2406.17663, 2024.
URL
http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/corr/
corr2406.html#abs-2406-17663.
Kambhampati, S., Valmeekam, K., Guan, L., Verma, M.,
Stechly, K., Bhambri, S., Saldyt, L. P., and Murthy, A. B.
Position: LLMs can’t plan, but can help planning in
LLM-modulo frameworks. In Forty-first International
Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=Th8JPEmH4z.
Li, B., Mellou, K., Zhang, B., Pathuri, J., and Menache,
I. Large language models for supply chain optimiza-
tion, July 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.
03875.
Liu, F., Yao, Y., Guo, P., Yang, Z., Lin, X., Zhao, Z., Tong,
X., Mao, K., Lu, Z., Wang, Z., et al. A systematic survey
on large language models for algorithm design. ACM
Computing Surveys, 2024.
Mistral AI. Mistral large: Flagship model launch, 2024.
URL https://mistral.ai/news/mistral-large. Ac-
cessed 2025-05-13.
9


--- Page 10 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
OpenAI.
Hello gpt-4o.
https://openai.com/index/
hello-gpt-4o/, 2024. Accessed: <date>.
Pan, L., Albalak, A., Wang, X., and Wang, W. Y.
Logic-lm: Empowering large language models with
symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning.
In
Bouamor, H., Pino, J., and Bali, K. (eds.), EMNLP
(Findings),
pp. 3806–3824. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, 2023.
ISBN 979-8-89176-
061-5.
URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/
emnlp/emnlp2023f.html#PanAWW23.
Ramamonjison, R., Yu, T., Li, R., Li, H., Carenini, G., Ghad-
dar, B., He, S., Mostajabdaveh, M., Banitalebi-Dehkordi,
A., Zhou, Z., et al. Nl4opt competition: Formulating
optimization problems based on their natural language
descriptions. In NeurIPS 2022 competition track, pp.
189–203. PMLR, 2023.
Ravi, S. et al. Llmloop: Improving llm-generated code
and tests through automated iterative feedback loops.
In International Conference on Software Mainte-
nance and Evolution (ICSME), Tool Demonstrations,
2025. URL https://conf.researchr.org/details/
icsme-2025/icsme-2025-tool-demonstration/8/
LLMLOOP-Improving-LLM-Generated-Code-and-Tests-through-Automated-Iterative-Feedback-.
Raza, M. and Milic-Frayling, N. Instantiation-based formal-
ization of logical reasoning tasks using language mod-
els and logical solvers.
In IJCAI, pp. 4633–4641. ij-
cai.org, 2025. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/
conf/ijcai/ijcai2025.html#RazaM25.
Sadana, U., Chenreddy, A., Delage, E., Forel, A., Frejinger,
E., and Vidal, T. A survey of contextual optimization
methods for decision-making under uncertainty. Euro-
pean Journal of Operational Research, 320(2):271–289,
2025.
Shinn, N., Labash, B., Gopinath, A., and Narasimhan, K.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2303.11366.
Tang, Z., Huang, C., Zheng, X., Hu, S., Wang, Z., Ge, D.,
and Wang, B. Orlm: Training large language models for
optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17743,
2024.
Wang, Y. and Zhu, Z.
Validating llm-generated pro-
grams with metamorphic prompt testing. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.06864, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2406.06864.
Williams, H. P. et al. Logic and integer programming, vol-
ume 130. Springer, 2009.
Wu, Y., Jiang, A. Q., Li, W., Rabe, M. N., Staats, C., Jamnik,
M., and Szegedy, C. Autoformalization with large lan-
guage models. In Koyejo, S., Mohamed, S., Agarwal, A.,
Belgrave, D., Cho, K., and Oh, A. (eds.), NeurIPS, 2022.
ISBN 9781713871088. URL http://dblp.uni-trier.
de/db/conf/nips/neurips2022.html#WuJLRSJS22.
Xiao, Z., Zhang, D., Wu, Y., Xu, L., Wang, Y. J., Han,
X., Fu, X., Zhong, T., Zeng, J., Song, M., and Chen,
G. Chain-of-experts: When LLMs meet complex oper-
ations research problems. In The Twelfth International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=HobyL1B9CZ.
Yang, C., Wang, X., Lu, Y., Liu, H., Le, Q. V., Zhou, D., and
Chen, X. Large language models as optimizers. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2024. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=Bb4VGOWELI.
Ye, X., Chen, Q., Dillig, I., and Durrett, G.
SatLM:
Satisfiability-aided language models using declarative
prompting.
In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2023.
URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=TqW5PL1Poi.
10


--- Page 11 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
A. Verified Success Cases
A.1. Success Case 1: Chain Store Location Problem
Problem Description.
A convenience supermarket is planning to open several chain stores in a newly built residential
area in the northwest suburb of the city. For shopping convenience, the distance from any residential area to one of the chain
stores should not exceed 800 m. Table 5 shows the new residential areas and the residential areas within a radius of 800 m
from each of them.
Question.
What is the minimum number of chain stores the supermarket needs to build among the mentioned residential
areas, and in which residential areas should they be built?
Table 5. Residential areas covered within an 800 m radius
Area Code
Residential Areas within 800 m Radius
A
A, C, E, G, H, I
B
B, H, I
C
A, C, G, H, I
D
D, J
E
A, E, G
F
F, J, K
G
A, C, E, G
H
A, B, C, H, I
I
A, B, C, H, I
J
D, F, J, K, L
K
F, J, K, L
L
J, K, L
Gurobi Formulation and Verified Solution.
The problem is formulated as a binary set covering model, where a binary
decision variable indicates whether a store is built in a residential area. The objective is to minimize the number of stores
while ensuring that every residential area is covered by at least one store within 800 m.
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = '../IndustryOR/10/data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
area_codes = data['area_codes']
coverage = data['coverage']
model = gp.Model()
# Decision variables: y[i] = 1 if a store is built in area i
y = model.addVars(area_codes, vtype=GRB.BINARY, name='y')
# Objective: Minimize the number of stores
model.setObjective(gp.quicksum(y[i] for i in area_codes), GRB.MINIMIZE)
# Coverage constraints
for area in area_codes:
model.addConstr(
11


--- Page 12 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
gp.quicksum(y[j] for j in coverage[area]) >= 1,
f'Cover_{area}'
)
model.optimize()
Verified Optimal Solution.
The optimizer returned the following solution:
• Stores built in areas: {A, I, J}
• Total number of stores: 3
LLM Masked Reasoning and Verification Outcome.
Below is the reasoning produced by our VERISIMPL model.
The model reasons correctly over the coverage constraints and computes the correct optimal value, which is subsequently
validated by the solver-based verifier.
"The problem requires minimizing the number of chain stores while ensuring that every residential area is within
800 meters of at least one store. Based on the known values, stores are already planned in areas A, I, and J. From
the coverage table, area A covers A, C, E, G, H, and I; area I covers A, B, C, H, and I; and area J covers D, F,
J, K, and L. Together, these three stores provide coverage for all residential areas (A through L). Therefore, the
minimum number of stores required is 3, which matches the number of stores already planned."
The verifier confirmed that the predicted value TotalStores = 3 matched the solver-optimal objective and that all coverage
constraints were satisfied. Verification therefore passed.
A.2. Success Case 2: Environmentally Friendly Transportation Planning
Problem Description.
A company plans to transport goods between the city and the suburb and needs to choose the most
environmentally friendly transportation method. The company can choose from three transportation methods: motorcycle,
small truck, and large truck. Each motorcycle trip produces 40 units of pollution, each small truck trip produces 70 units of
pollution, and each large truck trip produces 100 units of pollution. The objective is to minimize total pollution.
The company can only choose two out of these three transportation methods. Due to road restrictions, the number of
motorcycle trips cannot exceed 8. Each motorcycle trip can transport 10 units of products, each small truck trip can transport
20 units of products, and each large truck trip can transport 50 units of products. The company needs to transport at least
300 units of products. The total number of trips must not exceed 20.
Gurobi Formulation and Verified Solution.
The problem is formulated as a mixed-integer linear program. Integer
variables represent the number of trips for each transportation method, while binary variables indicate whether a method
is selected. The objective minimizes total pollution subject to transportation capacity, method selection, and trip limit
constraints.
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = '../IndustryOR/39/data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
transport_methods = data['transport_methods']
pollution = data['pollution']
max_methods = data['max_methods']
motorcycle_trip_limit = data['motorcycle_trip_limit']
transport_capacity = data['transport_capacity']
12


--- Page 13 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
product_transport_requirement = data['product_transport_requirement']
total_trip_limit = data['total_trip_limit']
model = gp.Model()
trips = model.addVars(transport_methods, vtype=GRB.INTEGER, lb=0, name='trips')
use_method = model.addVars(transport_methods, vtype=GRB.BINARY, name='use_method')
model.setObjective(
gp.quicksum(pollution[i] * trips[i] for i in range(transport_methods)),
GRB.MINIMIZE
)
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(use_method[i] for i in range(transport_methods)) == max_methods)
model.addConstr(trips[0] <= motorcycle_trip_limit)
model.addConstr(
gp.quicksum(transport_capacity[i] * trips[i] for i in range(transport_methods))
>= product_transport_requirement
)
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(trips[i] for i in range(transport_methods)) <= total_trip_limit)
for i in range(transport_methods):
model.addConstr(trips[i] <= total_trip_limit * use_method[i])
model.optimize()
Verified Optimal Solution.
The solver returned the following optimal solution:
• Number of trips: (0, 2, 0)
• Total pollution: 600
LLM Masked Reasoning and Verification Outcome.
Below is the reasoning produced by our VERISIMPL model, which
correctly infers the masked decision variable and is consistent with the solver-optimal solution.
"The company aims to minimize total pollution while meeting the constraints. Each motorcycle trip produces 2
units of pollution and can transport 2 units of products, while each small truck trip produces 3 units of pollution
and can transport 3 units of products. The company needs to transport at least 5 units of products, and the total
number of trips must not exceed 4. Additionally, the number of motorcycle trips cannot exceed 3. The known
total pollution is 6.0 units. If no motorcycle trips are made (trips[0] = 0), the pollution would entirely come from
small truck trips. Since each small truck trip produces 3 units of pollution, 6.0 units of pollution corresponds to 2
small truck trips. This satisfies the product transport requirement (2 × 3 = 6 units, which is greater than the 5-unit
requirement) and the total trip limit (2 ≤4). Therefore, trips[1] = 2."
The verifier confirmed that the predicted value for the masked variable trips[1] = 2 matched the solver-optimal solution
and that all constraints were satisfied. Verification therefore passed.
A.3. Success Case 3: Family Trip Selection with Logical Constraints
Problem Description.
The Zhang family has six children: Harry, Hermione, Ron, Fred, George, and Ginny. The cost of
taking Harry is $1200, Hermione is $1650, Ron is $750, Fred is $800, George is $800, and Ginny is $1500. The objective is
to minimize the total cost of taking children on an upcoming trip.
The family can take at most four children and must take at least three children. Ginny is the youngest child and must be
taken. If the couple takes Harry, they will not take Fred or George. If they take George, they must also take Fred and
Hermione.
13


--- Page 14 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Gurobi Formulation and Verified Solution.
The problem is formulated as a binary integer program. Each child is
associated with a binary decision variable indicating whether they are taken on the trip. The objective minimizes total cost
subject to cardinality, exclusion, dependency, and mandatory-selection constraints.
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = '../IndustryOR/53/data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
n_children = data['n_children']
children_names = data['children_names']
cost = data['cost']
max_children = data['max_children']
min_children = data['min_children']
mandatory_children = data['mandatory_children']
exclusions = data['exclusions']
dependencies = data['dependencies']
model = gp.Model()
x = model.addVars(n_children, vtype=GRB.BINARY, name='x')
model.setObjective(
gp.quicksum(cost[i] * x[i] for i in range(n_children)),
GRB.MINIMIZE
)
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(x[i] for i in range(n_children)) >= min_children)
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(x[i] for i in range(n_children)) <= max_children)
for child in mandatory_children:
idx = children_names.index(child)
model.addConstr(x[idx] == 1)
for exclusion in exclusions:
if_idx = children_names.index(exclusion['if'])
for not_child in exclusion['not']:
not_idx = children_names.index(not_child)
model.addConstr(x[if_idx] + x[not_idx] <= 1)
for dependency in dependencies:
if_idx = children_names.index(dependency['if'])
for must_child in dependency['must']:
must_idx = children_names.index(must_child)
model.addConstr(x[if_idx] <= x[must_idx])
model.optimize()
Verified Optimal Solution.
The solver returned the following optimal solution:
• Selected children: {Ron, Fred, Ginny}
14


--- Page 15 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
• Total cost: $3050
LLM Masked Reasoning and Verification Outcome.
Below is the reasoning produced by our VERISIMPL model for a
masked variable setting.
"The Zhang family must take at least one child, and C is mandatory, so C is already selected. The cost of taking C
is $4. Since the family can take up to two children, we need to evaluate the possible combinations of children that
include C and satisfy the constraints. If they take A, they cannot take B due to the exclusion rule. If they take B,
they must also take A due to the dependency rule, but this would result in taking three children, which exceeds the
maximum of two allowed. Therefore, the only feasible option is to take C alone. The total cost is thus $4, which
is the cost of taking C."
The verifier confirmed that the predicted value for the masked variable TotalCost matched the solver-optimal objective
value and that all logical and cardinality constraints were satisfied. Verification therefore passed.
A.4. Success Case 4: Animal Feed Cost Minimization Problem
Problem Description.
Suppose a certain animal needs at least 700 g of protein, 30 g of minerals, and 100 mg of vitamins
daily. There are five types of feed available, and the nutritional content and price per kilogram of each type of feed are
shown in Table 6. The objective is to formulate a linear programming model that meets the animal’s growth needs while
minimizing the total feed cost.
Table 6. Nutritional content and price of available feeds
Feed
Protein (g)
Minerals (g)
Vitamins (mg)
Price (¥/kg)
1
3
1
0.5
0.2
2
2
0.5
1
0.7
3
1
0.2
0.2
0.4
4
6
2
2
0.3
5
18
0.5
0.8
0.8
Gurobi Formulation and Verified Solution.
The problem is modeled as a linear program with continuous decision
variables representing the quantity (in kilograms) of each feed type. The objective minimizes the total cost while satisfying
minimum nutritional requirements.
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = '../IndustryOR/30/data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
n_feeds = data['n_feeds']
protein_requirement = data['protein_requirement']
minerals_requirement = data['minerals_requirement']
vitamins_requirement = data['vitamins_requirement']
feeds = data['feeds']
model = gp.Model()
x = model.addVars(n_feeds, vtype=GRB.CONTINUOUS, lb=0, name='x')
15


--- Page 16 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
model.setObjective(
gp.quicksum(feeds[i]['price'] * x[i] for i in range(n_feeds)),
GRB.MINIMIZE
)
model.addConstr(
gp.quicksum(feeds[i]['protein'] * x[i] for i in range(n_feeds)) >= protein_requirement
)
model.addConstr(
gp.quicksum(feeds[i]['minerals'] * x[i] for i in range(n_feeds)) >= minerals_requirement
)
model.addConstr(
gp.quicksum(feeds[i]['vitamins'] * x[i] for i in range(n_feeds)) >= vitamins_requirement
)
model.optimize()
Verified Optimal Solution.
The solver returned the following optimal solution:
• Feed quantities (kg): (0.0, 0.0, 0.0, 39.7436, 25.6410)
• Total cost: ¥32.4359
LLM Masked Reasoning and Verification Outcome.
Below is the reasoning produced by our VERISIMPL model, which
reasons correctly over the nutritional constraints and computes the correct optimal value.
"The animal’s daily nutritional requirements are 700 g of protein, 30 g of minerals, and 100 mg of vitamins. The
feeds used are Feed 3, Feed 4, and Feed 5, as indicated by the known quantities of 39.74358974358974 kg and
25.641025641025642 kg for Feed 4 and Feed 5, respectively. The total cost of the feeds is ¥32.43589743589744.
Using the price per kg for Feed 4 (¥0.3/kg) and Feed 5 (¥0.8/kg), their costs are calculated as 39.74358974358974
× 0.3 = ¥11.923076923076922 and 25.641025641025642 × 0.8 = ¥20.512820512820514, respectively. The sum
of these costs is ¥32.435897435897436, which matches the total cost. Therefore, Feed 3 is not used, and its
quantity is 0.0 kg."
The verifier confirmed that the predicted value for the masked variable feed_quantities[2] = 0.0 matched the solver-
optimal solution and that all nutritional constraints were satisfied. Verification therefore passed.
A.5. Success Case 5: Traveling Salesman Problem
Problem Description.
A traveling salesman must visit seven customers located at seven different locations. The symmetric
distance matrix between the locations is shown in Table 7. The salesman must start and end the tour at location 1, visit each
location exactly once, and minimize the total travel distance.
Table 7. Distance matrix for the traveling salesman problem
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1
–
86
49
57
31
69
50
2
86
–
68
79
93
24
5
3
49
68
–
16
7
72
67
4
57
79
16
–
90
69
1
5
31
93
7
90
–
86
59
6
69
24
72
69
86
–
81
7
50
5
67
1
59
81
–
16


--- Page 17 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Gurobi Formulation and Verified Solution.
The problem is formulated as a mixed-integer linear program using binary
decision variables to indicate travel between locations. Subtour elimination constraints are enforced using the Miller–Tucker–
Zemlin (MTZ) formulation to ensure a single Hamiltonian cycle.
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = '../IndustryOR/60/data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
n_locations = data['n_locations']
distance_matrix = data['distance_matrix']
model = gp.Model()
x = model.addVars(n_locations, n_locations, vtype=GRB.BINARY, name='x')
u = model.addVars(n_locations, vtype=GRB.CONTINUOUS, lb=0, name='u')
model.setObjective(
gp.quicksum(
distance_matrix[i][j] * x[i, j]
for i in range(n_locations)
for j in range(n_locations)
if i != j
),
GRB.MINIMIZE
)
model.addConstrs(
gp.quicksum(x[i, j] for j in range(n_locations) if i != j) == 1
for i in range(n_locations)
)
model.addConstrs(
gp.quicksum(x[j, i] for j in range(n_locations) if i != j) == 1
for i in range(n_locations)
)
model.addConstrs(
u[i] - u[j] + n_locations * x[i, j] <= n_locations - 1
for i in range(1, n_locations)
for j in range(1, n_locations)
if i != j
)
model.addConstrs(x[i, i] == 0 for i in range(n_locations))
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(x[0, j] for j in range(1, n_locations)) == 1)
model.addConstr(gp.quicksum(x[j, 0] for j in range(1, n_locations)) == 1)
model.optimize()
17


--- Page 18 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Verified Optimal Solution.
The solver returned the following optimal tour:
• Tour: (1, 6, 2, 7, 4, 3, 5, 1)
• Total distance: 153
LLM Masked Reasoning and Verification Outcome.
Below is the reasoning produced by our VERISIMPL model for a
masked tour variable.
"The traveling salesman problem aims to minimize the total travel distance while visiting all locations exactly
once and returning to the starting point. The known tour starts at location 1, proceeds to location 6, then to location
2, and ends back at location 1 after visiting all other locations. The total distance of the tour is given as 153.0.
Using the distance matrix, the distances for the known segments of the tour are: 1 →6 (69), 6 →2 (24), and 4 →
3 (16). To complete the tour, the missing location (Tour[3]) must minimize the remaining distance while ensuring
the total distance sums to 153. The remaining distances are calculated as follows: 2 →Tour[3], Tour[3] →4, and
5 →1. Testing all possible locations for Tour[3], location 7 fits the constraints and minimizes the total distance."
The verifier confirmed that the predicted value for the masked variable Tour[3] = 7 matched the solver-optimal tour and
that all routing and subtour-elimination constraints were satisfied. Verification therefore passed.
B. Failure Cases
B.1. Problem 52
B.1.1. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
This problem is a workforce scheduling problem commonly encountered in public transportation operations. A 24-hour bus
service requires a varying number of drivers and crew members across six consecutive 4-hour time periods, as summarized
in Table 8. Drivers begin work only at the start of a time period and work continuously for 8 hours, thereby covering two
consecutive periods.The objective is to determine the minimum number of drivers and crew members required to satisfy
staffing requirements throughout the day. This problem is traditionally formulated as a shift-start scheduling problem, where
decision variables represent the number of drivers starting their shifts at each time period.
Table 8. Daily Driver and Crew Requirements by Time Period
Shift
Time Period
Required
Shift
Time Period
Required
1
06:00–10:00
60
4
18:00–22:00
50
2
10:00–14:00
70
5
22:00–02:00
20
3
14:00–18:00
60
6
02:00–06:00
30
B.1.2. OBSERVED OUTCOME
When solved using our approach, the optimization model converged to an optimal solution with a total of 150 drivers
and crew members. All numerical constraints were satisfied, and the solver reported a zero optimality gap. Furthermore,
predictive inference verification (System-10) successfully reconstructed masked variables with 100% accuracy when all
other values were fixed. Despite these indicators of correctness, this solution constitutes a false positive.
B.1.3. WHY THIS IS A FALSE POSITIVE
The false positive arises from a semantic mismatch in the interpretation of the decision variables.
In the correct formulation, each decision variable xi should represent the number of drivers starting their 8-hour shift at time
period i. This definition is critical because each driver covers two consecutive 4-hour periods, creating overlap across time
intervals. Consequently, staffing constraints must explicitly model this temporal coupling.
However, in the evaluated formulation, the decision variables were implicitly treated as the number of drivers assigned to or
present in each individual time period, rather than the number of drivers starting their shifts. This interpretation removes the
18


--- Page 19 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
continuity requirement and allows each time period to be satisfied independently, violating the operational constraint that
drivers work continuously for 8 hours.
As a result, the model permits drivers to effectively “appear” and “disappear” between shifts, producing a solution that is
mathematically feasible but operationally infeasible.
B.1.4. FAILURE EXPLANATION
VERISIMPL failed to detect this modeling error because its predictive inference relies on algebraic consistency among
fixed variables rather than semantic reasoning. When a variable was masked, its value was inferred by maintaining total
consistency, without considering temporal coverage or shift overlap constraints. As a result, VERISIMPL produced correct
numerical reconstructions despite the underlying model being structurally incorrect.
B.1.5. ROOT CAUSE
This failure illustrates that semantic errors in decision-variable definitions can bypass both optimization solvers and inference-
based verification mechanisms. The solver optimized the given formulation, and VERISIMPL verified internal consistency,
but neither validated whether the decision variables correctly represented real-world operational behavior.
B.2. Problem 86
B.2.1. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
This problem is a production planning problem from an industrial food manufacturing setting. Healthy Pet Foods Company
produces two dog food products: Meaties and Yummies. Each product requires specific amounts of grains and meat per pack
and incurs a variable cost for mixing and packaging. The company can sell all units it produces.
Monthly production is constrained by limited availability of raw materials and a capacity restriction on Meaties due to a
specialized machine. The objective is to determine the optimal production quantities of Meaties and Yummies that maximize
total profit, defined as sales revenue minus all production-related costs. The relevant product, cost, and resource data are
summarized in Table 9.
Table 9. Healthy Pet Foods Production Data
Parameter
Meaties
Yummies
Selling price (per pack)
$2.80
$2.00
Grains required (lbs/pack)
2.0
3.0
Meat required (lbs/pack)
3.0
1.5
Variable processing cost (per pack)
$0.25
$0.20
Monthly grain availability
400,000 lbs
Monthly meat availability
300,000 lbs
Meaties production capacity
90,000 packs/month
B.2.2. OBSERVED OUTCOME
When solved using our approach, the optimization model converged to a feasible and solver-optimal solution. The solver
reported production quantities of 50,000 packs of Meaties and 100,000 packs of Yummies, and all resource constraints were
satisfied. The solver terminated with zero optimality gap.
VERISIMPL successfully reconstructed the decision variables when masked, indicating strong numerical consistency across
the solution. However, the reported objective value labeled as TotalProfit was inconsistent with the interpretation of
profit described in the problem. Despite solver optimality, this instance constitutes a false positive.
B.2.3. WHY THIS IS A FALSE POSITIVE
The false positive arises from a semantic misinterpretation in the formulation of the objective function.
In the correct formulation, profit must be computed by subtracting all production-dependent costs from revenue. These costs
19


--- Page 20 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
include not only variable processing costs, but also raw material costs for grains and meat, which are explicitly priced in the
problem description. Omitting any of these costs results in an objective that no longer represents true profit.
However, in the evaluated implementation of VERISIMPL, the objective function subtracted only the variable processing
costs and failed to subtract raw material costs. As a result, the model maximized a gross margin quantity rather than true net
profit. The solver therefore optimized an incorrectly defined objective while still satisfying all constraints.
This error caused the reported TotalProfit value and caused a mismatch between the solver’s output and the economically
correct profit implied by the problem description.
B.2.4. FAILURE EXPLANATION
The failure in this case arises from the interaction between an incorrectly specified optimization objective and the behavior
of VERISIMPL under variable masking.
When individual decision variables (e.g., production quantities of Meaties or Yummies) were masked, VERISIMPL inferred
their values by maintaining consistency with the solver-reported objective value. Because the remaining variables were
fixed, VERISIMPL effectively solved a constrained completion problem and reproduced the same (incorrect) objective
value as the solver. In these cases, predictive inference passed because the inferred values were consistent with the solver’s
internally flawed objective.
However, when the aggregate variable TotalProfit itself was masked, VERISIMPL recomputed profit directly from the
problem description. In this sampling instance, the system correctly subtracted all production-dependent costs, including
raw material costs, as implied by the problem statement. This produced the correct profit value, which no longer matched
the solver’s objective output. Consequently, verification failed, not because VERISIMPL reasoned incorrectly, but because
its correct reasoning conflicted with the solver’s incorrectly defined objective.
In a subsequent sampling instance, however, the reasoning path taken by VERISIMPL differed. In that case, the system
reconstructed TotalProfit using incorrect interpretation of the problem description and failed to subtract raw material
costs, mirroring the same semantic error present in the optimization model. Because this incorrect reasoning produced a
profit value that matched the solver’s output, verification passed, resulting in a false positive.
B.2.5. ROOT CAUSE
The root cause of this failure is a semantic inconsistency between the optimization model and the verification assumptions,
compounded by reasoning during inference.
The optimization model omitted raw material costs from the objective function, causing the solver to maximize an incorrect
notion of profit.
C. Evaluation on Mistral model
We performed an evaluation using the Mistral large model (Mistral AI, 2024) as the base model. Table 10 shows the accuracy
results for all systems across all benchmarks, and Table 11 shows the precision and coverage of verification of VERISIMPL
with the Mistral model.
System
NL4Opt NLP4LP CompOR IndOR Avg.
BASELLM
82.5
39.3
58.8
38.9
54.9
COE
58.9
-
25.9
-
-
SELFDEBUG
83.3
39.3
70.6
40.0
58.3
OPTIMUS
64.3
13.1
35.3
22.1
33.7
VERISIMPL
91.4
42.6
70.6
45.3
62.5
Table 10. Accuracy of systems, using Mistral as base (except COE).
20


--- Page 21 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
VERISIMPL (Mistral)
Precision
Coverage
NL4Opt
94.9
22.8
NLP4LP
75.0
11.5
CompOR
77.8
58.3
IndOR
87.5
16.3
Avg
83.8
27.7
Table 11. Self-verification precision and coverage of VeriSimpl using Mistral.
System
NL4Opt
NLP4LP
CompOR
IndOR
Average
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
VERISIMPL
88.1
92.7
32.1
51.6
90.0
28.1
76.5
100.0
53.8
45.8
83.3
22.7
65.5
91.5
34.2
A-CONS
87.7
92.6
90.7
51.6
73.3
68.8
70.6
71.4
83.3
45.8
65.3
72.7
63.9
75.7
78.9
A-SINGLEVAR
88.1
92.8
86.5
46.8
76.5
44.8
76.5
76.9
76.9
47.9
62.7
69.6
64.8
77.2
69.5
A-FULLVAR
82.5
90.3
25.2
50.0
80.0
12.9
70.6
66.7
50.0
45.8
58.8
22.7
62.2
74.0
27.7
A-TYPE
82.9
95.4
27.8
51.6
87.5
21.9
76.5
100.0
53.8
45.8
83.3
22.7
64.2
91.6
31.6
Table 12. Ablation study showing the contribution of different verification components for GPT-4o.
D. Full Ablation Results
The full ablation results for all systems and benchmarks are shown in Tables 12 and 13.
21


--- Page 22 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
System
NL4Opt
NLP4LP
CompOR
IndOR
Average
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
Acc.
Prec.
Cov.
VERISIMPL
88.8
95.8
38.5
57.4
75.0
17.1
76.5
66.7
15.4
67.4
76.5
20.3
72.5
78.5
22.8
A-CONS
88.1
92.5
93.2
55.7
71.4
73.5
76.5
72.7
61.5
65.3
74.6
75.8
71.4
77.8
76.0
A-SINGLEVAR
88.1
93.4
95.8
55.7
66.0
91.2
70.6
73.3
91.7
61.1
68.0
94.8
68.9
75.2
93.4
A-FULLVAR
87.4
96.6
72.0
55.7
66.7
53.0
76.5
77.0
77.0
60.0
69.8
65.0
69.9
77.5
66.7
A-TYPE
88.8
95.8
38.5
57.4
75.0
17.1
76.5
66.7
15.4
66.3
81.3
20.6
72.3
79.7
23.0
Table 13. Ablation study showing the contribution of different verification components for R1.
E. Prompts
This section contains the LLM prompts we use for code generation and various forms of verification.
22


--- Page 23 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 4. Prompt for Gurobi code generation
Gurobi Code Generation Prompt
System Prompt:
You are an expert in operations research. You specialize in solving Linear Programming (LP) and
Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) problems. Your task is to provide the Gurobi code
implementation for the MILP formulation to solve the given problem. Write the Gurobi code exactly
as you normally would, but load the input data from a JSON file called data.json. This file will
be located in the same directory. At the beginning of the code, define a variable DATA_FILE =
"data.json". In addition, load the input JSON data using this variable. Do not hardcode the file
name directly inside open(). After loading, proceed to define the variables, objective, and
constraints based on the loaded data.
Before starting to write the Gurobi model, carefully understand the problem and think step-by-step
about the following: How to model the structure, sets, variables, objective function, and
constraints in order to achieve the optimal solution.
The code should be directly executable. Do not include any non-code text, explanations, or
formatting like ```python or markdown blocks. Only output clean executable Python code.
Always use the exact variable names and capitalization (uppercase/lowercase) from the data.json
file consistently throughout the entire Gurobi code. Do not invent or modify variable names in
the Gurobi code.
Do not use any conditional statements (e.g., if) involving Gurobi expressions (LinExpr or
QuadExpr) in the logic because these are not directly supported by Gurobi and will raise a
NotImplementedError. Instead, model conditional logic using binary variables and additional
constraints wherever needed.
IMPORTANT #1: Do not use strict inequalities (< or >) in the model constraints. Always use <=,
>=, or = because Gurobi only supports these types of inequalities in mathematical formulations.
If a problem explicitly mentions strict inequality like x > 0 or x > 5, use a small epsilon
(e.g., 1e-4) and model it as x >= epsilon or x >= 5 + epsilon. Do not use epsilon unnecessarily.
If the problem allows zero production (e.g., x >= 0), model it directly as x >= 0 without
epsilon.
IMPORTANT #2: When modeling absolute values, maximums, or minimums of Gurobi expressions, do not
use Python functions like abs(), max(), or min(). If the problem requires modeling them, use
auxiliary variables and constraints like the following:
To model: m = max(x1, x2):
model.addConstr(m >= x1)
model.addConstr(m >= x2)
(If needed, add m <= threshold)
To model: z = |x1 - x2|:
model.addConstr(z >= x1 - x2)
model.addConstr(z >= x2 - x1)
Use these structures only if the problem explicitly states a maximum or absolute value is
required.
Here is an example of an input you might receive:
Problem Description:
A company needs to decide how much to produce of two products to maximize revenue. There is a
material constraint and a maximum production limit. The goal is to maximize revenue.
Data (data.json):
{
"NumProducts": 2,
"Revenue": [50, 70],
23


--- Page 24 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
"MaterialUsed": [3, 5],
"MaterialAvailable": 20
}
This would be the correct Gurobi code (a correct output you would produce):
Correct Gurobi Code:
import json
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
DATA_FILE = 'data.json'
with open(DATA_FILE, 'r') as f:
data = json.load(f)
NumProducts = data['NumProducts']
Revenue = data['Revenue']
MaterialUsed = data['MaterialUsed']
MaterialAvailable = data['MaterialAvailable']
model = gp.Model()
x = model.addVars(NumProducts, vtype=GRB.CONTINUOUS, lb=0, name='x')
model.setObjective(
gp.quicksum(Revenue[i] * x[i] for i in range(NumProducts)),
GRB.MAXIMIZE
)
model.addConstr(
gp.quicksum(MaterialUsed[i] * x[i] for i in range(NumProducts)) <= MaterialAvailable,
'MaterialConstraint'
)
model.optimize()
output = {
'x': [x[i].X for i in range(NumProducts)],
'TotalProfit': model.ObjVal
}
print(output)
End of Example.
User Prompt Template:
PROBLEM INFO:
{description}
DATA JSON FILE:
{data_json}
You must load each key from data[...] exactly as it appears here without modification. Generate
the Gurobi code based on this information.
24


--- Page 25 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 5. Prompt for Gurobi code error correction
Gurobi Code Error Correction Prompt
System Prompt:
You are a Gurobi Python code corrector. Your task is to correct the Gurobi Python code provided in
the input. The input will contain the standard output and standard error messages from running a
Gurobi Python file. You should analyze these messages and provide a corrected version of the
Gurobi Python code. If there are no errors, you should return the original code. You should return
the corrected code with no further commentary or extra words.
User Prompt Template:
Here is the Gurobi Python code:
{code}
Here is the standard output from running the Gurobi Python file:
{std_out}
Here is the standard error from running the Gurobi Python file:
{std_err}
Please provide the corrected version of the Gurobi Python code. Return only the corrected code,
with no further commentary or extra words.
25


--- Page 26 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 6. Prompt for constraint-based verification
Constraint Verification Prompt
System Prompt:
You are given a problem description with its decision variables. Along with it, several candidate
variable assignments are provided as test cases, and a separate block of problem data containing
all fixed parameters. Your task is to write a python program that evaluates each test case
assignment against all the constraints in the problem and determines whether it is feasible under
the given constraints (please note that we are not concerned with whether an assignment is
optimal, only that it is allowed under the given constraints).
The python program should ensure that the variables are correctly read into appropriate types and
assigned their values as given, compute any derived values, and evaluate each constraint as
boolean checks. You can display reasoning in comments but ensure all aspects of the problem
description (explicit and implicit constraints) are properly tested in the code. Always use the
exact values provided in the assignments with appropriate types and no rounding or approximate
results. The output should only be the executable python code and nothing else (so it can easily
be extracted and executed in python). The final result of the program should be assigned in two
special variables that are a list of strings: passing_tests should contain the labels of all the
test cases that passed and failing_tests should contain the labels of all test cases that failed.
Always make sure that all constraints and calculations operate on the correct data types (e.g.,
use scalar numbers for arithmetic and comparisons, not lists or other containers). If the data
contains nested structures, index properly to extract the needed scalar values before using them.
The output must be ONLY raw Python code that can be executed directly with `python`, without any
extra formatting. Do NOT include Markdown code fences such as ```python or ``` in the output.
Important Instructions:
- You must include ALL test cases provided in the input in the `test_cases` dictionary, without
skipping, abbreviating, summarizing, or replacing them with comments like "# Add other test
cases here..." or "# Additional test cases omitted for brevity".
- Do NOT shorten the test_cases dictionary for brevity. The code will be executed automatically
in a pipeline, so it must be a complete, runnable program. For example if the problem has 28
Test cases, then all the testcases should be included in the test_case dictionary from E1 to
E28 and shouldn't be omitted for brevity.
- If there are many test cases, still include them all explicitly in the dictionary exactly as
given.
- Do not add any explanatory text or markdown formatting (no ``` fences).
A one-shot illustrative example is given below.
Problem Description:
A confectionery company is assembling gift hampers that contain sweets. They can fill the hampers
using candy boxes, toffee jars, or chocolate packs. Each candy box contains 50 sweets and takes
12 minutes to prepare. Each toffee jar contains 150 sweets and takes 5 minutes to prepare. Each
chocolate pack contains 100 sweets and takes 10 minutes to prepare. The company has a total of
400 minutes of preparation time available. To ensure cost efficiency, the company prefers to use
more candy boxes than toffee jars and at least as many chocolate packs as toffee jars. The
objective is to prepare at least 1500 sweets while satisfying all constraints.
Data parameters:
data = {
"sweets_per_candy": 50,
"sweets_per_toffee": 150,
"sweets_per_chocolate": 100,
"min_total_sweets": 1500,
"time_per_candy": 12,
"time_per_toffee": 5,
"time_per_chocolate": 10,
"max_total_time": 400
}
26


--- Page 27 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Decision Variables:
- C = Number of Candy Boxes
- T = Number of Toffee Jars
- P = Number of Chocolate Packs
Test Cases:
- TEST CASE #1, LABEL: <E1>, ASSIGNMENT: C = 10, T = 0, P = 28
- TEST CASE #2, LABEL: <E2>, ASSIGNMENT: C = 10, T = 2, P = 27
- TEST CASE #3, LABEL: <E3>, ASSIGNMENT: C = 0, T = 0, P = 0
- TEST CASE #4, LABEL: <E4>, ASSIGNMENT: C = 0, T = 0, P = 1
- TEST CASE #5, LABEL: <E1>, ASSIGNMENT: C = 5, T = 5.0001, P = 5
Feasibility Checking Program:
#Include all test cases
test_cases = {
"<E1>": {"C": 10, "T": 0, "P": 28},
"<E2>": {"C": 10, "T": 2, "P": 27},
"<E3>": {"C": 0, "T": 0, "P": 0},
"<E4>": {"C": 0, "T": 0, "P": 1},
"<E5>": {"C": 5, "T": 5.0001, "P": 5}
}
data = {
"sweets_per_candy": 50,
"sweets_per_toffee": 150,
"sweets_per_chocolate": 100,
"min_total_sweets": 1500,
"time_per_candy": 12,
"time_per_toffee": 5,
"time_per_chocolate": 10,
"max_total_time": 400
}
passing_tests = []
failing_tests = []
# Iterate through test cases
for label, vars in test_cases.items():
C = vars["C"]
T = vars["T"]
P = vars["P"]
is_feasible = True
# Constraint: total preparation time <= max_total_time
total_time = (C * data["time_per_candy"]) + (T * data["time_per_toffee"]) + (P *
data["time_per_chocolate"])
if not (total_time <= data["max_total_time"]):
is_feasible = False
# Constraint: more candy boxes than toffee jars
if not (C > T):
is_feasible = False
# Constraint: at least as many chocolate packs as toffee jars
if not (P >= T):
is_feasible = False
# Constraint: prepare at least min_total_sweets
total_sweets = (C * data["sweets_per_candy"]) + (T * data["sweets_per_toffee"]) + (P *
data["sweets_per_chocolate"])
if not (total_sweets >= data["min_total_sweets"]):
is_feasible = False
27


--- Page 28 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
if is_feasible:
passing_tests.append(label)
else:
failing_tests.append(label)
print("Passing test cases:", passing_tests)
print("Failing test cases:", failing_tests)
User Prompt Template:
Problem Description:
{description}
Data:
{data}
Decision Variables:
{decision_vars}
Test Cases:
{test_cases}
Feasibility Checking Program:
28


--- Page 29 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 7. Prompt for variable-based verification
Decision Variable Verification Prompt
System Prompt:
You are an expert in mathematical optimization and decision modeling. You are verifying the
internal consistency of a solved linear programming (LP) problem by inferring optimal values of
some missing decision variables.
You will be given:
- A problem description that defines the optimization goal and the relationships among
decision variables.
- The list of decision variables and their definitions.
- The known numeric values for some decision variables.
- The names of missing variables to infer.
Your goal:
- Use logical and quantitative reasoning to deduce the missing variables' optimal values based
on the relationships described in the optimization problem.
- Perform explicit arithmetic reasoning; use exact numeric values without rounding
intermediate results.
- Reference the problem text naturally in your explanation (e.g., "as stated in the
problem...").
Output format -- absolutely mandatory:
- Return one single JSON object (no Markdown fences, no commentary).
- The JSON must contain exactly two fields:
- "reasoning": a short, clear explanation of how you derived the optimal values of the
missing variables.
- "predicted_values": map of missing variable names to inferred optimal values.
Here is an example of what is expected from you.
Problem Description:
A furniture manufacturer produces three products: chairs, tables, and benches. Each chair requires
2 hours of carpentry time and 3 kilograms of wood. Each table requires 4 hours of carpentry time
and 5 kilograms of wood. Each bench requires 3 hours of carpentry time and 4 kilograms of wood.
The company has a maximum of 60 labor hours and 70 kilograms of wood available per week. The profit
earned per unit is $20 for a chair, $35 for a table, and $25 for a bench.
The manufacturer wants to **maximize total profit**, subject to the labor and wood constraints.
Decision Variables:
- x = number of chairs produced
- y = number of tables produced
- z = number of benches produced
Known Values:
x = 5
Missing Variable to Predict:
y
z
Output:
{
"reasoning": "The company can use up to 60 hours of carpentry time and 70 kilograms of wood each
week. Since each chair takes 2 hours and 3 kilograms of wood, producing 5 chairs uses 10 hours
and 15 kilograms of wood. That leaves 50 hours of labor time and 55 kilograms of wood available
for making tables and benches. Each table needs 4 hours and 5 kilograms of wood, while each
bench needs 3 hours and 4 kilograms. The total weekly profit of 457 dollars includes the profit
from the 5 chairs plus whatever is earned from the tables and benches. To reach that level of
profit while staying within the available wood and labor, the manufacturer would likely make about
8 tables and 3 benches. This combination fits comfortably within the remaining time and wood limits
29


--- Page 30 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
and gives a total profit close to the reported value.",
"predicted_values": {"y": 8, "z": 3}
}
User Prompt Template:
Given the following linear programming problem, predict the numeric value of the missing decision
variable using the problem description and the known variable values.
When performing calculations:
- Use exact numeric values and do not round intermediate steps.
- Round the final answer only if needed (two decimal places max).
- Maintain consistency with the quantitative relationships stated in the problem.
Problem Description:
{description}
Decision Variables:
{decision_vars}
Decision Variable Definitions:
{decision_var_definitions}
Known Values:
{known_values}
Missing Variable to Predict:
{target_var}
Instructions:
- Use the relationships described in the problem to infer the value of {target_var}.
- Show substitutions and calculations explicitly.
- Reference the problem text naturally (e.g., "as stated in the problem...").
- Return only a single JSON object with exactly two fields:
- "predicted_value": <float>
- "reasoning": "<brief explanation>"
30


--- Page 31 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Figure 8. Prompt for type-based verification
Type Verification Prompt
System Prompt:
Task:
You are given a real-world word problem and data involving a linear programming or optimization
scenario, and the Gurobi code where the decision variables have unknown types. Please reason
about what each of the decision variables represent and what their appropriate types should be.
Your job is to:
- Understand what the decision variables (DVs) mean in the problem.
- Decide the appropriate Gurobi variable type for each DV, based strictly on:
* The problem wording
* The real-world logic (can the quantity be continuous? is it countable? is it binary?)
Explain your reasoning based on:
* Whether the item is countable or discrete (like jars, trips, meals, vaccines -> use
integer)
* Or whether the item is divisible or measurable (like grams, hours, medicine doses ->
use continuous)
Output:
Return a valid JSON object. Each decision variable name is a key. The value for each key is a
three-element list:
[meaning, reasoning, final_answer]
where
- meaning
= explanation of what the DV represents and means in the problem
- reasoning = explanation of why that variable's type was chosen
- final_answer = one of the following labels: "integer", "continuous", or "binary"
Output only the JSON. No extra text or explanation.
IMPORTANT NOTE:
Ensure the number of keys in the JSON you return is equal to the number of decision variables in
the code. This means ensure the number of keys in the output JSON equals the number of times
.addVar(...) appears.
Problem Example:
Description (from input):
A gardener must give his vegetable patch at least 1000 litres of water today while keeping his
electricity use as low as possible. He can run a garden hose, which delivers water in whatever
exact amount he lets flow but costs 0.05 kWh of electricity for every litre the pump pushes
through. He can roll out ready-filled 100-litre barrels, each of which costs 4 kWh to hoist and
tip into the beds. And he can switch on a sprinkler system that soaks the plot with 500 litres
in a single run and draws a flat 60 kWh, though regulations allow him to use that sprinkler no
more than once in the day. The task is to choose how much water to supply by hose, how many
barrels to empty, and whether to activate the sprinkler so that the total volume reaches or
exceeds 1000 litres while the combined electricity consumption from these choices is minimised.
Data (from input):
{
"n_water_options": 3,
"water_per_unit_litres": [1, 100, 500],
"electricity_per_unit_kwh": [0.05, 4, 60],
"min_water_requirement_litres": 1000,
"max_sprinkler_runs": 1
}
Code (from input):
import gurobipy as gp
from gurobipy import GRB
m = gp.Model("garden_watering")
31


--- Page 32 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
x_H = m.addVar(lb=0)
x_B = m.addVar(lb=0)
x_S = m.addVar()
m.addConstr(x_H + 100 * x_B + 500 * x_S >= 1000, name="min_water")
energy = 0.05 * x_H + 4 * x_B + 60 * x_S
m.setObjective(energy, GRB.MINIMIZE)
m.optimize()
if m.status == GRB.OPTIMAL:
print("Optimal watering plan")
print(f"
Hose water (L)
: {x_H.X:.1f}")
print(f"
Barrels used
: {int(x_B.X)}")
print(f"
Sprinkler on (0/1)
: {int(x_S.X)}")
print(f"
Total electricity
: {energy.getValue():.2f} kWh")
else:
print("No feasible solution found.")
Sample Output for Example:
{
"x_H": [
"Amount of water (in litres) delivered using the garden hose; this is clear from the
name 'x_H' and from the constraint where it's added directly, indicating it contributes
to the total water volume, and the cost per litre is 0.05 kWh.",
"Water delivered through a hose can be controlled very precisely, allowing the gardener
to choose any amount down to fractions of a litre. Since the hose is not constrained to
fixed units and the electricity cost is per litre, it logically follows that partial
litres are both possible and meaningful in this context. Therefore, the variable can
allow non-integer values to reflect real-world precision.",
"continuous"
],
"x_B": [
"Number of 100-litre barrels used; 'x_B' appears in the model as being multiplied by
100 to give litres of water, and each unit consumes 4 kWh, indicating it models discrete
barrels.",
"Barrels are pre-filled and fixed in size (100 litres), so the gardener can only use a
whole barrel at a time. It would not make practical sense to use part of a barrel in
this context, as that would require an artificial way to divide a barrel physically.
The decision revolves around how many full barrels to use, meaning the values must be
whole numbers.",
"integer"
],
"x_S": [
"Indicator for whether the sprinkler system is activated; it contributes a flat 500
litres and 60 kWh if used, and the problem mentions that it can be used at most once.",
"The sprinkler system is either used or not used, with no possibility of partial
activation. It provides a fixed volume and consumes a fixed amount of energy in one
operation. This on/off nature is a classic binary decision--using it means setting the
variable to 1, and not using it means setting it to 0.",
"binary"
]
}
User Prompt Template:
Tell me the type of this problem given the following:
Description:
{description}
32


--- Page 33 ---
VERISIMPL: Robust Optimization Modeling from Natural Language using Simplification-based Verification
Data:
{data}
Gurobi Code:
{masked_code}
Ensure the number of keys in the JSON you return is equal to the number of decision variables in
the code. This means ensure the number of keys in output JSON equals number of times .addVar(...)
appears. If the decision variable is represented as an array, only return 1 key which would be
the name of the variable given in the code above.
33
