--- Page 1 ---
Highlights
LP Mining with LP2Graph: A Use Case for Railway Rescheduling
Jörn Maurischat, Nikola Bešinović, Michael Färber
• A deterministic, graph-based method for mining the structure of LP and MILP formulations from the literature
• LP2Graph typed variable–equation graphs enable solver-free structural comparison and feature extraction
• Bottom-up multi-level clustering and two-stage labeling yield a reproducible taxonomy of variables, constraints
and model types
• Representation fidelity validated by round-trip translation and cross-solver reproduction of published optima
arXiv:2607.11980v1  [cs.AI]  13 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph: A Use Case for Railway Rescheduling
Jörn Maurischata,∗, Nikola Bešinovića and Michael Färberb
aTU Dresden, Chair of Railway Operations,"Friedrich List" Faculty of Transport and Traffic Sciences, Dresden, 01069, Germany
bTU Dresden, ScaDS.AI Dresden/Leipzig, Chair of Scalable Software Architectures for Data Analytics, Dresden, 01069, Germany
A R T I C L E I N F O
Keywords:
mixed integer linear programming
railway rescheduling
optimization model mining
graph representation
taxonomy
reproducible literature analysis
raiLPminer
A B S T R A C T
Like many optimization-driven domains, railway rescheduling relies on Mixed-Integer Linear
Programming (MILP), yet the field’s modeling knowledge is scattered across hundreds of
papers in incompatible notations, and narrative surveys organize it subjectively: they classify
models by vocabulary rather than by structure, and reproduce neither. We present LP Mining
with LP2Graph, a method that mines the structure of published LP and MILP formulations
into a reproducible dataset and an induced taxonomy. Its core, LP2Graph, represents each
formulation admitted by its canonical grammar as a typed variable–equation graph derived from
a single canonical model; once a source is extracted into that model, everything downstream
is deterministic. Each source is parsed into this model, homologized, and clustered bottom-up
(over variables, then constraints and the objective, then whole-model structure) and, separately,
by application domain and solution approach; the resulting groups are labeled by a rule-
seeded, self-updating classifier. We validate the representation rather than assume it: per-cluster
representatives are regenerated as independent LATEX and re-solved across CBC, HiGHS and
Gurobi against the optimum reported in the source paper. The outcome is an objective, repeatable
taxonomy of variables, constraints and model types: the principled foundation on which our
raiLPminer line of automated railway-rescheduling model development builds.
1. Introduction
Many domains, such as production scheduling, vehicle routing, service-network design and energy dispatch, cast
their hardest planning and control decisions as Mixed-Integer Linear Programs (MILP) (Nemhauser and Wolsey, 1988),
and each has deposited decades of operations-research (OR) modeling knowledge in published formulations. This
paper is about making that knowledge machine-readable; railway rescheduling is the application area on which we
demonstrate it, and a demanding one. When disruptions invalidate a planned timetable, operators must reroute, reorder
and retime trains under tight safety, capacity and connection constraints, and OR research has produced a rich catalogue
of recovery models and algorithms for doing so (Cacchiani, Huisman, Kidd, Kroon, Toth, Veelenturf and Wagenaar,
2014; Leutwiler and Corman, 2023; Bešinović, 2020; Tang, De Donato, Bešinović, Flammini, Goverde, Lin, Liu,
Tang, Vittorini and Wang, 2022). This catalogue, however, lives almost entirely as prose and mathematics scattered
across hundreds of papers, each written in its own notation. The modeling knowledge that matters (which variables
carry which decisions, which constraint families recur, how whole formulations are structured) is dispersed and, in its
current form, neither searchable nor comparable across sources.
The conventional way to consolidate such a body of work is a narrative literature review or survey. These summarize
the field subjectively: they can be neither reproduced nor quantified, and they classify formulations by domain
vocabulary rather than by the structure of the formulations themselves (Leutwiler and Corman, 2023; Tang et al.,
2022). Two formulations that share the same underlying structure but use different words are filed apart; two that
share words but differ structurally are filed together. The consequence is concrete: a practitioner who must re-order
and re-time trains through a disrupted bottleneck and reaches for a published model will find a railway timetable-
rescheduling formulation (Veelenturf, Kidd, Cacchiani, Kroon and Toth, 2016) and a job-shop scheduling formulation
(Ku and Beck, 2016) filed in different literatures. Yet, read structurally, both are disjunctive “who-goes-first” ordering
models, and for microscopic bottleneck dispatching the job-shop model is arguably the closer fit, train dispatching
being job-shop scheduling with blocking (D’Ariano, Corman, Pacciarelli and Pranzo, 2008). The title page names
the domain; only the structure tells whether a model fits the problem, and a vocabulary-filed survey cannot surface
that. There is, today, no objective, reproducible, structural account of how railway-rescheduling models are actually
∗Corresponding author
joern.maurischat@tu-dresden.de (J. Maurischat)
ORCID(s): 0009-0005-6050-7596 (J. Maurischat)
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 1 of 20


--- Page 3 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
built, and reviewers increasingly expect the selection process itself to follow a documented systematic-review protocol
such as PRISMA (Page, McKenzie, Bossuyt, Boutron, Hoffmann, Mulrow, Shamseer, Tetzlaff, Akl, Brennan, Chou,
Glanville, Grimshaw, Hróbjartsson, Lalu, Li, Loder, Mayo-Wilson, McDonald, McGuinness, Stewart, Thomas, Tricco,
Welch, Whiting and Moher, 2021) , which narrative reviews of this kind do not provide.
This deficiency is not confined to railways, and that structural kinship is what the method exploits rather than a
separate gap it claims to close. Timetable-recovery formulations are close structural relatives of the wider transportation
literature and, more loosely, of production scheduling and of routing and scheduling models generally, such as vehicle
routing, job-shop scheduling and service-network design (Toth and Vigo, 2014; Pinedo, 2016; Crainic, 2000), with
which they share variable patterns (assignment, sequencing, flow) and constraint families (precedence, capacity, time
windows). This kinship is why the corpus is not restricted to railway rescheduling but ordered by structural proximity
to it: railway first, the broader transportation domain next, and production as an analogical outer shell drawn on only
where nearer domains are sparse, spanning both the reactive rescheduling task and the wider set of planning and
control operations (Section 3.1). Railway rescheduling is the demonstration target; the comparable structure the method
induces is what makes that widening principled rather than opportunistic.
A third gap concerns extraction and reproducibility. In this field it remains uncommon to publish the solver code
behind a formulation, which is poor practice for reproducible research: a paper bound to a released model can be
cloned and re-run deterministically, mined exactly and validated in seconds, whereas a PDF-only formulation must be
recovered from its text. Reading the structure of a model out of free text or LATEX (inspecting the formulation rather
than re-implementing it) has no fully deterministic path, leaving the bulk of the literature’s modeling knowledge locked
in a form that cannot be processed at scale.
We address these gaps with LP Mining with LP2Graph, presented as a use case for a systematic, PRISMA-style
literature review of railway rescheduling. At its core, LP2Graph is a deterministic procedure that represents a defined
class of LP and MILP formulations, namely those expressible in its canonical grammar (Section 3.2), as typed variable–
equation graphs derived from a single canonical model. This paper is therefore not a contribution to LLM-based
optimization modeling: no language model participates in the representation, the mining, or the validation. Where
recent work synthesizes new models from natural-language descriptions, we do the converse: we mine the published
literature into a structured, comparable, validated corpus; the relation to automated model synthesis is deferred to the
outlook (Section 3.7). Around the representation we build a mining pipeline that takes a prioritized corpus of published
formulations, extracts and homologizes each into this representation, derives lexical and structural feature vectors,
clusters the formulations bottom-up without prior names, and labels the resulting groups top-down from existing
taxonomy vocabulary. The induced clusters are then sanity-checked against the classifications in existing expert review
papers, and the divergence between machine-induced structure and expert taxonomy is quantified and explained, with
those expert classifications serving as an interpretive anchor rather than as ground truth. The headline output is a
dataset: published models brought into one common form, labeled and grouped, delivering structural comparability
across formulations that did not exist before. We deliberately make the structure comparable, not the results: different
objectives and data make ranking formulations meaningless, so we normalize the foundations, not the outcomes.
This paper makes four contributions. (i) LP2Graph, a deterministic typed variable–equation graph representation
of LP/MILP formulations with views, structural metrics and bidirectional codecs between the graph and concrete
model sources: LATEX↔graph, currently the primary channel, and code↔graph, importing formulations from solver
code and exporting executable models back out. (ii) An end-to-end mining pipeline (corpus construction, extrac-
tion/homologization, feature construction, multi-level clustering and two-stage labeling) that operates on the published
literature. (iii) The mined dataset, the primary contribution, which establishes structural comparability across otherwise
incompatible formulations. (iv) An induced taxonomy of variable roles, constraint families and model types, anchored
against and contrasted with expert classifications. Re-solving a representative formulation per cluster serves only to
validate the LATEX→graph→translate→solve round-trip, not to rank papers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relevant literature and states the gap
precisely. Section 3 details the mining method and the LP2Graph representation. Section 4 and Section 5 describe the
corpus and present the resulting dataset and taxonomy. Section 6 concludes.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 2 of 20


--- Page 4 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
2. Related Work
2.1. Railway rescheduling and the wider routing–scheduling family
Railway timetable recovery has a deep MILP literature: rerouting, reordering and retiming under capacity, headway
and connection constraints, solved exactly or with dedicated heuristics (Cacchiani et al., 2014; Leutwiler and Corman,
2023; Bešinović, 2020; Tang et al., 2022). Structurally, these formulations are close relatives of a much larger body
of routing and scheduling models, such as vehicle routing, job-shop scheduling and service-network design (Toth and
Vigo, 2014; Pinedo, 2016; Crainic, 2000), which share variable patterns (assignment, sequencing, flow) and constraint
families (precedence, capacity, time windows) with timetable recovery. The present work treats railway rescheduling
as the demonstration domain while recognizing that the modeling structures it targets recur across this family; that
proximity is what later licenses a strategic widening of the corpus (Section 3).
2.2. Surveys, taxonomies and systematic-review methodology
The standard way to organize this literature is the narrative survey, which classifies models by domain vocabulary
and summarizes them subjectively (Leutwiler and Corman, 2023; Tang et al., 2022). Existing taxonomies of
optimization models do capture recurring variable, constraint and model types, but they are expert-authored, not
reproducible, and rest on naming rather than on the structure of the formulations. Reviewers now increasingly expect
review-shaped papers to follow a documented systematic-review protocol, PRISMA (Page et al., 2021), which specifies
how a corpus is searched, screened and reported. We position this paper as a use case for such a systematic review:
a PRISMA-conformant corpus protocol feeds a method that induces a taxonomy mechanically, and existing expert
classifications serve as an anchor to sanity-check the induced clusters against rather than as the ground truth.
2.3. Extracting formal models from papers and code
A growing line of work extracts formal optimization models from natural-language descriptions and turns them
into solver code, much of it now LLM-driven (AhmadiTeshnizi, Gao and Udell, 2024a; Huang, Tang, Hu, Jiang,
Zheng, Ge, Wang and Wang, 2025; Ramamonjison, Li, Yu, He, Rengan, Banitalebi-dehkordi, Zhou and Zhang, 2022;
Huang, Yang, Qi and Wang, 2024a; AhmadiTeshnizi, Gao and Udell, 2024b; Wasserkrug, Boussioux and Sun, 2024;
ter Beek, Fantechi, Gnesi, Lenzini and Petrocchi, 2025; Li, Mellou, Zhang, Pathuri and Menache, 2023), accompanied
by dedicated benchmarks for natural-language optimization modeling such as NL4Opt (Ramamonjison, Yu, Li, Li,
Carenini, Ghaddar, He, Mostajabdaveh, Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zhou and Zhang, 2023), NLP4LP (AhmadiTeshnizi
et al., 2024b) and MAMO (Huang, Shen, Hu, Gao and Wang, 2024b). Within this line, validation of the generated
models is increasingly treated as a first-class concern: TriVAL (Fang, Wang, Zhong and Ong, 2026) inserts an explicit
construct–validate–revise step at each modeling stage (semantic specification, mathematical formulation, code), a
validation need to which the structural substrate mined here is directly complementary. This effort is overwhelmingly
oriented toward synthesis, producing one new model from a natural-language prompt, and is evaluated on solve
accuracy against curated problem descriptions. The present work is neither a synthesis system nor a benchmark for
one: it mines the published literature into a structured, comparable corpus, uses no language model in its pipeline,
and is therefore not comparable to these systems on their own terms. The most faithful source of an existing model is
its released code: a paper bound to a public repository can be mined deterministically and validated quickly, whereas
PDF-only formulations must be recovered from text. Reading a model’s structure out of its LATEX or prose (inspecting
the formulation instead of re-implementing it) is the data-extraction problem at the heart of this paper, and it has no
fully deterministic solution for unstructured sources.
2.4. Graph representations of optimization models
A MILP has a natural bipartite graph structure, with variables linked to the equations in which they appear,
and this representation is well established as a basis for structural analysis and machine learning over combinatorial
problems (Gasse, Chételat, Ferroni, Charlin and Lodi, 2019; Bengio, Lodi and Prouvost, 2021). Graph-structured
views also support deterministic structural metrics (for example size, constraint-to-variable ratio and graph diameter)
that summarize a formulation independently of its wording (cf. Derrible and Kennedy, 2010; Maniadakis and Varoutas,
2013). Prior uses of such graphs target learning to solve or to branch; here the same bipartite structure is repurposed
as a canonical, comparable representation for mining and clustering published models, so that structurally similar
formulations group together regardless of the vocabulary their authors chose.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 3 of 20


--- Page 5 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
2.5. Cross-domain structural transfer and the shell-prioritized corpus
Bringing heterogeneous formal models onto a common footing is not unique to transport: structural-comparison
and instance-synthesis efforts recur across the wider optimization literature (Smith-Miles and Lopes, 2012; Gleixner,
Hendel, Gamrath, Achterberg, Bastubbe, Berthold, Christophel, Jarck, Koch, Linderoth, Lübbecke, Mittelmann,
Ozyurt, Ralphs, Salvagnin and Shinano, 2021). This is what makes a structurally widening corpus viable. When railway
rescheduling alone is too sparse to support reliable clustering, structurally analogous formulations from the broader
transportation domain and, in the outer analogical shell, production scheduling can be drawn in without breaking
comparability. The corpus is ordered along two axes: application domain by proximity to railway, and activity from
rescheduling out to general operations. It therefore grows along a principled priority (cells 𝑃1–𝑃5, Section 3.1) rather
than opportunistically.
2.6. Reproducibility and validation in OR
Finally, reproducing a published optimization result is itself non-trivial when neither data nor code is released, and
a mined representation must be shown to be faithful rather than assumed so. Round-trip translation (regenerating an
independent formulation from the graph), cross-solver re-solving and reproduction of a paper’s reported optimum are
the available levers (Koch, Achterberg, Andersen, Bastert, Berthold, Bixby, Danna, Gamrath, Gleixner, Heinz, Lodi,
Mittelmann, Ralphs, Salvagnin, Steffy and Wolter, 2011). In this work validation is applied a posteriori and only to
confirm the representation’s round-trip fidelity, not to rank papers or claim one model superior to another.
2.7. Gap
Across all of the above, the same gap recurs and is the one this paper targets. There is no objective, reproducible,
structural account of how railway-rescheduling (and, more broadly, routing and scheduling) optimization models
are built. Narrative surveys are subjective and non-reproducible; existing taxonomies classify by vocabulary, not
structure; extraction work synthesizes new models instead of mining existing ones into a comparable form; graph
representations are used to solve rather than to compare; and the bulk of the literature’s modeling knowledge stays
locked in text because reading structure out of unstructured sources has no deterministic path. The consequence is
an absence of comparability: no shared, labeled dataset of variable roles, constraint families and model types against
which formulations can be placed side by side. LP Mining with LP2Graph is designed to close exactly this gap: it
mines existing models rather than synthesizing new ones, uses a deterministic structural representation, delivers a
comparable labeled dataset carrying an induced taxonomy, and checks representation fidelity a posteriori.
3. Methodology
This section develops a method for mining the structure and content of published LP and MILP formulations and
distilling them into a reproducible dataset and a taxonomy. The analysis is constructive, and its determinism boundary is
stated precisely: extracting a formulation from a heterogeneous source into the canonical model involves interpretation
and is audited rather than claimed exact (Section 3.3); from the validated canonical model onward, the pipeline is
deterministic (given the same corpus, configuration and versioned resources it produces the same feature vectors,
clusters and rule-assigned labels), and the human-in-the-loop steps (ambiguous extractions and adjudicated labels)
are logged so the end-to-end result is reproducible by replay rather than by re-judgment. The single design principle
underlying every step is a cluster-and-name operator (Section 3.4): meaningful textual tokens are extracted, grouped
into concepts through an acknowledged lexical resource, projected into a fixed-dimensional vector, clustered, and
named after the most frequent formulation inside each cluster. The contribution of this paper is to apply that operator,
together with the deterministic structural representation provided by LP2Graph, in a disciplined bottom-up sweep over
the constituent parts of an optimization model.
Figure 1 summarizes the pipeline. A corpus of formulations is assembled and prioritized by proximity to the target
problem (Section 3.1). Each formulation is parsed from solver code, publisher full-text markup or LATEX into the
LP2Graph canonical model and homologized (Section 3.2, Section 3.3). Lexical features over names and deterministic
structural features over the graph are combined into feature vectors, which drive the multi-level clustering and naming
(Section 3.4): variables and parameters first, then constraints and the objective conditioned on the variables they
couple, then whole-model structure; in parallel a text-only analysis clusters each model along the two dimensions
of application domain and solution approach. The resulting groups receive multi-level, multi-dimensional labels from
a two-stage mechanism that seeds labels with transparent rules, generalizes them with a supervised classifier, and
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 4 of 20


--- Page 6 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
writes confident predictions back into a versioned label database (Section 3.5). The faithfulness of the underlying
representation is established empirically, not assumed: for the highest-cited representative of each cluster, LP2Graph
regenerates the model, translates it into a second modeling language, re-solves it across independent solvers, and
reproduces the optimum reported in the source paper (Section 3.6). The outputs are a reproducible dataset and a new
taxonomy (Section 3.7).
1. Corpus construction
shell-prioritized LP/MILP sources (solver code, publisher XML/MathML, LATEX)
2. Extraction & homologization
parse to LP2Graph canonical model; normalize symbols
3. Feature construction
lexical concepts ⊕deterministic structural metrics →vectors
4. Multi-level clustering & naming
variables →constraints/objective →model type; text-only domain × solution approach
5. Two-stage labeling
rule seed →supervised classifier; closed-loop label database
6. Outputs
reproducible dataset + taxonomy (variables, constraints, model types)
Representation-fidelity validation
graph →LATEX →graph round-trip; translate to a 2nd modeling
language; re-solve (CBC/HiGHS/Gurobi) vs. published optimum
Figure 1: The LP-mining pipeline. Solid arrows are the forward path from corpus to taxonomy, deterministic from the
validated canonical model (stage 2 output) onward, with the extraction into that model audited separately (Section 3.3);
the dashed loop is the a posteriori representation-fidelity check applied to the highest-cited representative of each
cluster.
3.1. Scope and Corpus Construction
3.1.1. Domain scope: a shell model
The corpus is defined over two orthogonal axes. The first is the application domain, ordered by structural proximity
to the target problem: railway is the inner shell, the broader field of transportation is the middle shell, and production
(manufacturing) forms an outer shell. These shells are not strict set inclusions (production scheduling is not a superset
of transportation) but a deliberate ordering of structural transferability: the further from railway, the looser the expected
match between a source formulation and railway rescheduling, hence the lower its priority for inclusion. The second
axis is the activity: rescheduling, i.e. the reactive re-optimization of plans under disruption, which is the target task, is
a proper subset of the wider set of operations (planning, control and dispatching). Figure 2 visualizes both axes.
Crossing the two axes yields the inclusion priority. The four cells spanned by the in-scope transportation super-
domain are ranked activity-first and domain-second: railway rescheduling (𝑃1), transportation rescheduling (𝑃2),
railway operations (𝑃3) and transportation operations (𝑃4). Production rescheduling is appended as an outer analogical
shell (𝑃5) and is drawn on only to augment clusters left sparse by the four in-scope cells; production operations is out
of scope. Rescheduling is prioritized over general operations because disruption-response models carry the temporal-
recovery and re-allocation structure most relevant to the target, while the domain ordering reflects decreasing notational
and structural compatibility.
3.1.2. Construction protocol
Mining requires breadth: a taxonomy is only as defensible as the coverage of the corpus it is induced from. The
protocol therefore admits formulations broadly within a fixed quality order and defers selectivity to the validation stage,
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 5 of 20


--- Page 7 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
where a single representative per cluster is examined in depth (Section 3.6). This separation lets the corpus be large
without diluting the rigor of the fidelity check.
Reporting standard. The corpus construction follows the PRISMA guidelines for systematic reviews, reporting iden-
tification, screening, eligibility and inclusion with counts at each stage so the selection is auditable and reproducible.
(Page et al., 2021) Within the full corpus we additionally mark a core corpus (the subset that satisfies the strict PRISMA
eligibility criteria and the top quality tier) and report it separately, so that results can be read either over the broad mining
corpus or over the smaller, fully review-grade core.
Quality tiers. Sources are admitted in descending order of editorial scrutiny: (i) peer-reviewed journal articles and
proceedings of established operations-research and transportation venues; (ii) other peer-reviewed conference papers
and book chapters; and only to fill residual gaps in under-populated clusters, (iii) theses, technical reports and preprint
servers such as arXiv. A formulation enters from a lower tier only when the higher tiers leave its cell or cluster
below a documented minimum support. Predatory and pay-to-publish outlets whose editorial control is known to
be weak (typically broad, generic-scope journals run on a high-throughput author-pays model) are excluded outright,
irrespective of tier.
Source artifact. Orthogonal to the venue tier is the form in which a formulation is published. A formulation
accompanied by released solver code bound to its source paper is the highest-fidelity source: it can be ingested
deterministically and re-solved within seconds, so it doubles as a validation anchor (Section 3.6). Formulations
available only as LATEX or prose are admitted as well and parsed accordingly (Section 3.3). Released code that is
not attached to a published formulation (unpublished or student repositories) is out of scope, since neither provenance
nor peer scrutiny can be established for it.
Search and expansion. Each priority cell 𝑃1–𝑃5 is seeded with a keyword query (domain terms × optimization
terms, e.g. “train timetable rescheduling MILP”). The seed set is then expanded by systematic snowballing in both
directions (backward over the reference lists and forward over the citing papers) until no new in-scope formulations
appear. The search date is frozen and every query string is recorded so the corpus can be regenerated.
Unit of analysis and inclusion. The unit is a formulation: one optimization model comprising at least an objective
and a constraint set that can be recovered from the paper’s text, an appendix, or accompanying solver code. A single
paper may contribute several formulations (e.g. a base model and an extension), each treated independently with a
shared provenance record. A candidate is included iff it (a) falls in an in-scope cell, (b) is an LP or MILP (a linear
objective and linear constraints, with integer or binary variables for the MILP case), and (c) exposes a recoverable
formulation. It is excluded if it presents only a verbal or heuristic procedure with no explicit model, is nonlinear
without a linearized variant, or duplicates an already-ingested formulation. These criteria are mutually exclusive and,
over the candidate pool, collectively exhaustive.
Provenance. Every ingested formulation carries a record: source identifier, venue and tier, year, citation count at the
freeze date, domain shell, activity, and the priority cell 𝑃𝑘. Citation count is retained specifically to drive the a posteriori
selection of validation representatives (Section 3.6); it is not used during clustering, so that popularity cannot bias the
induced structure.
Reproducibility and threats. The protocol is reproducible up to the freeze date: identical queries, tier thresholds
and deduplication produce an identical corpus. Three threats are acknowledged and carried forward to the discussion
of validity. Citation count is an imperfect proxy for importance and is recency-biased; venue quality is heterogeneous
across sub-fields; and formulations that are well formalized in machine-readable form are easier to ingest, which can
over-represent recent or code-released work. The current corpus comprises 8957 candidate formulations from 238
source papers (pre-review); Figure 3 reports the full PRISMA flow, and the per-cell 𝑃1–𝑃5 distribution follows from
the domain/activity classification (in progress).
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 6 of 20


--- Page 8 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
3.2. The LP2Graph Representation
Mining structure requires a representation that is precise, comparable across papers, and computable without
solving. LP2Graph1 provides one. It represents an LP, MIP or MILP as a typed variable–equation graph derived
deterministically from a single canonical data model: identical input always yields byte-identical output, with no
language model, sampling or temperature anywhere in the procedure. This determinism is what makes the mined
dataset reproducible. The representation covers a defined class of formulations, not all of mathematical programming;
its scope, the distinction between what it can represent and what it can solve, and what the graph preserves, normalizes
and loses are stated explicitly at the end of this section.
3.2.1. Canonical model
A formulation is a schema-versioned document declaring five parts. Index families (e.g. trains, events, time slots)
may be ordered (admitting offsets such as 𝑡−1) and cyclic (wrapping modulo their cardinality, as in periodic
timetabling). Parameters carry a kind (scalar, vector, matrix, big-M, tolerance); the big-M and tolerance tags are
semantic, not decorative, and surface later as structural signals. Variable templates declare a shape over index families,
a domain (continuous, integer, binary) with bounds, and a role (primary, auxiliary, slack, indicator); a template
𝑦[𝐼, 𝐼] stands for the whole family of |𝐼|2 variables. Constraint templates are a comparison of two term lists under
quantifiers over index families, with restrictions (𝑖≠𝑗, ordered pairs, attribute-based where-predicates). The objective
declares a sense and a combination rule (sum, weighted sum, lexicographic). Variables, parameters and constraints
may additionally carry an additive semantic facet (a domain-role for variables, a domain-class for parameters and
constraints) recorded alongside the structural fields; it is optional and never required for validity, and is read into the
type signature during homologization (Section 3.3). The atomic unit is a term: a tuple of a referent (variable, parameter
or literal), one binding per index slot (with offset and modulo), a coefficient, a sign, a role, and an optional aggregation
operator (∑, max, min, abs, indicator, modulo) with the index families it ranges over. This single term grammar is
what allows several graph views to be derived from one source of truth. Two-phase validation guards integrity: a
JSON-schema check on document shape, then a semantic check on cross-cutting invariants: every referenced name is
declared, every binding covers the referent’s shape, and the family2 is consistent (an LP carries no integer or binary
variable, an MILP at least one).
3.2.2. Typed variable–equation graph and views
The structural object is a typed variable–equation graph 𝐺= (𝑁, 𝐸). Nodes 𝑁partition into classes: one per index
family, one per parameter, one per variable template, one per constraint template, the objective, and one aggregation-
operator node inserted between a container and the variables it aggregates. Edges 𝐸are also typed: a var-in-constraint
or var-in-objective edge for each term, an edge from each variable or parameter to the index families that shape it, and
operator input/output edges. Restricting attention to the variable and equation (constraint/objective) classes recovers
the familiar bipartite intuition (variables on one side, the equations that govern them on the other) while the typing
retains everything needed for finer analysis.
Three deterministic view functions expose this object at different resolutions. The schema view is the topology
alone: templates and indices, with offsets suppressed. It is the canonical structural fingerprint (any two formulations
with the same template skeleton produce the same schema graph) and is therefore the basis for cross-formulation
comparison and for all topological metrics in this paper. The hybrid view enriches the schema view with per-binding
offset, sign and modulo labels, and is used for inspection. The ground view materializes every variable and constraint
instance at supplied index cardinalities and applies degeneracy filters (out-of-range offsets dropped, restricted tuples
excluded, cyclic bindings wrapped); it is used for rendering at small sizes and, exported to PyG/DGL, as input
to downstream graph learning. Export adapters to NetworkX, LaTeX and Pyomo are available for interoperability.
Figure 4 illustrates the representation on a small example.
1Open-source library lp2graph; see the repository for the canonical schema, view derivations and validation suite.
2In the library the model class is the family field, taking values lp/mip/milp; this LP/MIP/MILP class is distinct from the constraint families
induced at Level C (Section 3.4).
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 7 of 20


--- Page 9 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
(a) A small formulation
min
𝑡,𝑦
∑
𝑖∈𝐼𝑡𝑖
s.t. 𝑡𝑗−𝑡𝑖≥ℎ−𝑀(1 −𝑦𝑖𝑗),
∀𝑖, 𝑗∈𝐼, 𝑖< 𝑗,
𝑡𝑖≥0,
𝑦𝑖𝑗∈{0, 1}.
(b) Typed variable–equation graph
𝑡[𝐼]
𝑦[𝐼, 𝐼]
ℎ
𝑀
𝐼
𝑧: min ∑𝑡
𝐶1: headway
Figure 4: The LP2Graph representation on a small big-M train-ordering model. (a) the formulation; (b) its typed
variable–equation (schema) graph: variable templates (𝑡[𝐼], 𝑦[𝐼, 𝐼], grey rounded), parameters (ℎ, 𝑀, square), the
index family 𝐼(circle) that shapes the variables, and the constraint and objective nodes (blue) they connect to. The
node typing is what lets structurally similar formulations be compared regardless of the symbols their authors chose.
3.2.3. Deterministic metrics
Every metric is a pure function of the canonical model or its schema graph. Two well-formedness indicators are used
as structural features (Section 3.4). Model coherence is the indicator that the undirected schema graph is connected;
it doubles as a data-quality signal during ingestion, since a disconnected schema graph flags an extraction in which
a declared variable never enters any equation. Model completeness is the indicator that a formulation declares an
objective together with at least one variable and at least one constraint: the minimal evidence that a recoverable model,
rather than a fragment, was extracted. The library additionally exposes a heuristic keyword-based constraint classifier
over each constraint’s name and description; we use it only as a seed for labeling (Section 3.5), never as ground truth.
The library further computes a family of structural complexity metrics (presence flags 𝝓; minimal size 𝑆min =
𝑛𝑉min ⋅𝑛𝐶min; constraint–variable ratio 𝑅𝐶∕𝑉= 𝑛𝐶min∕𝑛𝑉min; graph diameter 𝐷𝐺; edge density |𝐸|∕(|𝑁|(|𝑁| −1))).
They are not used as clustering features in this version; whether they add discriminative value beyond the type
signatures is assessed with the corpus-scale ablations (Section 3.4).
3.2.4. Deterministic text ↔graph codec and solving
Beyond the views, LP2Graph offers a bidirectional, deterministic codec between a formulation’s text and its graph,
and a real solver back-end: the two capabilities the validation in Section 3.6 relies on. to_canonical_latex renders
a paper-style LATEX document (calligraphic set notation , ∑, ∀, big-M), and from_canonical_latex parses it back,
resolving each subscripted symbol through the declared symbol table. The codec is a tested fixed point: serialization
is idempotent and the round-trip preserves the canonical normal form, with only incidental labels normalized; the
solvable content (sets, parameters, variables, constraints, objective) round-trips exactly. The solver back-end grounds
a formulation with an instance (index cardinalities plus parameter values) into a concrete linear program and solves it
with CBC, HiGHS or Gurobi, so that the same model can be checked across independent solvers. Together these make
a formulation not only comparable but executable from its mined representation.
3.2.5. Scope and boundary conditions
Because the paper’s central claim is structural comparability, the limits of the representation must be as explicit as
its capabilities. The canonical grammar admits linear formulations built from templates over regular index families:
variables with domains continuous, non-negative, integer or binary and optional finite bounds; constraints comparing
two linear term lists under ≤, ≥or =, quantified over index families with pairwise restrictions and attribute-based
where-predicates; coefficients that are numeric literals or declared parameters; and single-level summations (no
nested ∑∑). Indicator constraints are a first-class construct (a constraint template may carry a gating binary and an
activation value), and big-M formulations are explicit rather than implicit: big-M constants are tagged parameters, and a
deterministic transform linearizes an indicator constraint by computing the tightest finite 𝑀from the declared variable
bounds. The objective is single but supports three combination rules: plain sum, weighted sum, and lexicographic
priorities.
Within this class the library distinguishes what it can represent from what it can solve, and the distinction matters
for which fidelity claims (Section 3.6) a model can carry. Aggregation operators beyond summation (max, min, abs,
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 8 of 20


--- Page 10 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
indicator terms, modulo terms) and lexicographic objectives are representable (they appear as typed operator nodes in
the graph and count fully toward structural comparison), but the grounder rejects them for direct solving with an explicit
unsupported-model error: an indicator constraint must first be linearized by the big-M transform, a lexicographic
objective solved as a sequence of single-objective problems, and the remaining operators await linearization rules.
Outside the schema altogether are quadratic and other nonlinear terms, piecewise-linear constructs, SOS sets, semi-
continuous variables, and solver-specific devices such as lazy constraints or callbacks; a source model using them is
recorded with an explicit extraction status (Section 3.3) rather than approximated silently.
The graph preserves template-level structure exactly: the typed nodes and edges, index shapes, quantifier patterns
and restrictions, per-binding offsets and modulo wraps, domains, roles, and the semantic parameter and constraint tags.
It normalizes away author-specific surface form: symbol names (recovered separately by homologization, Section 3.3),
notational variants of the same term, and term order, all mapped to a canonical normal form. It loses whatever is not
structural: concrete instance data (re-attached only at grounding time) and any prose semantics not captured by the
optional semantic facets. On this basis structural equivalence has a precise meaning: two formulations are structurally
equivalent when their schema graphs are isomorphic respecting node and edge types (identical template skeletons up
to renaming of symbols and index families), while finer distinctions (offsets, signs, modulo wraps) are compared on
the hybrid view. Equivalence is thus a statement about model architecture, deliberately insensitive to instance size and
notation, and it is the invariant on which all cross-formulation comparison in this paper rests.
3.3. Extraction and Homologization
Every source formulation must become a validated LP2Graph canonical model before any analysis. Two facts make
this non-trivial: papers express the same construct in incompatible notations, and the deterministic codec of Section 3.2
parses only the canonical grammar, not arbitrary author notation. We therefore separate extraction (recovering a
canonical model from a heterogeneous source) from homologization (reducing the recovered symbols to a common,
comparable form).
3.3.1. Extraction
Extraction is the one stage of the pipeline that is not claimed to be deterministic, and we state its boundary precisely:
once a formulation has been extracted into the LP2Graph canonical model and certified by the two-phase validator,
everything downstream (representation, feature construction, clustering, labeling and reporting) is deterministic; the
path from source to canonical model involves interpretation whose difficulty depends on the source channel. We
therefore distinguish the channels explicitly, ordered by decreasing reliability.
(i) Solver code. A formulation published as executable code (Pyomo, GAMS, AMPL, JuMP) is the preferred
input: its sets, variables and constraints are already symbolic and machine-readable, so an importer maps them onto
the canonical schema with essentially no interpretation. (ii) Canonical LATEX. A formulation already expressed in,
or mechanically transcribable to, the canonical grammar is parsed directly by the library’s deterministic parser. (iii)
Publisher full-text markup. The bulk of the corpus arrives through structured publisher interfaces, full-text XML
with MathML equations (Elsevier’s text-and-data-mining API) and LATEX sources (arXiv), from which each display
equation is recovered as machine-readable LATEX. This channel does not operate on rendered PDFs; markup-to-LATEX
conversion is rule-based, but the subsequent step, reconstructing the symbol table (which letters denote index families,
parameters and variables, and their shapes) and rewriting each declaration and constraint into canonical templates
and terms, requires reading the surrounding prose and is where interpretation enters. (iv) Manual transcription. A
formulation available only as typeset mathematics or prose is transcribed by hand into the canonical grammar. (v)
Manual correction. Any automatic result may be corrected by hand; corrections are first-class events, not silent
overwrites.
Whatever the channel, the output is always a canonical document re-checked by the same deterministic validator,
and every transformation, automatic or human, is logged with provenance (channel, tool version, source locator,
correction history) so each model traces back to its source lines and the human share of the reconstruction is reportable,
not hidden. The human decisions of channels (iv) and (v), namely accepting, correcting or rejecting each recovered
formulation and screening papers for scope, are collected through a dedicated mobile review instrument that presents
each formulation with its source rendering and records every decision as a versioned, exportable event, so the manual
share of the corpus is elicited systematically rather than ad hoc; a gamified variant of the same instrument opens this
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 9 of 20


--- Page 11 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
review to additional annotators.3 Sources that resist extraction are themselves data: a paper whose model is documented
incompletely, inconsistently or ambiguously is recorded as such (via the completeness and coherence indicators of
Section 3.2 and an explicit extraction-status field) rather than silently repaired, so the corpus also yields an honest
picture of documentation practice in the field.
Extraction-quality audit. Because the taxonomy can only be as reliable as the extraction feeding it, extraction
quality is audited directly rather than assumed. A stratified sample of formulations, covering all source channels, is
independently extracted a second time by a human into a gold canonical model, and the pipeline’s model is compared
against it element-wise: precision and recall over index families, parameters, variables and constraints (matched under
the homologization equivalence of Eq. (1)), together with a categorization of every disagreement (missed element,
spurious element, wrong domain or shape, wrong comparator or term, under-specified source). [Deferred to the corpus-
scale version: report audit sample size, per-element precision/recall per channel, and the error-category distribution.]
3.3.2. Homologization
A variable named 𝑥in one paper and 𝑧in another may denote the same construct; conversely, the same letter may
denote different things. Homologization removes this accidental variation so that entities are compared by what they
are, not by the symbol an author happened to choose. We define it as a map on each extracted symbol 𝑠(a variable,
parameter or constraint),
ℎ(𝑠) = (𝜏(𝑠), 𝜅(𝑠)),
(1)
with two independent components. The type signature 𝜏(𝑠) is read directly from the canonical model: for a variable,
its algebraic domain, structural role, the ordered list of index families of its shape, and, where the model assigns one,
a semantic domain-role; for a parameter, its kind, shape and optional domain-class; for a constraint, its comparator,
the quantifier and restriction structure, the multiset of referent kinds in its terms, and its declarative kind and optional
domain-class. Type signatures are invariant to index renaming, so 𝑥[𝐼, 𝑇] and 𝑧[𝐴, 𝐵] with matching domains and
family structure share a signature. The concept 𝜅(𝑠) is obtained by normalizing the symbol’s name and its surrounding
description (subscripts split, case folded, lemmatized, stop-words removed) and mapping the resulting meaningful
tokens onto a concept identifier through the shared lexical resource of Section 3.4; this is what collapses “headway”,
“minimum separation” and “safety distance” to one concept. Two entities are homologous when they agree on both
components, 𝑠∼𝑠′ ⟺𝜏(𝑠) = 𝜏(𝑠′) ∧𝜅(𝑠) = 𝜅(𝑠′), up to index renaming.
Homologization is applied bottom-up. Variables and parameters, the atomic elements of any LP, are homologized
first, because their signatures and concepts are needed to characterize the constraints and objective that reference them
(Section 3.4). The procedure is deterministic given a fixed lexical resource and concept map; the precise normalization
rules and the concept inventory are versioned, so re-running homologization on the same corpus reproduces the same
homologized entities. Residual ambiguity (a symbol whose role or concept cannot be assigned automatically with
sufficient confidence) is queued for human adjudication and the resolution is written back, with provenance, into
the same versioned store used for labeling, closing the loop between extraction and the label database (Section 3.5).
Extraction error is the dominant threat to this stage and is quantified directly in Section 3.6 by regenerating each
validated model’s LATEX and comparing it against the source.
3.4. Feature Construction and Multi-level Clustering
The taxonomy is induced, not imposed. A single cluster-and-name operator is defined once and then applied at
every level of the model, each time over features appropriate to that level. Defining it once is what makes the procedure
uniform and auditable.
3.4.1. The cluster-and-name operator
Let 𝐸be a finite set of textual entities, each carrying a name and, optionally, a short description. The operator
CN(𝐸) returns a partition of 𝐸together with a name for each part, in three deterministic steps.
(1) Meaningful tokens to concepts. Each entity’s text is tokenized, case-folded, split on subscripts and compounds,
lemmatized, and reduced to content words by removing function words and a domain stop-list (so “railway” is kept
3A public demonstrator of the review instrument, restricted to a small openly licensed (CC-BY) subset of the corpus, is available at https:
//railpmining.joernmaurischat.de/.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 10 of 20


--- Page 12 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
and “is” discarded). A concept map 𝑔sends each remaining token to a concept 𝑐in a fixed vocabulary , grouping
synonyms primarily through a frozen, versioned domain thesaurus (the deterministic backbone, covering domain terms
that general resources miss, e.g. “headway”, “rolling stock”) and, optionally, through an acknowledged lexical database
(WordNet synsets) (Miller, 1995; Fellbaum, 1998) when its pinned release is available; a token matched by neither falls
back to its lemma. Grouping by frozen, versioned resources, rather than by ad-hoc judgment, is what keeps the concept
assignment reproducible.
(2) Concept vector. For entity 𝑒with token multiset 𝑇(𝑒), the count of concept 𝑐is 𝑛𝑒,𝑐= |{𝑤∈𝑇(𝑒) ∶𝑔(𝑤) = 𝑐}|,
weighted by a smoothed term frequency–inverse document frequency over the collection,̂
𝑤𝑒,𝑐= 𝑛𝑒,𝑐⋅
(
ln
1 + |𝐸|
1 + |{𝑒′ ∈𝐸∶𝑛𝑒′,𝑐> 0}| + 1
)
,
(2)
the additive smoothing (the 1+ terms and the trailing +1) keeping the weight strictly positive and finite even for
a concept that occurs in every entity or in none. The raw vector̂ 𝐯(𝑒) = (̂𝑤𝑒,𝑐)𝑐∈is then 𝐿2-normalized, 𝐯(𝑒) =̂
𝐯(𝑒)∕‖̂𝐯(𝑒)‖2, so entities are compared under cosine distance and the per-entity token total cancels; common concepts
that fail to discriminate are down-weighted automatically. At the structural levels below, the structural facets from
LP2Graph are folded into the same vector rather than kept as a separately scaled block: the categorical type-signature
components enter directly as one-hot tokens, weighted by the scheme of Eq. (2). (The presence flags and the continuous
complexity metrics are not used in this version; see Section 3.2.) The result is a single homogeneous vector̃ 𝐯(𝑒) on
which no block dominates by scale.
(3) Cluster and name. A clustering algorithm partitions {̃𝐯(𝑒)} under cosine distance into clusters 𝐶1, … , 𝐶𝐾
plus an explicit “unassigned” set, so that every entity lands in exactly one part. The default is a deterministic
agglomerative clustering (average linkage under cosine distance, with a distance threshold that discovers 𝐾and leaves
genuine outliers as singletons), chosen so that the partition is exactly reproducible and free of any external dependency;
a fixed-𝐾variant selects 𝐾by the silhouette criterion (Rousseeuw, 1987), and a density-based backend (HDBSCAN)
(Campello, Moulavi and Sander, 2013; McInnes, Healy and Astels, 2017), which infers 𝐾and isolates outliers rather
than forcing them into clusters, is available as an option. Each cluster is named after its most characteristic concepts
(the “most common formulation within”) by aggregating the normalized concept weights of Eq. (2),
𝓁𝑗= arg max
𝑐∈
∑
𝑒∈𝐶𝑗
𝑣𝑒,𝑐,
(3)
optionally reported as the top-𝑚concepts plus the medoid entity as an exemplar. The operator is thus CN(𝐸) =
{(𝐶1, 𝓁1), … , (𝐶𝐾, 𝓁𝐾)}.
3.4.2. Bottom-up structural levels
The operator is applied in three passes, each consuming the output of the one below, so that higher-level structure
is expressed in terms of lower-level vocabulary.
Level V: variables and parameters. Entities are the homologized variables and parameters. Features are the concept
of the name, Eq. (2), concatenated with the type signature 𝜏of Eq. (1) encoded categorically as one-hot tokens
(algebraic domain, structural role, shape arity and index families, parameter kind, and the canonical model’s semantic
domain-role/domain-class facet where assigned). CN yields clusters of variable and parameter types (e.g. binary
sequencing indicators, continuous time/position variables, big-M parameters), each named by Eq. (3).
Level C: constraints and objective. Entities are the constraint templates and the objective. The feature vector
conditions on Level V: the concept of the constraint’s name and description, concatenated with the histogram of
Level-V clusters over the variables the constraint couples, and with the constraint’s structural signature (comparator,
quantifier/restriction pattern). Conditioning on which variable types a constraint connects is what lets structurally
identical couplings be recognized across different notations. CN yields constraint families (and objective types), e.g.
headway/separation, capacity, connection/transfer, flow conservation, big-M disjunctions.
Level M: model type. Entities are whole formulations. Features are the histogram of Level-C constraint families
and Level-V variable types present in the model, concatenated with the model-level well-formedness indicators of
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 11 of 20


--- Page 13 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
Section 3.2 (coherence and completeness). CN yields model types: a structural answer to “what kind of model is this”,
derived from its parts rather than asserted by its authors.
3.4.3. Text-only domain and approach
Independently of the graph, two further labelings are induced from the paper text alone, because application domain
and solution method are properties of the work, not of the formulation’s structure. Running the operator’s lexical
pipeline (steps 1–2) over, respectively, the problem-description text and the methods text yields two one-dimensional
clusterings: the application domain (e.g. metro, mainline, freight) and the solution approach (e.g. exact branch-and-
cut, decomposition, rolling-horizon, matheuristic). Their product is a two-dimensional, text-only descriptor (domain ×
approach) attached to each model. Holding this descriptor apart from the structural levels is deliberate: it lets us later
cross-tabulate what is modeled (structure) against where and how it is solved (text), and to detect where authors’ stated
framing diverges from the structure they actually wrote.
3.4.4. Determinism, cluster validity and ablations
Given a frozen corpus, a versioned concept vocabulary , and fixed algorithm seeds, every pass reproduces the
same partition and the same names. Cluster quality is reported with the silhouette coefficient; stability is reported as
the adjusted Rand index across bootstrap resamples and across reasonable choices of and of the vocabulary cutoff
||, so that a reviewer can see which clusters are robust and which are artefacts of a parameter choice. [Deferred to the
corpus-scale version: report 𝐾at each level, silhouette, and bootstrap ARI.]
An induced taxonomy invites a specific objection: that the clusters reflect naming conventions, notation, or corpus
artefacts rather than mathematical structure. Because the feature vector deliberately mixes lexical and structural
evidence, this is answered by ablation, not by assertion. The empirical evaluation therefore reports, at each level,
the partitions obtained from lexical features only, from structural features only (type signatures, coupling histograms
and structural signatures, with all concept tokens removed), and from the combined vector, together with the pairwise
adjusted Rand index between the three: high lexical–structural agreement indicates that names and structure carry the
same signal, while divergence localizes exactly where vocabulary and mathematics part ways. The same protocol covers
the remaining design choices: clustering from variables only, constraints only, and the full model at Level M; with
and without homologization (raw symbols versus homologized entities), which quantifies how much comparability
the normalization actually buys; and across the clustering backends and their parameters (agglomerative threshold,
fixed-𝐾silhouette variant, HDBSCAN) and the feature weighting of Eq. (2) versus unweighted counts. [Deferred
to the corpus-scale version: ablation table, per level: lexical / structural / combined silhouette and pairwise ARI;
with/without homologization; backend sensitivity.]
3.5. Multi-level Labeling
Clustering discovers structure but its parts are anonymous and corpus-specific. Labeling assigns each entity a
value from a controlled vocabulary that is stable, human-meaningful and reusable across corpora; the union of these
vocabularies is the taxonomy. Labels are organized by level and dimension: at the variable level a type; at the constraint
level a family; at the model level a structural type together with the text-derived domain and solution approach.
Each dimension has its own controlled vocabulary, seeded from the cluster names of Section 3.4 and then frozen
and versioned.
3.5.1. Two-stage mechanism with a closed loop
Labels are assigned by a two-stage mechanism, deliberately combining the precision of explicit rules with the recall
of a learned model, and feeding the learner’s confident output back to grow the rules and the labeled set.
Stage 1: rule seed. A transparent rule layer maps unambiguous evidence to labels: presence flags and type signatures
from LP2Graph, and matches of an entity’s concepts against a seed lexicon of domain-typical terms compiled from
the highest-cited reference formulations. A rule returns a label or abstains, 𝑟(𝑒) ∈∪{⊥}. Rules are high-precision
but low-recall; their value is a trustworthy labeled seed set 𝐿= {(𝑒, 𝑟(𝑒)) ∶𝑟(𝑒) ≠⊥} and an audit trail for every label
they assign.
Stage 2: supervised generalization. A classifier 𝑓𝜃is trained on 𝐿over the same feature vectors̃ 𝐯(𝑒) used for
clustering, as a one-vs-rest model per class. Every dimension is treated as single-valued: the highest-scoring class
is taken (variable type, constraint family, model type, and likewise the text-derived domain and solution approach);
intrinsically multi-valued descriptors (a model spanning two domains or two solution approaches) are recognized
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 12 of 20


--- Page 14 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
but left to a planned extension and are not emitted by the current implementation. We default to a calibrated linear
support-vector classifier (interpretable, effective on sparse TF-IDF features, and stable with the modest labeled sets
typical here) whose calibrated probabilities gate write-back. The classifier labels the entities the rules left abstained.
Closed loop. Predictions are not blindly trusted. A prediction with calibrated confidence above 𝜃high is accepted
automatically; one below 𝜃low, or one that contradicts a rule, is routed to a human adjudicator (active learning, which
spends scarce human effort where it is most informative). Accepted and adjudicated labels are written back into the
label database; newly reliable concept-to-label associations are promoted into the Stage-1 lexicon; and the classifier is
retrained on the enlarged set. The loop repeats until few new labels are added. Algorithm 1 states this precisely.
Input: entities 𝐸, features̃ 𝐯, rules 𝑟, thresholds 𝜃low ≤𝜃high
Output: versioned label database 𝐷, lexicon Λ, classifier 𝑓𝜃
𝐿←{(𝑒, 𝑟(𝑒)) ∶𝑒∈𝐸, 𝑟(𝑒) ≠⊥}
repeat
train 𝑓𝜃on 𝐿
foreach 𝑒∈𝐸with no accepted label do
(̂𝑦, 𝑝) ←𝑓𝜃(𝑒)
if 𝑝≥𝜃high and̂ 𝑦consistent with 𝑟(𝑒) then
accept (𝑒,̂ 𝑦) automatically
else if 𝑝< 𝜃low or̂ 𝑦conflicts with 𝑟(𝑒) then
adjudicate (𝑒, ⋅) by a human
else
defer to next iteration
end
write accepted/adjudicated label to 𝐷with provenance
promote confirmed concept→label rules into Λ
end
𝐿←all confirmed labels in 𝐷
until |𝐿| unchanged
Algorithm 1: Two-stage labeling with closed-loop database update
3.5.2. Provenance, reproducibility and guardrails
Every label record stores the entity, level, dimension, value, source (rule, classifier or human), confidence, and the
versions of the lexicon, classifier and corpus in force when it was written. The rule stage is deterministic; the classifier
is deterministic given a fixed seed and data version; the human decisions are logged, so the entire loop is reproducible
by replaying the versioned decision log rather than by re-eliciting judgments.
Self-training that writes its own predictions back can amplify errors, so the design is explicitly guarded. The
confidence gate and rule-consistency check bound what may be auto-accepted; a held-out, human-labeled gold set
is re-scored after every loop to detect precision regressions and label drift, and the versioned store allows roll-back
to any prior state. Subjectivity in the gold labels is quantified by inter-annotator agreement (Cohen’s or Fleiss’ 𝜅)
(Cohen, 1960; Fleiss, 1971), and class imbalance is surfaced by reporting per-class precision and recall rather than
overall accuracy. The evaluation additionally reports how the labels were arrived at (the share assigned by rules, auto-
accepted from the classifier, and human-adjudicated) and a qualitative error analysis: concrete examples of wrong
or unstable labels (entities whose label changes across loop iterations or parameter choices), since these localize
where the vocabulary is still ill-defined. [Deferred to the corpus-scale version: report seed-set size |𝐿|, gold-set size
and agreement 𝜅, final per-dimension precision/recall, rule/auto/human label shares, and wrong- or unstable-label
examples.] These choices keep the learned component from quietly corrupting a taxonomy whose chief value is its
objectivity.
3.6. Representation-Fidelity Validation
A taxonomy mined through LP2Graph is only trustworthy if the representation it rests on faithfully captures the
source models. We therefore validate the representation explicitly rather than assume it, and we separate three fidelity
claims of increasing strength so that each can be reported honestly.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 13 of 20


--- Page 15 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
3.6.1. Three fidelity claims
Structural fidelity asks whether the typed graph preserves the model’s structure. It is established by the deterministic
codec of Section 3.2: serializing a canonical model to LATEX and parsing it back is idempotent and preserves the
canonical normal form, parse(render(𝑓)) ≡𝑓, with the solvable content (sets, parameters, variables, constraints,
objective) round-tripping exactly. This holds for every model the canonical grammar admits and requires no instance
data.
Translation fidelity asks whether the canonical model still denotes the same optimization problem once expressed
in an independent language. For a model with recoverable instance data, LP2Graph regenerates it both as paper-style
LATEX and as an executable model in a second modeling language, grounds it with the instance, and solves it. Agreement
between solving the regenerated model and solving the original confirms that nothing semantic was lost in mining.
External fidelity asks whether the mined model reproduces the source paper’s own result. The grounded model is
solved with three independent solvers and checked against the published optimum,
𝑧⋆
CBC = 𝑧⋆
HiGHS = 𝑧⋆
Gurobi
and
||| 𝑧⋆
mined −𝑧⋆
paper
||| ≤𝜀.
(4)
Cross-solver agreement rules out solver-specific artefacts; agreement with 𝑧⋆
paper anchors the mined model to an
externally established value. The whole pipeline (render, parse, ground, solve) is deterministic and free of any language
model.
3.6.2. Corpus-wide coverage and citation-anchored selection
The three claims are applied at very different scales, and stating the scale of each is part of the validation design.
Structural fidelity is checked for every canonical model in the corpus: the codec round-trip needs no instance data and
costs milliseconds, so a corpus-wide round-trip pass rate is reported, not sampled. Translation fidelity is attempted for
every model the grammar admits as executable: regeneration into the second modeling language is likewise data-
free, and grounding is attempted wherever instance data are recoverable; the report states, for the whole corpus,
how many models could be translated, how many grounded, and why the rest could not. Only external fidelity is
selective, because it needs both instance data and a published optimum, neither universally available. We apply it
to one representative per cluster: the highest-cited formulation in each label class, taken from the provenance record
(Section 3.1). Highest-citation representatives are the most scrutinized, the most influential, and the most likely to report
reproducible numerics, so anchoring the taxonomy at these points validates its load-bearing members. Where the top
representative lacks recoverable instance data, the next-highest is tried; where none in a cluster publishes usable data,
a benchmark instance of the same structural class is substituted (for example a MIPLIB cyclic-timetabling instance for
a PESP cluster) (Gleixner et al., 2021), and the cluster is marked as carrying structural and translation fidelity but not
paper-anchored external fidelity.
Validation status is recorded per model and aggregated per cluster, so the dataset (Section 3.7) carries a validation-
coverage table: for each cluster, the fraction of members passing the round-trip, the fraction translated and grounded,
and which fidelity level its anchor reached. Failures are data, not embarrassments, and every failure is categorized by
cause: extraction error (the canonical model misrepresents the source), missing instance data, construct outside the
grammar or unsupported by the grounder (Section 3.2.5), cross-solver disagreement, or a source paper too ambiguous
or under-specified to decide. The categories point to different remedies, and reproducibility failures in the published
record are themselves a finding of the mining. [Deferred to the corpus-scale version: report corpus-wide round-trip
rate, translation/grounding rates with reasons, per-cluster coverage table, and the failure-category distribution.]
3.6.3. Coverage limits and threats to validity
The canonical grammar covers template-structured models (periodic-event scheduling, assignment/matching, time-
indexed packing and covering, big-M disjunctive ordering), and for these the pipeline reproduces independently verified
optima exactly. Models outside it are reported, not hidden: formulations with per-train variable-length routes or a
derived “next resource” cannot yet be expressed by the regular-index-family templates, so they receive structural
labels where partially recoverable but are excluded from external-fidelity claims, and grammar extension is left as
future work. Four threats are carried to the discussion. Instance data are often unpublished, capping how much of the
corpus can reach external fidelity; published optima can themselves be wrong or under-specified; a single representative
may not speak for its whole cluster; and grammar coverage is incomplete. The third threat is mitigated by reporting
intra-cluster structural homogeneity (the rate of schema-graph isomorphism within each cluster) so a reviewer can
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 14 of 20


--- Page 16 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
Table 1
Axes of the induced taxonomy. Categories are placeholders pending the empirical run.
Level
Dimension
Derived from
Example categories
Variable/parameter
type
structure + lexical
sequencing indicator; time/position variable; big-M pa-
rameter; slack
Constraint
family
structure + lexical
headway/separation; capacity; connection/transfer; flow
conservation; big-M disjunction
Model
type
structure
periodic-event
(PESP);
assignment/matching;
time-
indexed packing; big-M ordering
Model
domain
text
metro; mainline; freight; multimodal
Model
solution approach
text
exact branch-and-cut; decomposition; rolling horizon;
matheuristic
judge how representative the validated anchor is. [Deferred to the corpus-scale version: report the fraction of clusters
reaching each fidelity level, the tolerance 𝜀, and intra-cluster isomorphism rates.]
3.7. Outputs: Dataset and Taxonomy
The method yields two artefacts. The first is a dataset: for every formulation, its LP2Graph canonical model, schema
and hybrid graphs, structural metrics and presence flags, homologized variables, parameters and constraints, multi-level
and multi-dimensional labels, provenance, and validation status. The dataset is machine-readable and versioned, and it
is regenerable: given the frozen corpus, the versioned concept vocabulary and lexicon, and the recorded configuration,
re-running the pipeline reproduces it identically, with any human adjudications replayed from the logged decision
history rather than re-elicited.
The second artefact is the taxonomy: the controlled vocabularies the labeling settles on, each entry defined by its
characterizing concepts (Eq. (3)) and illustrated by its medoid exemplar and corpus frequency. Table 1 lists its axes.
The taxonomy is multi-level (variable, constraint, model) and multi-dimensional (structure-derived type; text-derived
domain and solution approach).
The taxonomy is MECE by construction along well-defined boundaries. The dimensions are orthogonal (a model
has a structural type and a domain and an approach independently), so an entity carrying several labels does so across
dimensions, never as competing values within one. Within a single dimension the categories are mutually exclusive,
and the current implementation assigns exactly one value per dimension (intrinsically multi-valued descriptors such as
a multimodal domain are left to a planned extension), while exhaustiveness is guaranteed by a residual “unassigned”
category that holds whatever the current vocabulary does not yet cover and that is emptied over successive refinement
passes. What the method guarantees is objectivity and repeatability: the same inputs yield the same taxonomy, and
every category traces to explicit features and named exemplars. What it does not guarantee is uniqueness (a different
lexical resource or clustering choice could induce a different, equally valid partition), which is why cluster stability
(Section 3.4) and fidelity coverage (Section 3.6) are reported alongside the taxonomy rather than asserted away.
3.7.1. Release plan
Because the dataset is a primary contribution, its release is specified concretely rather than promised in passing.
What is released: for every included formulation, the LP2Graph canonical model (JSON), its schema and hybrid
graphs, homologized entities, feature vectors, labels, validation status, and a provenance record linking it to the source
paper’s DOI with the exact source locator, extraction channel and tool versions of Section 3.3; alongside these, the
versioned taxonomy itself, the frozen concept vocabulary and seed lexicon, the logged human decisions (review
verdicts, corrections and label adjudications), the PRISMA screening record of Section 3.1, and the complete pipeline
code (extraction, homologization, clustering, labeling and validation). What is not released: the publishers’ original
full texts and equation markup. The corpus is mined from publisher interfaces under text-and-data-mining terms that
permit publishing derived structural data but not redistributing the source text; the release therefore contains our derived
representations and pointers (DOI, section, equation number) into the originals, which is also why every derived artefact
is DOI-linked. Reproducibility: a user with their own lawful access to the same interfaces can re-run the pipeline from
the frozen query set and screening record to regenerate the corpus, and any user can regenerate every downstream
artefact (graphs, features, clusters, labels, validation) from the released canonical models alone, since the pipeline is
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 15 of 20


--- Page 17 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
deterministic from that point on (Section 3.3). The taxonomy and label database are versioned, so later corpus growth
extends rather than silently rewrites them. The library is already public under an open-source license; the dataset is
released with a documented schema and, for downstream machine-learning use, a fixed documented split. [Deferred to
the corpus-scale version: archive repository and DOI, dataset license, and split definition to be fixed at submission.]
3.7.2. Further steps
The dataset and taxonomy are a substrate, not an endpoint. Three uses follow directly. They enable retrieval: given
a new textual rescheduling problem, the structurally closest model types and constraint families can be looked up and
reused. They enable structure-aware generation and validation: an automated model builder can be conditioned on
the taxonomy’s categories rather than free-form text, and its output can be validated (checked structurally against the
known model families before it is ever solved), turning model development into selection and recombination over
a known structural space; this is the role our earlier raiLPminer generation experiments attempted without such a
substrate, and the foundation its successor builds on. And they enable learning: the ground views export to graph-
learning frameworks, so the labeled corpus can train models that predict type, family or solver-relevant structure. In
each case the contribution of this paper (an objective, repeatable, validated structural inventory) is the precondition
that makes the downstream automation scientifically defensible.
4. Experiments
This section specifies how the mining pipeline of Section 3 is applied end-to-end to the railway-rescheduling corpus,
and what each stage of the run reports. The run answers three questions: which variable roles, constraint families and
model types recur across the published record; how the induced structure compares to the vocabulary-based groupings
of narrative surveys; and how reproducibly the whole result can be regenerated from the released artifacts. In this
preliminary version the protocol is fixed and the pipeline is demonstrated end-to-end on the library’s bundled fixture
set (Section 5); the corpus-scale numbers follow in a subsequent version once the human review of the extracted corpus
is complete.
Corpus. The corpus is assembled under the domain-shell prioritization and PRISMA protocol of Section 3.1. At
the current freeze the identification and screening stages are complete: 6 frozen database queries plus systematic two-
directional snowballing yield 238 source papers contributing 8957 candidate formulations (Figure 3). These candidates
are machine-extracted but not yet human-reviewed; the review–ingest step that promotes accepted formulations to
canonical models is the gate between this snapshot and the corpus-scale run.
Extraction and homologization. Each candidate is parsed through the channel hierarchy of Section 3.3 (solver code
where released, publisher full-text markup (MathML) as the bulk channel, LATEX or PDF otherwise) into the LP2Graph
canonical model, then homologized under Eq. (1). The run reports per-channel coverage (candidates parsed, admitted
by the grammar, rejected with cause) and the extraction-quality audit of Section 3.3 over a stratified sample spanning
all channels.
Clustering and labeling. The cluster-and-name operator (Section 3.4) runs with its deterministic default: agglomer-
ative clustering under cosine distance with a versioned concept vocabulary and frozen thesaurus, sweeping variables,
then constraints/objective, then whole-model structure, plus the two text-only dimensions. Labels are assigned by
the two-stage mechanism of Section 3.5. All resource versions (clustering, vocabulary, rewrite rules) are pinned and
reported, so the partition is exactly reproducible; the ablation protocol of Section 3.4 (lexical-only vs. structural-only
vs. combined, with/without homologization, backend sensitivity) runs on the same frozen inputs.
Validation. Validation follows Section 3.6 at its three scales: the codec round-trip over every canonical model in
the corpus; translation and grounding wherever the grammar admits execution; and external fidelity for the highest-
cited representative of each cluster, re-solved across CBC, HiGHS and Gurobi against the optimum reported in the
source paper, with benchmark substitutes where no member of a cluster publishes usable instance data. Outcomes
are aggregated into the per-cluster validation-coverage table and failure-category distribution released with the dataset
(Section 3.7).
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 16 of 20


--- Page 18 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
5. Results
[Preliminary: end-to-end demonstration, not the final corpus.] The figures and taxonomy in this section were
produced by running the M3 induction (lp2graph clustering version cluster-2026.06.0) over the 10 canonical
formulation fixtures bundled with the library, not over the mined railway corpus, whose human review is still in
progress (Section 4). They demonstrate the pipeline end-to-end on real, deterministically reproducible output; the
corpus-scale results will replace this section verbatim in a subsequent version. The cluster names are the raw M3
cluster names (the M4 labeling layer, which maps them to the controlled taxonomy vocabulary, is not applied here).
5.1. The mined dataset
The test set comprises 𝑁
=
10 formulations (6 MILP and 4 LP) spanning fixed-sequence dispatching,
big-M disjunctive ordering, time-indexed packing, periodic-event scheduling (PESP), assignment, multi-objective
lateness/energy, and absolute-deviation and lexicographic objectives. Because these are synthetic fixtures rather than
extracted models, no source-paper count (𝑀) or citation ranking is reported here; both arrive with the corpus.
5.2. The induced taxonomy
The bottom-up induction yields 𝑉= 13 variable/parameter-role clusters at Level V, 𝐾= 9 constraint-family
(plus objective) clusters at Level C, and 𝑇= 4 model-type clusters at Level M; the two text-only dimensions yield 9
domain and 9 solution-approach clusters. Mapping to the abstract’s coverage placeholder: 𝑁= 10 formulations yield
𝐾= 9 constraint families, 𝑉= 13 variable roles and 𝑇= 4 model types. Table 2 gives the full level × cluster × count
breakdown.
The induction is deterministic: identical inputs and clustering version yield byte-identical clusters. On this tiny
test set many clusters are singletons (expected, since 10 hand-built fixtures share little vocabulary); the final corpus is
where the cluster structure becomes informative.
6. Conclusion
LP Mining with LP2Graph turns dispersed, incompatibly-notated published LP and MILP formulations into a
reproducible dataset and an objective, structural taxonomy of variables, constraints and model types. The method rests
on a single canonical model per formulation: once a source is extracted into it (the one audited, non-deterministic
step), everything downstream is deterministic, from the typed variable–equation graph through homologization, the
bottom-up cluster-and-name sweep, and the two-stage labeling, so the entire result regenerates by replay rather than
re-judgment.
This preliminary version contributes the method itself: the canonical representation and its scope conditions
(Section 3.2), the PRISMA-governed corpus protocol with 238 source papers and 8957 machine-extracted candidate
formulations already screened (Section 3.1), the full experimental and validation protocol (Section 4), and an end-to-
end demonstration on the library’s fixture set showing that the pipeline runs deterministically from canonical models to
a named multi-level taxonomy (Section 5). The corpus-scale taxonomy and validation outcomes follow in a subsequent
version once the human review of the extracted corpus is complete.
The claims are deliberately bounded. Validation establishes structural fidelity corpus-wide via the codec round-
trip, while semantic and optimality fidelity are established only where translation, grounding and a published optimum
permit, and remain bounded by extraction accuracy and the coverage of the canonical grammar. The method further
depends on well-structured source formulations and on the reach of the homologization resources: models outside the
regular-index-family templates are labeled where partially recoverable but excluded from external-fidelity claims, and
corpus coverage is itself limited by publisher access and the freeze date.
The resulting taxonomy is intended as infrastructure: an objective map of which modeling structures the field
actually uses, on which the automated development of railway-rescheduling optimization models (the generation line
of work this paper’s validation and taxonomy feed) can be built.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this manuscript the authors used Claude (Anthropic), ChatGPT (OpenAI) and you.com
(Claude, OpenAI, Meta, DeepSeek) to implement concepts into code and document it, support literature research,
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 17 of 20


--- Page 19 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
Table 2
Preliminary induced taxonomy over the 10-formulation demonstration set (lp2graph cluster-2026.06.0). Each row is
one M3 cluster with its member count 𝑛; names are raw M3 cluster names pending M4 labeling. To be regenerated over
the final corpus in a subsequent version.
Level (entities)
Cluster (raw M3 name)
𝑛
Level V: variable/parameter roles (13 clusters, 37 entities)
kind:non_negative
8
over:E
6
kind:scalar
4
target
4
train
3
assign
2
energy
2
indicator
2
periodic
2
4 singletons: bound, cap, crui, earliest
1 each
Level C: constraint families + objective (9 clusters, 24 entities)
kind:min/sum
5
one
4
over:E
4
ref:variable
4
cost
3
4 singletons: choo, earliest, kind:min/lexicographic, slot
1 each
Level M: model types (4 clusters, 10 entities)
ckind:linear
3
vtype:target
3
ckind:set_packing
2
vtype:over:E
2
Domain (text-only; 9 clusters, 10 entities)
periodic
2
8 singletons: abs, assignment, big, cost, fix, index, lexicographic, soft
1 each
Solution approach (text-only; 9 clusters, 10 entities)
periodic
2
8 singletons: abs, assignment, big, cost, fix, lexicographic, slot, soft
1 each
improve text writing style and translate results (e. g. tables) into LATEX. All AI-generated text was reviewed and edited
by the authors, and the authors accept full responsibility for the content and any errors.
Declaration of Competing Interests
Jörn Maurischat reports a relationship with DB Engineering und Consulting GmbH that includes: employment. All
authors declare no other competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence
the work reported in this paper.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Jörn Maurischat: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Investigation, Visualization, Writing
– original draft. Nikola Bešinović: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. Michael Färber:
Supervision, Writing – review & editing.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 18 of 20


--- Page 20 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
References
AhmadiTeshnizi, A., Gao, W., Udell, M., 2024a. Optimus: scalable optimization modeling with (mi)lp solvers and large language models, in:
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, JMLR.org. pp. 577–596. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/
v235/ahmaditeshnizi24a.html.
AhmadiTeshnizi, A., Gao, W., Udell, M., 2024b. Optimus: Scalable optimization modeling with (mi)lp solvers and large language models, in:
Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, JMLR.org. pp. 577–596. URL: https://github.com/teshnizi/
OptiMUS.
ter Beek, M.H., Fantechi, A., Gnesi, S., Lenzini, G., Petrocchi, M., 2025. Can ai help with the formalization of railway cybersecurity requirements?,
in: Margaria, T., Steffen, B. (Eds.), Leveraging Applications of Formal Methods, Verification and Validation. REoCAS Colloquium in
Honor of Rocco De Nicola, Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham. pp. 186–203. URL: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/
978-3-031-73709-1_12, doi:10.1007/978-3-031-73709-1_12.
Bengio, Y., Lodi, A., Prouvost, A., 2021. Machine learning for combinatorial optimization: a methodological tour d’horizon. European Journal of
Operational Research 290, 405–421. doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2020.07.063.
Bešinović, N., 2020. Resilience in railway transport systems: A literature review and research agenda. Transport Reviews 40, 457–478. URL:
https://doi.org/10.1080/01441647.2020.1728419, doi:10.1080/01441647.2020.1728419.
Cacchiani, V., Huisman, D., Kidd, M., Kroon, L., Toth, P., Veelenturf, L., Wagenaar, J., 2014. An overview of recovery models and algorithms
for real-time railway rescheduling. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological 63, 15–37. URL: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trb.
2014.01.009, doi:10.1016/j.trb.2014.01.009.
Campello, R.J.G.B., Moulavi, D., Sander, J., 2013. Density-based clustering based on hierarchical density estimates, in: Advances in Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (PAKDD 2013), Springer. pp. 160–172. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-37456-2_14.
Cohen, J., 1960.
A coefficient of agreement for nominal scales.
Educational and Psychological Measurement 20, 37–46.
doi:10.1177/
001316446002000104.
Crainic, T.G., 2000. Service network design in freight transportation. European Journal of Operational Research 122, 272–288. doi:10.1016/
S0377-2217(99)00233-7.
D’Ariano, A., Corman, F., Pacciarelli, D., Pranzo, M., 2008.
Reordering and local rerouting strategies to manage train traffic in real time.
Transportation Science 42, 405–419. URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/trsc.1080.0247, doi:10.1287/trsc.1080.0247.
Derrible, S., Kennedy, C., 2010.
Characterizing metro networks: State, form, and structure.
Transportation 37, 275–297.
doi:10.1007/
s11116-009-9227-7.
Fang, Z., Wang, J., Zhong, J., Ong, Y.S., 2026.
TriVAL: A tri-validation framework for faithful automatic optimization modeling.
URL:
https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23966, arXiv:2605.23966.
Fellbaum, C. (Ed.), 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Fleiss, J.L., 1971. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psychological Bulletin 76, 378–382. doi:10.1037/h0031619.
Gasse, M., Chételat, D., Ferroni, N., Charlin, L., Lodi, A., 2019. Exact combinatorial optimization with graph convolutional neural networks, in:
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (NeurIPS 2019), pp. 15580–15592.
Gleixner, A., Hendel, G., Gamrath, G., Achterberg, T., Bastubbe, M., Berthold, T., Christophel, P., Jarck, K., Koch, T., Linderoth, J., Lübbecke, M.,
Mittelmann, H.D., Ozyurt, D., Ralphs, T.K., Salvagnin, D., Shinano, Y., 2021. MIPLIB 2017: data-driven compilation of the 6th mixed-integer
programming library. Mathematical Programming Computation 13, 443–490. doi:10.1007/s12532-020-00194-3.
Huang, C., Tang, Z., Hu, S., Jiang, R., Zheng, X., Ge, D., Wang, B., Wang, Z., 2025. ORLM: A Customizable Framework in Training Large
Models for Automated Optimization Modeling. Operations Research 73, 2986–3009. URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/opre.2024.1233,
doi:10.1287/opre.2024.1233.
Huang, S., Yang, K., Qi, S., Wang, R., 2024a. When large language model meets optimization. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation 90, 101663.
URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2210650224002013, doi:10.1016/j.swevo.2024.101663.
Huang, X., Shen, Q., Hu, Y., Gao, A., Wang, B., 2024b. Mamo: a mathematical modeling benchmark with solvers. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2405.13144, arXiv:2405.13144.
Koch, T., Achterberg, T., Andersen, E., Bastert, O., Berthold, T., Bixby, R.E., Danna, E., Gamrath, G., Gleixner, A.M., Heinz, S., Lodi, A.,
Mittelmann, H., Ralphs, T., Salvagnin, D., Steffy, D.E., Wolter, K., 2011.
MIPLIB 2010: mixed integer programming library version 5.
Mathematical Programming Computation 3, 103–163. doi:10.1007/s12532-011-0025-9.
Ku, W.Y., Beck, J.C., 2016. Mixed integer programming models for job shop scheduling: A computational analysis. Computers & Operations
Research 73, 165–173. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2016.04.006.
Leutwiler, F., Corman, F., 2023. A review of principles and methods to decompose large-scale railway scheduling problems. EURO Journal
on Transportation and Logistics 12, 100107. URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2192437623000043,
doi:10.1016/j.ejtl.2023.100107.
Li, B., Mellou, K., Zhang, B., Pathuri, J., Menache, I., 2023. Large language models for supply chain optimization. URL: https://arxiv.org/
abs/2307.03875, arXiv:2307.03875.
Maniadakis, D., Varoutas, D., 2013. Structural properties of urban street networks of varying population density, in: European Conference on
Complex Systems (ECCS’13), Barcelona, Spain. doi:10.13140/2.1.2483.7120.
McInnes, L., Healy, J., Astels, S., 2017. hdbscan: Hierarchical density based clustering. Journal of Open Source Software 2, 205. doi:10.21105/
joss.00205.
Miller, G.A., 1995. WordNet: a lexical database for English. Communications of the ACM 38, 39–41. doi:10.1145/219717.219748.
Nemhauser, G.L., Wolsey, L.A., 1988.
Integer and Combinatorial Optimization.
Wiley-Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and
Optimization, Wiley-Interscience, New York. doi:10.1002/9781118627372.
Page, M.J., McKenzie, J.E., Bossuyt, P.M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T.C., Mulrow, C.D., Shamseer, L., Tetzlaff, J.M., Akl, E.A., Brennan, S.E., Chou,
R., Glanville, J., Grimshaw, J.M., Hróbjartsson, A., Lalu, M.M., Li, T., Loder, E.W., Mayo-Wilson, E., McDonald, S., McGuinness, L.A., Stewart,
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 19 of 20


--- Page 21 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
L.A., Thomas, J., Tricco, A.C., Welch, V.A., Whiting, P., Moher, D., 2021. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting
systematic reviews. BMJ 372, n71. doi:10.1136/bmj.n71.
Pinedo, M.L., 2016. Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and Systems. 5th ed., Springer, Cham. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-26580-3.
Ramamonjison, R., Li, H., Yu, T., He, S., Rengan, V., Banitalebi-dehkordi, A., Zhou, Z., Zhang, Y., 2022. Augmenting operations research with
auto-formulation of optimization models from problem descriptions, in: Li, Y., Lazaridou, A. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track, Association for Computational Linguistics, Abu Dhabi, UAE. pp. 29–62.
URL: https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-industry.4/, doi:10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-industry.4.
Ramamonjison, R., Yu, T.T.L., Li, R., Li, H., Carenini, G., Ghaddar, B., He, S., Mostajabdaveh, M., Banitalebi-Dehkordi, A., Zhou, Z., Zhang, Y.,
2023. NL4Opt competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language descriptions, in: Proceedings of the NeurIPS
2022 Competitions Track. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v220/ramamonjison23a.html.
Rousseeuw, P.J., 1987. Silhouettes: a graphical aid to the interpretation and validation of cluster analysis. Journal of Computational and Applied
Mathematics 20, 53–65. doi:10.1016/0377-0427(87)90125-7.
Smith-Miles, K., Lopes, L., 2012. Measuring instance difficulty for combinatorial optimization problems. Computers & Operations Research 39,
875–889. doi:10.1016/j.cor.2011.07.006.
Tang, R., De Donato, L., Bešinović, N., Flammini, F., Goverde, R.M., Lin, Z., Liu, R., Tang, T., Vittorini, V., Wang, Z., 2022.
A literature
review of artificial intelligence applications in railway systems. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 140, 103679. URL:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0968090X22001206, doi:10.1016/j.trc.2022.103679.
Toth, P., Vigo, D. (Eds.), 2014. Vehicle Routing: Problems, Methods, and Applications. MOS-SIAM Series on Optimization. 2nd ed., SIAM,
Philadelphia, PA. doi:10.1137/1.9781611973594.
Veelenturf, L.P., Kidd, M.P., Cacchiani, V., Kroon, L.G., Toth, P., 2016.
A railway timetable rescheduling approach for handling large-scale
disruptions. Transportation Science 50, 841–862. doi:10.1287/trsc.2015.0618.
Wasserkrug, S., Boussioux, L., Sun, W., 2024. Combining large language models and or/ms to make smarter decisions, in: Tutorials in Operations
Research, INFORMS. pp. 1–49. URL: https://doi.org/10.1287/educ.2024.0275, doi:10.1287/educ.2024.0275.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 20 of 20


--- Page 22 ---
LP Mining with LP2Graph
RESCHEDULING
(reactive, under disruption)
OPERATIONS
(planning & control)
Railway
rescheduling
(𝑃1)
Railway
operations
(𝑃3)
Transportation
rescheduling (𝑃2)
Transportation
operations (𝑃4)
Production
rescheduling (𝑃5)
Production operations
(out of scope)
proximity →priority
Figure 2: Domain-shell model. Concentric shells order application domains by structural proximity to the target (railway ⊂
transportation, with production as an analogical outer shell); the horizontal split separates the target activity, rescheduling,
from the wider set of operations. Badges 𝑃1–𝑃5 give the corpus inclusion priority (activity-first, then domain); production
operations is excluded.
Identification. Database search (6 frozen queries): 45 records; 2 duplicates removed →43 unique. Other methods (citation
searching / snowballing): 10056 records identified.
Screening. 43 database records screened against the in-scope cells 𝑃1–𝑃5.
Eligibility. 286 reports retrieved and assessed; 48 excluded (10 full text not entitled, 15 no machine-readable formulas, 23
awaiting Tier-3 PDF extraction).
Included. 238 source papers contributing 8957 candidate formulations enter the mining pipeline.
Figure 3: PRISMA flow of corpus construction. Counts are generated deterministically from the corpus artifacts
(corpusbuilder.prisma) and re-imported as macros, so the figure tracks the corpus exactly. Counts shown are the
current pre-review snapshot.
J. Maurischat et al.: Preprint
Page 21 of 20
