--- Page 1 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Grid-Interactive Operation of Solar-Integrated Data
Centers for Coordinated Local and System-Level
Decarbonization
Mingxu Yang, Weiqi Zhang, Hui Geng, and Jiaze Ma
Abstract—The exponential growth of AI is accelerating the
deployment of data centers (DCs), placing unprecedented strain
on power infrastructures. In response, major IT corporations
are increasingly adopting on-site solar generation to reduce
grid dependence and meet sustainability targets. However, the
true impacts of this strategy remain ambiguous. While DCs
are flexible assets capable of temporal load-shifting, anchoring
them to self-generated power may inadvertently constrain their
grid responsiveness. To evaluate these trade-offs, we propose a
receding-horizon optimization (RHO) framework coordinating
job scheduling, grid interactions, and on-site solar generation
for a stand-alone DC. Our findings reveal a critical paradox:
although solar integration increases energy self-sufficiency and
reduces overall DC emissions, it inherently limits the facility’s
capacity to absorb low-cost, low-carbon electricity from the grid.
This implies a fundamental tension between individual corporate
sustainability goals and system-wide grid decarbonization.
Index Terms—Data center, on-site solar, energy market, green
computing
I. INTRODUCTION
D
RIVEN by the rapid development of AI, the electricity
consumption of DCs in the U.S. has reached 176 TWh in
2024, representing 4.4% of total U.S. electricity consumption
[1]. This is equivalent to the power used by 6.7 million
average American households. Meanwhile, it is projected that
electricity consumption by DCs in the U.S. will increase to
two to three times the 2024 level by 2028 driven by the
explosion of generative AI [1]. In 2024, the total greenhouse
gas emissions (GHGs) from U.S. DCs reached 61 billion kg of
CO2, which is comparable to the annual GHGs of 11 million
cars on the streets [1], [2]. The huge electricity demand from
DCs exerts substantial pressure on regional power supply and
grid stability [3]. Unfortunately, the expansion of power grid
infrastructure cannot keep pace with the exponential growth
of DCs, leading to delays in project deployment [4], [5].
To mitigate the impact of DCs’ electricity demand on
grid operations, electricity markets have introduced peak-
related penalties. DC electricity bills typically consist of usage
charges, which depend on the amount of electricity used
and the hourly electricity prices, and peak demand charges,
which depend on the largest electricity load of a DC over
M. Yang and J. Ma are with the City University of Hong Kong,
Tat Chee Avenue, Hong Kong (e-mail: mingxyang9-c@my.cityu.edu.hk; ji-
azema@cityu.edu.hk)(Corresponding author: Jiaze Ma.).
W. Zhang is with Uber Technologies Inc., 1655 3rd St, San Francisco, CA
94158 USA (e-mail: weiqiz@uber.com).
H. Geng is with the University of Wisconsin–Madison, 1415 Engineering
Dr., Madison, WI 53706 USA (e-mail: hgeng7@wisc.edu).
a period of time, such as the peak power load in a month
[6], [7]. Using Google DCs as an example, the peak de-
mand charges can account for up to 56% of the monthly
electricity bill [8]. As a result, large IT enterprises have now
recognized that exclusive reliance on the public power grid
is insufficient to ensure power supply reliability and business
continuity. This trend leads to the adoption of self-supply and
diversified power procurement strategies, such as deploying
on-site solar power to mitigate the reliance on the public
grid. In addition to economic and reliability considerations,
the development of renewable assets improves companies’
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) performance,
which in turn affects company image, investor confidence,
and market valuation [9]. Motivated by cost-effectiveness,
reliability, and ESG considerations, major IT companies are
turning to their own renewable and low-carbon energy sources,
such as solar and nuclear power. For instance, Amazon has
matched its DC electricity consumption through more than 52
renewable energy projects across Europe [10]. Microsoft and
Google have secured electricity supply through multiple solar
power agreements [11]–[13]. In an extreme case, Google have
even been involved in restarting a few nuclear power plants
or have entered into agreements with existing nuclear energy
providers to supply their DCs with low-carbon electricity [14].
Overall, the rapid expansion of DCs in the U.S. is placing
increasing pressure on traditional power grids, driving major
IT enterprises to pursue on-site renewable generation to ensure
power reliability, cost effectiveness, and ESG performance.
The on-site renewable generation can mitigate the reliance
on the public power grid, but the inherent variability of
renewable energy sources also exposes DCs to power fluc-
tuations [15], [16]. In parallel, the volatility of electricity
prices adds another layer of complexity to the operation of
the DC. Taking California as an example, electricity prices
exhibit large fluctuations, as the highest regional prices can
reach up to 1000 USD/MWh, while prices in the lowest-priced
regions may even fall below zero [17]. DCs’ jobs fluctuate
across diverse service types, as the incoming computing jobs
are random [15]. The joint volatility of renewable generation,
electricity prices, and computational demand therefore renders
DC scheduling inherently complex. At the same time, DC
job scheduling exhibits intrinsic flexibility, as a substantial
share of jobs can be deferred or curtailed, enabling demand-
side flexibility [18], [19]. The integration of on-site renewable
generation further complicates scheduling by requiring coor-
dinated decisions between self-generation, grid procurement
arXiv:2607.17089v1  [math.OC]  19 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
and DCs’ job management.
Motivated by the growing exposure of DCs to electricity
markets and on-site renewable generation, a substantial body
of literature has investigated job scheduling and energy man-
agement under volatile electricity prices, renewable output,
and random job demand. Early studies first focused on im-
proving quality of service (QoS) through job scheduling and
server provisioning [20]–[23]. As awareness of the massive
energy footprint of DCs increased, the field advanced toward
energy efficiency improvements that are sensitive to service
quality [24]–[28]. Subsequent studies incorporated dynamic
electricity prices and demand charges, demonstrating that load
shifting and market-aware scheduling can substantially reduce
operating costs [29]–[32]. Building on this line of work, our
previous study [33] proposed a RHO framework to coordinate
DC job scheduling with dynamic electricity markets, capturing
electricity price volatility and job flexibility in a rolling
decision-making setting. Driven by stringent environmental
policies and growing renewable energy penetration, recent
studies have demonstrated that the integration of renewable
energy sources can further reduce the DC’s operating costs
while strictly maintaining QoS guarantees [34]–[38]. However,
how on-site renewable generation affects optimal job schedul-
ing has received limited attention. DCs were also treated
solely as electricity consumers, the impact of on-site renewable
generation on the power grid is also unknown. As large-
scale DCs increasingly deploy on-site solar generation, the
interaction between market-driven scheduling incentives, non-
Fig. 1. DC scheduling under volatile electricity prices, solar inputs, and incoming computing jobs: DC has the flexibility to shift jobs based on solar availability
and electricity prices with a battery buffer. Solar power can be selectively allocated to the DC, the power grid, or the battery. The DC is jointly powered by
solar, battery, and the power grid.


--- Page 3 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
dispatchable self-generated power, and prosumer operation in-
troduces new operational trade-offs that are not fully captured
by existing receding-horizon formulations.
In this work, we extend our previous framework [33] to
jointly account for volatile electricity prices, dynamic solar
output, and flexible job migration. Due to their inherent
workload flexibility, DCs can act as temporally adaptable
loads, shifting computational demand to absorb surplus, low-
cost, and low-carbon electricity from the grid. However, the
integration of on-site solar fundamentally reshapes this role
by partially coupling energy consumption to local generation.
While self-generation reduces reliance on grid electricity, it
may also constrain the ability of DCs to respond to mar-
ket signals, limiting their participation in low-price periods
and weakening their effectiveness as demand-side flexibility
resources. In addition, solar deployment introduces capital
investment and embodied carbon emissions, further complicat-
ing its net environmental benefits. By anchoring operations to
on-site generation, solar integration may inadvertently reduce
the ability of DCs to utilize system-level low-carbon electricity
that is abundant but temporally concentrated, such as during
midday renewable peaks. As a result, it remains unclear
whether on-site solar can simultaneously deliver economic
savings and system-efficient decarbonization.
To address this gap, we develop a coordinated optimiza-
tion framework that captures the interaction between flexible
computing workloads, on-site solar generation, and electricity
market dynamics under realistic operating conditions. Our
results reveal a fundamental paradox: while integrating on-
site solar reduces total greenhouse gas emissions and lowers
electricity procurement costs at the facility level, it simultane-
ously increases the average carbon intensity of grid electricity
consumption and diminishes the ability of data centers to
act as flexible demand-side resources. This effect arises from
the temporal alignment between local solar generation and
grid-wide renewable availability, which limits the absorption
of surplus low-carbon electricity. These findings highlight a
misalignment between facility-level sustainability objectives
and system-level grid decarbonization, underscoring the need
for grid-interactive strategies that better coordinate distributed
renewable generation with flexible demand.
II. DC SCHEDULING AND ENERGY MANAGEMENT MODEL
We develop a computational framework for optimal DC job
scheduling and energy management. Following the formula-
tion in [33], we model the system using a RHO framework.
Upon receiving electricity prices, solar radiation forecasts,
and incoming job information, the decision-making framework
optimizes energy transactions, job execution, and energy flows
over a 168-hour receding horizon. Only the first-step decision
of each optimization horizon is implemented, while the re-
maining steps are updated in the next iteration. The final output
is obtained by concatenating the first-step decisions across all
horizons.
The DC consists of I = {1, 2, . . . , I} servers, and the
scheduling horizon is discretized into time steps with a total
length of T
= {1, 2, . . . , T}. Due to limitations in power
supply, the operator does not activate all |I| servers at every
time step. We define It
⊆I as the number of servers
available at time t. Each computing job is characterized by
two key attributes: the number of servers required and the
job’s running duration (in hours). We introduce two finite
sets: K = {1, 2, 4, 8, 16} denotes the set of possible server
requirements, and L = {1, 2, 4, ..., 168} denotes the set of
possible running durations. We define KL = K × L as the
set of all possible job-type combinations (server demand,
running time). Based on this structure, we aggregate the jobs
by grouping together those with identical resource demands
(k ∈K) and identical running durations (l ∈L). We define
Th as the optimization time for each round. For each time
r
∈T, the optimization time domain is represented as
Tr = {r, r + 1, ..., r + Th −1}. We further assume that all
jobs are independent and that their execution order does not
affect overall system performance.
A. Data Center Job Scheduling Model
Our goal is to maintain a high level of load completion
while minimizing the operational cost. To ensure the fun-
damental operational requirements of the DC, we include a
job-completion term in the objective function together with
penalties on peak demand and electricity usage. Our aim is
to complete incoming jobs as promptly as possible while
minimizing both energy expenses and peak electricity demand,
thereby reducing stress on the grid’s transmission network. We
first consider:
m(t) =
X
(k,l)∈KL
t
X
t′=st(t,l)
k nkl(t′) +
¯L−1
X
l=t−r+1
ul(t)
−
X
(tb,k,l)∈V (t)
k vtb
kl(r),
∀t ∈Tr,
(1)
m(t) ≤¯It,
∀t ∈Tr.
(2)
where st(t, l) = max{r, t −l + 1} represents the earliest start
time of a job of length l at time t. ¯L = max{L} and ¯It =
max{It}. V (t) := {(tb, k, l) | tb + l −t > 0, (k, l) ∈KL}
denotes the set of all tuples (tb, k, l)such that jobs of type (k, l)
started at time tb have not yet finished by time t. The decision
variables m(t) ∈Z+ and nkl(t′) ∈Z+ represent the number
of active servers at time t and the number of (k, l) type jobs
started at time t′, respectively. The decision variable vtb
kl(r) ∈
Z+ denotes the number of (k, l) jobs that are canceled at
the beginning of time r and were originally started at time
tb. The state variable ul(t) ∈Z+ represents the number of
servers occupied by jobs with a remaining time of l hours at
time t. Equation (1) defines the number of active servers, and
Equation (2) represents the server capacity constraint.
Then, we introduce the basic constraints of job scheduling.
We define N e
kl(t′) ∈Z+ as the expected number of (k, l)
type jobs at time t′. The state variables ˜nkl(r) ∈Z+ and
ˆntb
kl(r) ∈Z+ are the number of (k, l) type jobs in the waiting
queue at time r, and the number of (k, l) type jobs that started
at time tb and are still running at time r. Equations (3)–(5)


--- Page 4 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
define workload execution limits, backlog constraints, and job-
cancellation feasibility.
X
t′=r
nkl(t′) ≤
X
t′=r
N e
kl(t′) + ˜nkl(r),
∀(k, l) ∈KL,
(3)
r+Th−1
X
t′=r
nkl(t′) ≤
r+[Th/2]−1
X
t′=r
N e
kl(t′) + ˜nkl(r),
∀(k, l) ∈KL,
(4)
vtb
kl(r) ≤ˆntb
kl(r),
∀t ∈Tr, ∀(k, l) ∈KL.
(5)
We now discuss the constraints regarding power consump-
tion for the DC, we have:
P(m(t)) = g(t) = (Pp −Pi)m(t)
I
+ Pi,
∀t ∈Tr,
(6)
ψ(t) = g(t) · p(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(7)
G(r) ≥g(t),
∀t ∈Tr.
(8)
where P(m(t)) ∈R+ and g(t) ∈R+ represent the electricity
consumption and electricity purchased of DC from the grid at
time t. p(t) ∈R is the electricity price at time t, while ψ(t) ∈
R represents the DC usage charge. G(r) ∈R+ represents the
peak power at the current interval r. Pp ∈R+ and Pi ∈R+
are defined as the peak and idle power of DC.
For a detailed scheduling model, please refer to [33].
B. Energy Management with On-site Solar Power
After completing the DC job scheduling model, we con-
sidered the impact of adding on-site solar on the DC. We
introduced the decision variable s(t) ∈R+ and parameter
ξ(t) ∈R+, which represent the solar power consumed by
the DC at time t and the maximum energy that the on-site
solar system can provide. Since the on-site solar system can
be started and stopped within minutes [39], meaning it can
freely discard power, we have:
0 ≤s(t) ≤ξ(t),
∀t ∈Tr.
(9)
Consequently, in contrast to Equation (6), the electricity
procured from the power grid by the system will be given
by:
g(t) = (Pp −Pi)m(t)
I
+ Pi −s(t),
∀t ∈Tr.
(10)
That is, the amount of electricity purchased by the DC from
the grid at time t equals the total power consumption minus the
solar power utilized. If we want to consider that DC prioritizes
the consumption of its own generated solar power, we need
to set a constraint that the solar power s(t) used by DC at
time t is the minimum between the total energy consumption
P(m(t)) and the maximum solar power provided ξ(t). We
have:
s(t) = min{P(m(t)), ξ(t)},
∀t ∈Tr.
(11)
To linearize Equation (11), we introduce a big-M for-
mulation. Specifically, if P(m(t)) ≥ξ(t), then y(t) = 1
and s(t) = ξ(t). If P(m(t)) < ξ(t), then y(t) = 0 and
s(t) = P(m(t)), where M is selected to be sufficiently large.
From this formulation, we get:
s(t) ≥ξ(t) −M · (1 −y(t)),
∀t ∈Tr,
(12)
s(t) ≥P(m(t)) −M · y(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(13)
s(t) ≤P(m(t)),
∀t ∈Tr,
(14)
y(t) ∈{0, 1}.
(15)
We further consider that if a feedback mechanism is intro-
duced to sell excess solar power generated by the DC back to
the grid, then we have:
f(t) = ξ(t) −s(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(16)
ψ(t) = g(t) · p(t) −f(t) · x(t),
∀t ∈Tr.
(17)
where the decision variable f(t) ∈R+ denotes the amount of
power sold to the grid at time t, and parameter x(t) ∈R+
denotes the grid purchase price.
C. Battery Participation in Flexible Scheduling
After incorporating solar power, we aim to further enhance
the flexibility of the DC scheduling system by introducing the
battery. Consequently, the electricity supply of DC will have
three sources: solar generation, battery storage, and the power
grid. The energy generated by the solar system can be flexibly
allocated either directly to the DC, stored in the battery, or sold
back to the grid. We consider:
Q(t + 1) = Q(t) + ηin · bin(t) −
1
ηout
· bout(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(18)
0 ≤Q(t) ≤¯Q(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(19)
0 ≤bin(t) ≤¯bin,
∀t ∈Tr,
(20)
0 ≤bout(t) ≤¯bout,
∀t ∈Tr.
(21)
where the state variable Q(t) ∈R+ denotes the energy level
of the battery at time t. The decision variables bin(t) ∈R+
and bout(t) ∈R+ represent the amount of energy charged
into and discharged from the battery at time t. ¯Q(t) ∈R+,
¯bin ∈R+, and ¯bout ∈R+ denote the maximum energy
capacity of the battery, the maximum charging power, and
the maximum discharging power. The parameters ηin ∈R+
and ηout ∈R+ are the charging and discharging efficiency
coefficients. Equation (18) illustrates the state update of the
battery. To prevent the battery from charging and discharging
simultaneously at the same time, we have:
bin(t) · bout(t) = 0,
∀t ∈Tr.
(22)
To linearize it while preserving the model’s solvability, we
introduce a binary variable z(t) ∈{0, 1} for each time period
t, which indicates the operating mode of the battery:
bin(t) ≤¯bin · z(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(23)
bout(t) ≤¯bout · (1 −z(t)),
∀t ∈Tr.
(24)
Meanwhile, the amount of electricity purchased by the DC
from the grid at time t becomes the total power consumption


--- Page 5 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
minus the solar power used by the DC and the energy dis-
charged from the battery. Similarly, the amount of electricity
sold back to the grid by the DC at time t equals the total solar
generation minus the solar power consumed by the DC and
the energy charged into the battery. We have:
g(t) = (Pp −Pi)m(t)
I
+ Pi −s(t) −bout(t),
∀t ∈Tr,
(25)
f(t) = ξ(t) −s(t) −bin(t),
∀t ∈Tr.
(26)
D. Optimization Problem and Objective Function
This study aims to develop an integrated computational
framework that enables joint optimization of DC job schedul-
ing and energy management under dynamic conditions in-
cluding volatile electricity prices, fluctuating solar generation,
and time-varying job arrivals. We first consider incentives for
proactive job scheduling and guarantees on job completion,
leading to the following equation:
θ(r) =
X
t∈Tr
X
(k,l)∈KL
 (r + Th)kl −t

nkl(t)
−
X
(k,l)∈KL
r−1
X
tb=Trl
 (r + Th)kl −tb

vtb
kl(r)
(27)
where Trl represents the earliest start time of the job of (k, l)
type. The decision variable nkl(t) ∈Z+ represents the job
of (k, l) type starting at time t. The first term on the right-
hand side of the equation shows the reward for proactive job
scheduling, with (r+Th)kl−t as the reward weight, meaning
the earlier the job is scheduled, the greater the reward. The
second term shows the penalty for job cancellation, with (r +
Th)kl −tb as the penalty weight, meaning the later the job
is cancelled, the greater the penalty. Meanwhile, we introduce
λp ∈R+ as the penalty coefficients for peak power demand,
yielding the following RHO model at time intervals r over the
decision horizon Tr:
max
m,n,u,v,s θ(r) −λp · G(r) −
X
t∈Tr
ψ(t)
(28)
s.t. (1)–(27).
(29)
III. CASE STUDIES
We select a CAISO node (35.56°N, 118.96°W) with high
annual solar irradiance (234.58 Wh/m2, which is higher than
the state average 216.26 Wh/m2) and large price volatility
(mean 57.77 USD/MW, variance 2337.18). Five operational
strategies were simulated and compared:
(i) Grid-only operation with peak and usage penalties
(Case I): the DC procures all electricity from the grid.
The scheduling decisions respond only to usage charges
(time-varying electricity prices) and peak-demand penal-
ties; no on-site solar, feed-in, or storage is available.
(ii) Prioritized solar consumption (Case II): on-site solar is
used under a strict self-consumption priority. Whenever
solar is available, the DC is forced to consume solar up to
its instantaneous power demand, and any residual demand
is met by grid procurement; solar export is not allowed.
(iii) Flexible solar–grid co-optimization (Case III): solar
utilization is a decision variable. The model jointly
optimizes how much solar to use and how much grid
electricity to procure at each time step, allowing solar
curtailment when economically optimal; solar export is
not allowed.
(iv) Surplus solar feed-in to the grid (prosumer mode)
(Case IV): surplus solar can be exported to the grid under
a feed-in (LMP) price. The model jointly optimizes solar
self-consumption, solar export, and grid procurement,
enabling the DC to operate as a prosumer.
(v) Battery participation in flexible scheduling (Case V):
a battery is added to provide temporal shifting and
additional flexibility. Solar can be allocated among direct
DC use, battery charging, and grid export, while the
battery can be discharged to reduce grid purchases and
manage peak demand.
In our case study, we consider a large-scale DC with a
capacity of 20,000 servers, a peak power of 100 MW, and
an idle power of 30 MW. We set the solar capacity to 50 MW
[1], [40] with a battery capacity to solar capacity ratio of 1:1
[41]. We run a one-year closed-loop simulation (168 h horizon,
1 h resolution) in Julia 1.10.5 [42] with JuMP 1.23.2 [43] and
Gurobi 11.0.2 [44].
The values of λp are selected based on the current electricity
market conditions. The CAISO imposes relatively high peak
demand penalties (approximately 50 USD/kWh), while regions
such as Texas (ERCOT) and parts of the Midwest do not apply
such penalties. Accordingly, we consider λp = 0, 15 and 50,
where λp = 15 represents an national average penalty level
[45]. We find increasing λp introduces a small number of job
cancellations and slightly longer delays because the DC tends
to defer workloads to avoid peak demand charges. Cases with
on-site solar exhibit marginally lower scheduling flexibility,
whereas prosumer operation partially alleviates this effect.
Despite these trade-offs, service quality remains high, with job
completion rates consistently above 99.9% in all simulations.
Fig. 2 shows the job scheduling intensity of three arbitrary
days with different level of peak demand penalty. Due to the
periodicity of solar generation, electricity prices, and job input,
the scheduling results also exhibit clear periodic patterns.
When λp = 0, since solar power is insufficient to support
power consumption most of the time, the scheduling of jobs
for all cases strictly follows the power response to reduce
the electricity bill. When imposing a peak demand penalty
(λp ≥0), job scheduling remains flexible and responds to
both electricity prices and solar availability. The Case I mode
smooths the job deployment evenly and results in the lowest
peak penalty. Interestingly, in Cases II to IV, the DC not
only responds to the volatility of the solar power but also
schedules a large number of jobs to the night. This is because
during the daytime high-price period, the solar can only offset
part of the demand. Over-scheduling would result in high
costs, so the system chooses to sacrifice peak demand charge
to reduce overall costs. The introduction of the battery will
cause jobs to be scheduled more frequently during the daytime
when electricity prices are low and solar power is plentiful.
The storage characteristics allow it to avoid periods of high


--- Page 6 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
Fig. 2. Job scheduling under different peak demand penalties. Darker shades indicate higher scheduling intensity. (a) shows the changes in electricity price
and solar power over time. (b)-(d) represent job scheduling when λp = 0, 15, and 50. The DC schedules jobs based solely on electricity price when λp = 0.
As λp increases, the impact of solar power begins to manifest.
Fig. 3. Electricity purchasing pattern of the DC over time. Gray bars are electricity prices, and red lines are solar generation. In (a)–(e), blue lines denote
the amount of grid electricity purchased in Cases I–V, respectively. In (f), the dark gray line represents the battery state of charge in Case V. The addition of
on-site solar will not make the DC unresponsive to electricity prices, and battery storage provides greater flexibility.
electricity prices and make full use of solar power, while
avoiding excessive peak penalties and achieving minimal cost.
In Fig. 3, the electricity purchasing pattern in Case I is
clearly anti-correlated with the price trend: grid usage falls
when prices rise and increases when prices drop. In Cases
II and III, the on-site solar power offsets a large portion
of the grid’s electricity during the daytime, which dents
the electricity purchasing curve. Cases II and III not only
consume substantially less grid electricity than Case I but also
exhibit very similar purchasing patterns. This suggests that
regardless of whether a priority constraint on solar utilization
is imposed, the optimized decisions naturally favor available
solar generation in most situations. Meanwhile, the overall
consumption trend in these cases remains negatively correlated


--- Page 7 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
Fig. 4. Electricity cost of the DC under different λp. The gray bars represent the usage charge, and the scatter points denote the peak demand charge. Each
subfigure is divided into three sections corresponding to different values of λp. (a)–(d) illustrate the cost distribution for Case I, III, IV, and V, respectively.
Since the cost variations in Case II and Case III are nearly identical, Case III is used as the representative in (b). On-site solar can effectively reduce usage
charges, but it has little effect on peak demand charges.
Fig. 5. Carbon emissions analysis. (a) shows the sources of power generation
for CAISO and the average carbon intensity of the power grid over a day. (b)
shows the trade-off between total annual carbon emissions and the average
carbon intensity of grid electricity consumed by DC.
with electricity prices. As solar capacity does not exceed
that of DC and the solar power is absorbed by DC itself,
very little electricity is exported to the grid, so the electricity
purchasing pattern in Case IV is similar to that in Cases II
and III. For Case V, the introduction of the battery further
enhances flexibility in grid interaction. The purchasing pattern
becomes more volatile, reflecting the DC’s improved capability
to adjust and identify the optimal energy mix. The inclusion of
storage allows the DC to store energy when solar generation
is abundant and electricity prices are low, and to supply power
when solar output is insufficient and prices are high.
In Fig. 4, we compare the usage charge and peak demand
penalty across operational modes. In the first four cases, the
peak demand charges remain perfectly flat throughout the
year when penalties are enforced (λp = 15 and 50), as the
facility hits the exact same maximum instantaneous power
draw every single month. The introduction of on-site solar
reduces monthly usage charges, but it does not lower peak
demand by too much even with a high peak demand penalty
factor as λp = 50. The system trade off peak demand and
usage charges in order to achieve the lowest electricity cost.
Being flexible with electricity prices and ramping up the
system when the price is low provides a large incentive,
even if it causes a slightly higher peak demand. Case V
demonstrates that adding a battery fundamentally changes this
dynamic. Energy storage provides dispatch flexibility, allowing
the system to actively discharge during the specific hours of
maximum net load. This targeted peak shaving successfully
suppresses the monthly peak demand charges, with the most
savings achieved during the summer months when abundant


--- Page 8 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
Fig. 6. Electricity transactions during peak and off-peak hours. (a) and (b) show the distribution of electricity prices during off-peak and peak hours. (c)–(f)
show the net grid import from the grid in Cases I, III (Cases II and III have the identical patterns, and only one plot is presented here), IV, and V during
peak hours (red) and off-peak hours (blue). Incorporating an on-site solar facility, DCs discharge less power from the grid during peak hours while injecting
a larger amount of electricity into the grid during off-peak hours.
solar power reliably recharges the battery to offset cooling and
IT peaks.
In Fig. 5, the carbon intensity of grid electricity exhibits sig-
nificant intra-day variation driven by the real-time generation
mix. This overall intensity is determined by the fractional con-
tribution of each energy source and its specific emission factor.
A diurnal pattern is the marked decrease in carbon intensity
during midday hours, which directly corresponds to peak solar
generation on the grid. To decipher whether the on-site solar
affects the DC’s ability to absorb low-carbon electricity from
the grid, we present the total GHGs of the DC, accounting for
electricity-related carbon emissions, the annualized life-cycle
emissions of the solar PV and battery systems, and the average
carbon intensity of the consumed grid electricity. The baseline
average carbon intensity of electricity generation in CAISO
in 2023 is 0.216 kg CO2-eq per kWh [46]. A comparison
reveals that in Case I, active job scheduling enables the DC to
consume a relatively high share of low-carbon grid electricity.
When on-site solar is introduced, the DC’s overall energy mix
becomes cleaner; however, the remaining electricity purchased
from the grid tends to have a higher average carbon intensity.
This occurs because periods of abundant on-site solar gen-
eration in the CAISO region directly coincide with a high
share of utility-scale solar on the broader grid. Consequently,
strictly prioritizing on-site solar self-consumption during these
hours displaces the DC’s opportunity to absorb available
green electricity from the grid. The prosumer mode slighty


--- Page 9 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
mitigate this unintended effect. While adding battery storage
lowers the DC’s overall emissions without compromising its
ability to utilize low-carbon grid power too much, especially
when there is a high penalty on peak demand. Although the
annualized life cycle emissions of the on-site solar system
amount to 1.65 × 106 kg CO2-eq (estimated based on data
from [47]), the total DC emissions remain lower than those
of Case I after solar integration. The battery system generates
2.33×105 kg CO2-eq over its annualized life cycle (estimated
based on data from [48], [49]); therefore, the annual total
emissions in Case V are also at a low level. In summary,
the introduction of on-site solar can lower the total annual
GHGs of the DC by roughly 10-15%, but still constrains the
DC’s ability to absorb low-carbon electricity from the grid,
even with a flexible operating mode such as prosumer. The
reduction of total annual GHGs comes at a cost of more than a
10% increase in the average carbon intensity of the consumed
grid electricity.
To reveal the impact of an on-site solar facility on the DC’s
ability to serve as a temporally flexible asset for the grid, we
set the average DAM price of CAISO in 2023 for the studied
region as the 50% reference line. When the DAM price falls
within the range of 25%–75% of this average value, the elec-
tricity market is defined as operating under normal conditions,
while all remaining periods are classified as abnormal [50].
The abnormal periods are further divided into two categories:
when the electricity price is below 25%, the grid is considered
electricity sufficient (off-peak hour), whereas when the price
exceeds 75%, the grid is regarded as electricity insufficient
(peak hour) [51]. Fig. 6 presents the electricity prices and net
grid import (purchased electricity minus sold electricity) of the
DC during peak and off-peak hours. Figs. 6(a) and 6(b) show
that off-peak hours mainly occur at night as social electricity
consumption is low and during the summer as renewable
energy is abundant. Peak hours mainly occur in the early
morning and during winter. Particularly, CAISO electricity
prices were unusually high in January 2023, with a monthly
average price of 138.56 USD/MW [17]. For Case I, the DC has
the highest frequency of charging from the grid during peak
hours in January. Abnormal prices make it unavoidable for
the DC to purchase high-priced electricity. The integration of
on-site solar effectively reduces electricity purchases during
peak hours from 9 AM to 4 PM, when solar is abundant,
thereby alleviating grid stress. The battery storage decreases
and smooths peak-hour grid electricity usage. Instead of only
backing up the grid during the daytime when solar is available
(from 9 AM to 4 PM), the system also alleviates grid stress in
the early morning and at the evening, since the battery adds
another layer of temporal flexibility to the system. In Fig. 6(e)
– 6(f), the blue shade represents the frequency of net grid
import during off-peak hours. One can observe that DC tends
to discharge a slightly lower amount of electricity from the grid
during off-peak hours when integrating on-site solar. This is
because more computing jobs were completed in the daytime
when solar is on (since solar is free), and fewer computing
jobs were carried out during the nighttime even though the
electricity price is cheap. Especially when integrated with a
battery, this pattern becomes more obvious: the battery tends
to store the excess solar power, and the profit-oriented schedule
model prioritizes the use of stored solar power instead of off-
peak electricity from the grid. In summary, the addition of on-
site solar alleviates the grid stress in daytime (peak shaving)
but also constrains DC from absorbing off-peak electricity
since the DC is soaking into the on-site solar.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper developed a receding-horizon optimization
framework to coordinate data-center workload scheduling, grid
electricity procurement, on-site solar utilization, solar export,
and battery operation. Using a year-long CAISO case study,
we show that behind-the-meter solar reduces electricity costs
and total facility-level greenhouse gas emissions, but has lim-
ited impact on peak demand charges. More importantly, solar
self-consumption can increase the average carbon intensity of
the remaining grid electricity consumed by the data center,
because local solar generation often coincides with low-carbon
periods in the bulk grid. This reveals a trade-off between local
renewable self-sufficiency and system-level decarbonization.
Prosumer operation and battery storage partially mitigate this
trade-off by enabling solar export, temporal energy shifting,
and peak shaving. These results highlight the need to coor-
dinate local renewable utilization with grid-level price and
carbon signals when designing sustainable data centers.
REFERENCES
[1] A.
Shehabi,
S.
J.
Smith,
A.
Hubbard,
A.
Newkirk,
N.
Lei,
M.
A.
B.
Siddik,
B.
Holecek,
J.
Koomey,
E.
Masanet,
and
D. Sartor, “2024 united states data center energy usage report,”
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California, Tech.
Rep. LBNL-2001637, December 2024. [Online]. Available: https:
//eta-publications.lbl.gov/sites/default/files/2024-12/lbnl-2024-united-s
tates-data-center-energy-usage-report 1.pdf
[2] U.S.
Environmental
Protection
Agency
(EPA),
“Greenhouse
gas
emissions from a typical passenger vehicle,” Webpage, Jun. 2025, last
updated: June 12, 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online]. Available:
https://www.epa.gov/greenvehicles/greenhouse-gas-emissions-typical-p
assenger-vehicle
[3] T.
McLaughlin,
“Big
tech’s
data
center
boom
poses
new
risk
to us grid operators,” Article, Mar. 2025, reuters. Last updated:
March 20, 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.reuters.com/technology/big-techs-data-center-boom-poses-new
-risk-us-grid-operators-2025-03-19/
[4] International Energy Agency (IEA), “Electricity 2025,” Webpage, Feb.
2025, accessed: 2025-12-24. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/
reports/electricity-2025
[5] Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), “Product id: 3002028905,”
Webpage, 2025, accessed: 2025-12-24. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.epri.com/research/products/000000003002028905
[6] Z. Liu, A. Wierman, Y. Chen, B. Razon, and N. Chen, “Data cen-
ter demand response: Avoiding the coincident peak via workload
shifting and local generation,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMET-
RICS/international conference on Measurement and modeling of com-
puter systems, 2013, pp. 341–342.
[7] Z. Liu, I. Liu, S. Low, and A. Wierman, “Pricing data center demand
response,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 42,
no. 1, pp. 111–123, 2014.
[8] M. Dabbagh, B. Hamdaoui, A. Rayes, and M. Guizani, “Shaving
data center power demand peaks through energy storage and workload
shifting control,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, vol. 7, no. 4,
pp. 1095–1108, 2017.
[9] R. Galema and D. Gerritsen, “Esg rating changes and stock returns,”
Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 154, p. 103309, 2025.
[10] Amazon, “Carbon-free energy,” Webpage, 2025, amazon Sustainability.
Last updated: 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online]. Available: https:
//sustainability.aboutamazon.com/climate-solutions/carbon-free-energy


--- Page 10 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
[11] J. Leong, “Microsoft (msft) signs solar deal with zelestra to power data
centers in spain, supporting community projects,” Article, Nov. 2025,
carbon Credits. Published: November 26, 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-15.
[Online]. Available: https://carboncredits.com/microsoft-msft-signs-sol
ar-deal-with-zelestra-to-power-data-centers-in-spain-supporting-com
munity-projects/
[12] Constellation Energy, “Constellation to launch crane clean energy
center, restoring jobs and carbon-free power to the grid,” Press
Release,
Sep.
2024,
constellation
Energy
Newsroom.
Published:
September 20, 2024. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online]. Available:
https://www.constellationenergy.com/newsroom/2024/Constellation-t
o-Launch-Crane-Clean-Energy-Center-Restoring-Jobs-and-Carbon-Fre
e-Power-to-The-Grid.html
[13] T. De Chant, “Google’s data center power playbook comes into focus,”
Webpage, Mar. 2026, accessed: 2026-04-03. [Online]. Available:
https://techcrunch.com/2026/03/17/googles-data-center-power-playboo
k-comes-into-focus/
[14] G. Wehner, “Google strikes major nuclear power deal to fuel ai data
centers with 50 megawatt capacity,” Article, Aug. 2025, new York
Post. Published: August 19, 2025. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online].
Available: https://nypost.com/2025/08/19/tech/google-strikes-major-nuc
lear-power-deal-to-fuel-ai-data-centers-with-50-megawatt-capacity/
[15] W. E. Gnibga, A. Blavette, and A.-C. Orgerie, “Renewable energy in
data centers: the dilemma of electrical grid dependency and autonomy
costs,” IEEE transactions on sustainable computing, vol. 9, no. 3, pp.
315–328, 2023.
[16] P. Bojek and International Energy Agency (IEA), “Special report
on solar pv global supply chains,” IEA Special Report, Jul. 2022,
lead author: Piotr Bojek. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iea.org/reports/solar-pv-global-supply-chains
[17] California Independent System Operator (CAISO), “Today’s outlook:
Prices,” Webpage, 2025, real-time and day-ahead wholesale electricity
price map for the CAISO market. Accessed: 2025-12-15. [Online].
Available: https://www.caiso.com/todays-outlook/prices
[18] M. Ghamkhari and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Energy and performance man-
agement of green data centers: A profit maximization approach,” IEEE
transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 1017–1025, 2013.
[19] W. Zhang and V. M. Zavala, “Quantifying space-time load shifting
flexibility in electricity markets,” Computers & Chemical Engineering,
vol. 177, p. 108338, 2023.
[20] A. Beloglazov and R. Buyya, “Managing overloaded hosts for dynamic
consolidation of virtual machines in cloud data centers under quality
of service constraints,” IEEE transactions on parallel and distributed
systems, vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1366–1379, 2012.
[21] C. Delimitrou and C. Kozyrakis, “Paragon: Qos-aware scheduling for
heterogeneous datacenters,” Acm SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 48, no. 4, pp.
77–88, 2013.
[22] Y. Gu and C. Budati, “Energy-aware workflow scheduling and opti-
mization in clouds using bat algorithm,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, vol. 113, pp. 106–112, 2020.
[23] M. Sharma and R. Garg, “An artificial neural network based approach
for energy efficient task scheduling in cloud data centers,” Sustainable
Computing: Informatics and Systems, vol. 26, p. 100373, 2020.
[24] A. Beloglazov and R. Buyya, “Energy efficient allocation of virtual
machines in cloud data centers,” in 2010 10th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing.
IEEE, 2010, pp.
577–578.
[25] S. Wang, A. Zhou, C.-H. Hsu, X. Xiao, and F. Yang, “Provision of data-
intensive services through energy-and qos-aware virtual machine place-
ment in national cloud data centers,” IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computing, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 290–300, 2015.
[26] H. Yuan, J. Bi, J. Zhang, and M. Zhou, “Energy consumption and
performance optimized task scheduling in distributed data centers,” IEEE
transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics: systems, vol. 52, no. 9,
pp. 5506–5517, 2021.
[27] M. Ghamkhari, A. Wierman, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “Energy portfolio
optimization of data centers,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 8,
no. 4, pp. 1898–1910, 2016.
[28] H. Li, G. Zhu, Y. Zhao, Y. Dai, and W. Tian, “Energy-efficient and
qos-aware model based resource consolidation in cloud data centers,”
Cluster Computing, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2793–2803, 2017.
[29] K. Le, R. Bianchini, M. Martonosi, and T. D. Nguyen, “Cost-and energy-
aware load distribution across data centers,” Proceedings of hotpower,
vol. 1, 2009.
[30] S. Bahrami, V. W. Wong, and J. Huang, “Data center demand response
in deregulated electricity markets,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid,
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 2820–2832, 2018.
[31] Y. Zhang, D. C. Wilson, I. C. Paschalidis, and A. K. Coskun, “Hpc data
center participation in demand response: An adaptive policy with qos
assurance,” IEEE transactions on sustainable computing, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 157–171, 2021.
[32] Y. Zhang, A. Tsiligkaridis, I. C. Paschalidis, and A. K. Coskun, “Data
center and load aggregator coordination towards electricity demand
response,” Sustainable Computing: Informatics and Systems, vol. 42,
p. 100957, 2024.
[33] W. Zhang, L. Roald, and V. Zavala, “Exploring the impacts of power grid
signals on data center operations using a receding-horizon scheduling
model,” IEEE Transactions on Sustainable Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
245–256, 2022.
[34] C. Wang, B. Urgaonkar, Q. Wang, and G. Kesidis, “A hierarchical
demand response framework for data center power cost optimization
under real-world electricity pricing,” in 2014 IEEE 22nd International
Symposium on Modelling, Analysis & Simulation of Computer and
Telecommunication Systems.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 305–314.
[35] W. He, Q. Xu, S. Liu, T. Wang, F. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Wang, and H. Li,
“Analysis on data center power supply system based on multiple renew-
able power configurations and multi-objective optimization,” Renewable
Energy, vol. 222, p. 119865, 2024.
[36] D. Lagan`a, C. Mastroianni, M. Meo, and D. Renga, “Reducing the
operational cost of cloud data centers through renewable energy,”
Algorithms, vol. 11, no. 10, p. 145, 2018.
[37] X. Peng, T. Bhattacharya, T. Cao, J. Mao, T. Tekreeti, and X. Qin, “Ex-
ploiting renewable energy and ups systems to reduce power consumption
in data centers,” Big Data Research, vol. 27, p. 100306, 2022.
[38] A. Agarwal, J. Sun, S. Noghabi, S. Iyengar, A. Badam, R. Chandra,
S. Seshan, and S. Kalyanaraman, “Redesigning data centers for renew-
able energy,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics
in Networks, 2021, pp. 45–52.
[39] C. Loutan, P. Klauer, S. Chowdhury, S. Hall, M. Morjaria, V. Chadliev,
N. Milam, C. Milan, and V. Gevorgian, “Demonstration of essential
reliability services by a 300-mw solar photovoltaic power plant,” NREL
(National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO (United
States)), Tech. Rep., 2017.
[40] R. Luthander, A. M. Nilsson, J. Wid´en, and M. ˚Aberg, “Graphical
analysis of photovoltaic generation and load matching in buildings: A
novel way of studying self-consumption and self-sufficiency,” Applied
Energy, vol. 250, pp. 748–759, 2019.
[41] Battery
Skills,
“How
much
solar
battery
capacity
do
i
need,”
Webpage, Mar. 2026, accessed: 2026-03-22. [Online]. Available:
https://batteryskills.com/how-much-solar-battery-capacity-do-i-need/
[42] J. Bezanson, A. Edelman, S. Karpinski, and V. B. Shah, “Julia: A fresh
approach to numerical computing,” SIAM review, vol. 59, no. 1, pp.
65–98, 2017.
[43] I. Dunning, J. Huchette, and M. Lubin, “Jump: A modeling language for
mathematical optimization,” SIAM review, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 295–320,
2017.
[44] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “The leader in decision intelligence
technology - gurobi optimization,” Webpage, Mar. 2026, accessed:
2025-07-27. [Online]. Available: https://www.gurobi.com/
[45] J. A. McLaren, P. J. Gagnon, and S. Mullendore, “Identifying potential
markets for behind-the-meter battery energy storage: A survey of us
demand charges,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL),
Golden, CO (United States), Tech. Rep., 2017.
[46] California Independent System Operator (CAISO), “Today’s outlook:
Demand,” Webpage, 2026, accessed: 2025-07-27. [Online]. Available:
https://www.caiso.com/todays-outlook
[47] A. Danelli, E. Brivio, P. Girardi, N. Baggio, and J. Libal, “Environmental
life cycle assessment of passivated emitter and rear contact (perc)
photovoltaic module technology,” International Energy Agency (IEA)
PVPS Task, vol. 12, 2024.
[48] International
Energy
Agency
(IEA),
“Ev
battery
supply
chain
sustainability:
Life
cycle
impacts
and
the
role
of
recycling,”
Report, Dec. 2024, accessed: 2026-03-22. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.iea.org/reports/ev-battery-supply-chain-sustainability
[49] W. Cole, V. Ramasamy, and M. Turan, “Cost projections for utility-scale
battery storage: 2025 update,” National Renewable Energy Laboratory
(NREL), Golden, CO (United States), Tech. Rep., 2025.
[50] J. Luoma, P. Mathiesen, and J. Kleissl, “Forecast value considering
energy pricing in california,” Applied energy, vol. 125, pp. 230–237,
2014.
[51] M. Kohansal, A. Sadeghi-Mobarakeh, and H. Mohsenian-Rad, “A data-
driven analysis of supply bids in california iso market: Price elasticity
and impact of renewables,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on


--- Page 11 ---
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 58–
63.
