--- Page 1 ---
The Model in the Middle: Toward AI-Native
Real-Time Communication
Ziqian Liu
The University of Hong Kong
Minghao Li
The University of Hong Kong
Yiming Qiu
The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
Full-duplex omni models are transforming human–AI interac-
tion from turn-based exchanges into continuous multimodal
conversations in which speaking, listening, and reasoning
unfold concurrently. Rather than viewing the model as a re-
placement for a human endpoint, we argue for a new per-
spective: the model is a stateful computational middlebox
inside a human-centered feedback loop, with network trans-
port, model serving, and user playback jointly shaping how
the interaction evolves. This perspective breaks the traditional
boundaries among stages designed around local objectives.
Rather than optimizing them in isolation, an AI-native real-
time stack should allow the state of each stage to shape the
actions of the others. We explore three cross-stage coordi-
nation opportunities: network-aware inference scheduling,
execution-aware transport prioritization, and playback control
that accounts for both network and model variability. We are
building CONFLUX to explore these ideas, and preliminary
results show substantial improvements in response latency
and playback deadline adherence under network degradation.
More broadly, we call for an AI-native real-time communi-
cation stack that resolve the joint control problem spanning
communication, computation, and playback.
1
Introduction
Large language models are rapidly moving beyond turn-based
question answering toward real-time, full-duplex multimodal
interaction [12, 14, 29, 37, 42, 49]. Instead of submitting a
complete query and waiting for a response, users can speak
while sharing their camera or screen, interrupt the model
mid-sentence, point to new visual evidence, and continuously
refine their intent as the interaction unfolds. A growing land-
scape of systems, as shown in Figure 1, including Gemini
Live [18], Qwen-3.5-Omni-Realtime [31], and GPT-Live [1],
is beginning to support this experience. Their capabilities en-
able applications ranging from visual assistance [12, 21, 30]
and real-time translation [11, 17, 34] to meeting agents [5, 20],
interactive avatars [10, 19, 39], and embodied AI [13, 25].
More fundamentally, they turn model interaction into a con-
tinuous real-time process in which perception, reasoning, gen-
eration, and user feedback overlap in time [1, 43].
Conventional real-time communication [2, 3, 15] and LLM
serving [23, 44, 48] both operate under a sender–receiver ab-
straction: one endpoint produces information and the other
GPT-Live
Gemini Live
JoyAI
Seeduplex
Jul. 2026
Jun. 2026
Apr. 2026
May. 2025
Qwen-3.5-Omni-Realtime
Hunyuan Voice
Apr. 2026
Aug. 2024
Jun. 2025
GLM-Realtime
Figure 1: Real-time omni-model development.
Audio
Video
Text
Client
Chunk
Transport
WebSocket
WebRTC
WebTransport
Server
Inference Framework
(Buffer, Schedule, Preprocess)
Modality Encoder
LLM (AR)
Modality Generator
Omni model
Figure 2: Full-duplex omni-model workflow.
consumes it, whether that receiver is human or AI. Full-duplex
omni-model interaction calls for a fundamentally different
perspective. As Figure 2 shows, a full-duplex model continu-
ously updates its state from streaming chunks while producing
corresponding output chunks from that evolving state, form-
ing a latency-sensitive uplink–model–downlink path. As such,
we argue that a full-duplex model is best understood as a
stateful computational middlebox inside a human-centered
feedback loop. The central shift is not that one receiver be-
comes AI, but that communication, computation, and user
reaction now co-evolve as a single closed-loop system.
This closed-loop structure breaks the traditional boundaries
among network transport, model serving, and user playback.
These components were designed around different local objec-
tives: transport delivers media efficiently, model serving man-
ages inference latency and throughput, and playback absorbs
jitter to maintain smooth output. In full-duplex interaction,
however, each component changes the operating conditions
faced by the others. Network delay determines when input be-
comes available to the model; model serving determines when
chunks enter the downlink; and the model’s modality, fidelity,
and freshness requirements constrain what the network must
deliver. Playback must then absorb variability introduced by
both the network and the model. Full-duplex AI thus shifts
the design focus from optimizing individual stages to jointly
optimizing their interactions across the end-to-end path.
1
arXiv:2607.25792v1  [cs.NI]  28 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Ziqian Liu, Minghao Li, and Yiming Qiu
In this paper, we envision an AI-native real-time communi-
cation stack that accounts for the interactions among network
transport, model serving, and user playback. Unlike recent
systems that optimize communication via costly model con-
text and task semantics [7, 40], we argue that broad cross-
stage coordination can be achieved through execution-level
properties. Our central idea is that chunks provide a com-
mon coordination substrate across the end-to-end path. As a
chunk progresses through transport, inference, and playback,
it can carry and accumulate cross-stage signals such as the
remaining latency budget, while preserving a stable identity.
We therefore call for chunk-level interfaces that expose the
system conditions and requirements needed for coordination.
Such interfaces allow stages to jointly determine when each
chunk should be transmitted, processed, and presented, with-
out requiring them to understand what the chunk means.
Our first observation is that network conditions can change
the urgency and usefulness of model-serving work. Conven-
tional serving schedulers make admission and batching deci-
sions largely from server-local signals, such as queuing time,
request age, and GPU efficiency. In full-duplex interaction,
however, chunks reach the model after accumulating different
amounts of network delay, leaving them with different remain-
ing latency budgets. A delayed barge-in or turn-transition
chunk may require immediate processing before the model
produces more obsolete output, whereas a visual update may
already be too stale to justify further queuing or computation.
Model serving should therefore schedule chunks by their re-
maining value to the interaction, not merely by their arrival
order or batching efficiency.
Conversely, our second observation is that the model can ex-
pose how input chunks should compete for network resources.
We argue that transport prioritization need not depend on
online semantic interpretation [7, 40], because full-duplex
chunks already differ in execution-level properties: some are
urgent or irreplaceable, some require reliable delivery, while
others can be degraded, deferred, or replaced by fresher in-
puts. The model runtime can expose these properties as a
transport specification, which the sender combines with dy-
namic signals such as deadline slack and network conditions
to prioritize chunks across modalities and channels. This
allows barge-in, speech, control traffic, and visual context
to take precedence over one another without requiring the
transport to infer what any chunk means. The opportunity is
therefore to make network transport execution-aware without
making it semantics-aware.
Our third observation is that full-duplex AI presents a new
playback decision: when should each model response begin?
Conventional real-time communication maintains an ongo-
ing media timeline, with buffering primarily used to absorb
network jitter. A full-duplex model, in contrast, alternates
between listening and producing finite responses. Each time
Model Inference
Uplink
Downlink
Frame:480p
Queue and Batch
Audio:16kbps
Chunk size: 500ms
Text
Chunk 1
Chunk2
...
Inference Engine
Timeline
1000ms
Arrive at 1200ms
Delay!
Last input
captured
Uplink 
chunk sent
Inference 
starts
First output 
arrives
Playback
Starts
t0
t1
t2
t3
t4
TTFR
Figure 3: Full-duplex omni-model transport flow.
a response starts, the receiver must establish a new playback
timeline from the first output chunk. Starting immediately
minimizes time to first response, but leaves little protection
if subsequent chunks are delayed; waiting creates playback
slack, but directly slows the interaction. Moreover, future
arrivals depend not only on downlink conditions, but also
on model serving progress. AI-native playback must there-
fore decide when each response is ready to begin, absorbing
variability across the entire uplink-model-downlink path.
We are building CONFLUX, an AI-native real-time com-
munication system that instantiates these observations across
transport, model serving, and playback stages. We describe its
design principles and provide initial evidence of its potential.
2
Motivation
2.1
Transport Pattern in Full-Duplex AI
Full-duplex omni-models treat chunks as the basic transport
objects. As shown in Figure 3, each uplink chunk represents
a bounded interaction interval, e.g., a 500 ms window, and
contains multiple aligned modalities, such as speech samples
at a given bitrate, selected video frames with configurable res-
olution and frame rate, text, and control events. These chunks
are transmitted over the uplink using transport channels such
as WebRTC or WebSocket. Then, each input chunk proceeds
through the server-side model pipeline, where it is prepro-
cessed, encoded, and batched. The autoregressive LLM sub-
sequently samples an interaction action: silence, producing
no media output; delegate, invoking a background task; or re-
sponse. A response action generates a token sequence, which
is rendered by modality-specific generators, such as TTS,
and packaged into a sequence of output chunks for downlink
delivery. This process establishes a logical correspondence be-
tween each input chunk and the resulting output chunks. The
receiver maintains a playback timeline anchored by the first
output chunk, with subsequent deadlines determined by chunk
duration and playback buffer. Chunks arriving before their
deadlines enable continuous playback, whereas late arrivals
introduce gaps and user-perceived glitches.
2


--- Page 3 ---
The Model in the Middle: Toward AI-Native Real-Time Communication
Q: Describe large language model.
A: Large language model is a type...
Q: Stop, what is on my hand? (barge-in)
A: It is a white cup.(barge-in succeed)
Good
Q: Stop, what is on my hand? (barge-in)
A:  of artificial intelligence...(continue last question)
Bad
First round
Figure 4: A barge-in example.
Table 1: Barge-in latency by network condition.
Metric
Good
Constrained
Limited
Bad
Bandwidth (Mbps)
20
10
5
2.5
RTT (ms)
20
40
80
160
Jitter (ms)
0
5
10
20
Barge-in latency (ms)
542.7
686.6
1202.9
5040.9
2.2
Network-Conditioned Model Behavior
In traditional media systems, a poor network condition mainly
appears as receiver-side quality degradation, such as stalls and
lower resolution [16, 22, 26, 28, 35]. In full-duplex AI media,
however, it can affect what content is produced in the first
place, because delayed input changes the model state from
which subsequent outputs are generated. Take user barge-in
as an example, the signal must enter the model’s inference
loop so that the model can update its interaction state and
decide to stop speaking and listen to the new input. As shown
in Figure 4, after the model starts answering the first ques-
tion, the user interrupts with a new visual question. Under a
good network condition, the model receives the interruption
in time and switches to the new responses, while under net-
work degradation, the delayed barge-in causes it to continue
the obsolete response. Table 1 shows this case quantitatively
in MiniCPM-o-4.5 Demo [9] with voice activity detection
(VAD [36]) setup: as network condition degrades, barge-in
latency increases from 542.7 ms to 5040.9 ms.
To ensure the timely processing of interaction-sensitive
inputs, full-duplex model serving needs to become inher-
ently network-aware. The inference scheduler should main-
tain lightweight per-session information, such as speaking
state, input queuing delay, and, crucially, network conditions.
Using these signals, the runtime can determine whether a
chunk should be admitted immediately, preempt ongoing
work, or tolerate a short delay to improve batching efficiency.
In particular, network and session state reveal whether addi-
tional waiting would merely increase latency or further reduce
the usefulness of ongoing generation. Therefore, full-duplex
AI media should schedule model inference in a network- and
session-aware manner rather than relying solely on request
arrival order or GPU utilization [33, 38, 45].
Insight 1: Model inference should be per-session and
network-aware to optimize end-to-end interaction quality.
Table 2: Modality-specific transport characteristics.
Modality
Urgent?
Reliable?
Replaceable?
Adaptive?
Control
High
High
No
No
Audio
High
Medium
No
Yes
Video
Medium
Low
Yes
Yes
Text
Medium
High
No
No
2.3
Model-Defined Transport Requirements
Recent work [27, 40, 41] shows that model accuracy does
not improve monotonically with input volume: insufficient
fidelity can cause inference errors, while additional data pro-
vides little benefit beyond a sufficient quality level. However,
identifying this boundary from the semantic context of each
request requires task-specific online analysis and is costly and
difficult to operationalize in transport; for example, CLIP-
based ROI identification incurs 27.13% additional inference
cost [32, 41]. Our key observation is that multimodal inputs al-
ready have distinct and well-defined roles in model interaction.
As shown in Table 2, control events, audio, video, and text dif-
fer in urgency, reliability, replaceability, and adaptability. For
example, control events and speech directly affect turn-taking,
visual frames provide replaceable grounding evidence, and
text often carries exact symbols that require reliable delivery.
Omni-models should therefore expose explicit modality-
specific transport requirements, including minimum fidelity,
tunable operating ranges, latency sensitivity, reliability, and
cross-modal alignment constraints. The transport layer can
then satisfy the minimum requirements needed for accurate
inference while avoiding unnecessary transmission, and inde-
pendently map each modality to suitable channels or network
paths rather than applying a uniform policy to all inputs. The
resulting objective is an accuracy-bounded performance opti-
mization: deliver sufficient model-useful evidence within its
validity window while minimizing transmission overhead and
end-to-end delay.
Insight 2: Omni-models should expose modality-specific
requirements to enable model-defined transport.
2.4
Interaction QoE and Playback Deadlines
Traditional real-time video transport optimizes continuous
media streams, where receiver-side buffering primarily ab-
sorbs packet-arrival variation and maintains smooth play-
back [4, 6, 8, 46, 47]. AI-native real-time communication
exposes a different optimization space: model outputs arrive
as discrete response chunks whose timing depends on both
network conditions and model execution. User-perceived qual-
ity therefore depends on how quickly a response begins and
whether later chunks arrive before their playback deadlines.
We characterize interaction QoE using two metrics: Time to
First Response (TTFR), which measures the delay until the
3


--- Page 4 ---
Ziqian Liu, Minghao Li, and Yiming Qiu
Receiver-side Playback 
Schedule
④,⑦,⑧
Network-aware Model 
Inference
②,③,④,⑦,⑧
Sender-side 
Cross-layer Transport
①,②,③,④,⑤,⑥
Deadline Miss
Jitter
Inference Latency
Throughput
Bandwidth        
TTFR
RTT
Model
Network
Playback
①
②
③
④
⑥
⑦
⑧
Signal
Gatherer
Model-Centric Spec①
⑤
Figure 5: CONFLUX Overview.
first useful output reaches the user, as shown in Figure 3, and
Deadline Miss (DM), which captures the accumulated delay
time of chunks that miss their playback deadlines.
After the first chunk arrives, the receiver waits for a buffer
interval before starting playback. Let 𝑡0 denote the arrival
time of the first output chunk 0, 𝑏0 the initial playback buffer,
and 𝑑𝑖the media duration of chunk 𝑖. Playback begins at time
𝑡0 + 𝑏0, which anchors the response timeline. Accordingly,
the playback deadline of chunk 1 is 𝑡0 + 𝑏0 + 𝑑0. A smaller 𝑏0
reduces TTFR, whereas a larger 𝑏0 provides more slack for
subsequent arrivals and reduces DM. Unlike the jitter buffer
of a continuous stream, 𝑏0 can be selected independently for
each model response based on network conditions, model
backpressure, and recent interaction latency.
Insight 3: Playback should be scheduled based on net-
work delay and model backpressure to maximize QoE.
3
Research Agenda
As illustrated in Figure 5, CONFLUX uses model, network, and
playback signals to coordinate three runtime actions. Model
signals expose modality requirements and inference backpres-
sure; network signals such as RTT, bandwidth, and jitter esti-
mate chunk delivery conditions; and playback signals such as
TTFR and DM reflect interaction quality. Guided by these sig-
nals, the sender adapts chunk size, modality channels, fidelity,
and reliability; the server prioritizes chunks for immediate
inference, batching, or degradation based on urgency and
staleness; and the receiver adjusts the first-chunk playback
buffer using end-to-end latency. Together, these coordinated
actions form an end-to-end control loop that adapts transport,
inference, and playback to the evolving interaction state.
3.1
Sender-Side Cross-Layer Transport
The sender is the first control point in the full-duplex AI me-
dia loop. It observes cross-layer signals before deciding how
to schedule outgoing chunks and coordinate multiple modal-
ity channels. These signals include the model specification,
1
channels:
2
audio:
3
protocol: WebSocket
4
direction: uplink downlink
5
params:
6
audio_bitrate:
7
channel: audio
8
range: 8 48 default 24 kbps
9
video_resolution:
10
channel: video
11
values: 240 360 480 720 default 480 px
12
chunk_size:
13
values: 0.5 1 2 default 1 s
14
signals:
15
server_tbt_threshold: 40 ms
16
server_ttft_threshold: 120 ms
17
loop:
18
policy: delay-gradient-aimd
19
interval: 1000 ms
Figure 6: Example model-centric transport specification.
which defines the input requirements, as well as runtime sig-
nals from network and inference engine that indicate whether
the current input path can deliver and process chunks timely.
As shown in Figure 6, the specification exposes the trans-
port configuration available to the sender, including media
channels and protocols, tunable parameters, runtime feedback
signals, and the adaptation policy. The channels field declares
the logical media channels, their transport protocol, and di-
rection. The params field defines configurable knobs, such as
audio bitrate, video resolution, and chunk duration, together
with their valid ranges or candidate values and default settings.
It can also define an adaptation order, allowing the sender to
reduce less critical dimensions first, such as lowering video
resolution before audio bitrate when speech freshness and
intelligibility are more important than visual fidelity. The sig-
nals field combines network measurements, including RTT,
jitter, loss, and available bandwidth, with server-side model
backpressure indicators such as chunk serving latency, pro-
cessing throughput, and TTFT.
At runtime, the sender applies the configured policy to
translate the specification and cross-layer observations into
a joint transmission decision across modality channels. The
decision determines which chunks should be degraded, de-
ferred, or discarded based on their latency sensitivity, dead-
line slack, and relevance to the current interaction, allowing
speech, barge-in, and control events to take precedence over
less urgent visual content. The policy can range from light-
weight threshold-based or delay-gradient AIMD controllers
to model predictive control or learned policies, depending on
the available system model and runtime data.
4


--- Page 5 ---
The Model in the Middle: Toward AI-Native Real-Time Communication
3.2
Network-Aware Model Inference
Full-duplex AI media requires network-aware inference sched-
uling that accounts for each session’s interaction state and
end-to-end latency. The key question is not only whether de-
laying a chunk improves serving efficiency, but whether it
changes the chunk’s meaning or usefulness. The scheduler
therefore maintains lightweight per-session context, including
duplex phase, turn and interaction states, recent QoE, network
quality, output progress, and inference backlog. Each chunk
is scheduled based on these states before admission, allowing
the runtime to prioritize state-changing events while batching
less urgent inputs for better throughput.
Box 1: State-Aware Inference Scheduling Policy.
(1) Update network, QoE, and inference states.
(2) For each pending chunk 𝑐in session 𝑠,
𝑃(𝑠,𝑐) = 𝑃𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦𝐹𝑢𝑛𝑐(𝐼(𝑠,𝑐) + 𝑄(𝑠) + 𝑁(𝑠)),
𝑃: Priority, 𝐼: Interaction state, 𝑄: QoE, 𝑁: Network.
(3) Sum over priority of current batched chunks 𝐶and
select action 𝐴based on threshold 𝜃.
𝐴(𝑠) =
(
ADMITNOW,
Í
𝑐∈𝐶𝑃(𝑠,𝑐) ≥𝜃,
WAITBATCH,
Í
𝑐∈𝐶𝑃(𝑠,𝑐) < 𝜃,
(4) Commit the batch when it is full, its wait limit expires,
or any queued chunk becomes urgent.
At each scheduling epoch, the scheduler refreshes active
session states and assigns each pending chunk a priority. Box 1
summarizes how the scheduler converts this per-session state
into priority-based inference actions. The priority score cap-
tures whether the chunk may change the model state, such as
a turn transition, barge-in event, or control signal. QoE en-
sures sessions that have recently experienced poor interaction
quality, such as high end-to-end latency, delayed responses,
stalls, or failed interruptions, will be given high priority, while
network degradation captures unstable transport conditions
that make additional waiting more harmful. The scheduler
aggregates the priorities of queued chunks within each candi-
date batch and uses the resulting batch priority to determine
when inference should begin. If the aggregate priority exceeds
threshold, the batch is admitted immediately, allowing urgent
interaction events and sessions with poor QoE or degraded
network conditions to shorten the batching delay. Otherwise,
the batch waits to improve serving efficiency.
3.3
Receiver-Side Playback Scheduling
The receiver controls the last stage of the full-duplex loop
by setting the playback buffer duration after the first output
chunk arrives and before playback begins. This decision bal-
ances responsiveness against playback smoothness: a smaller
Table 3: Experiment network settings.
Metric
L1
L2
L3
L4
Bandwidth (Mbps)
10.0
5.0
2.5
1.5
RTT (ms)
40
80
160
200
Jitter (ms)
0
10
20
40
buffer reduces time to first response, whereas a larger buffer
gives subsequent chunks more time to arrive before their play-
back deadlines. Network conditions and model backpressure
determine end-to-end latency, shaping subsequent chunk ar-
rivals relative to their playback deadlines. Therefore, at the
beginning of each response, the reciever derives a congestion
signal from recent playback and delivery dynamics. Based on
these observed signals, the receiver adapts the playback buffer
using a configurable congestion-control-inspired policy. The
receiver then updates the buffer time 𝑏𝑡at time 𝑡as:
𝑏𝑡=


min {𝛾𝑏𝑡−1, 𝑏max}
𝐿𝑡> 𝜙high,
max {𝑏𝑡−1 −𝛿, 𝑏min}
𝐿𝑡< 𝜙low,
𝑏𝑡−1
otherwise,
where 𝐿𝑡denotes the observed end-to-end latency, 𝛾> 1
is the multiplicative increase factor, 𝛿> 0 is the additive
decrease step, and 𝜙high > 𝜙low define a hysteresis region
in which the buffer remains unchanged. When 𝐿𝑡exceeds
𝜙high, the receiver rapidly increases the buffer to absorb larger
inter-chunk arrival gaps. When 𝐿𝑡falls below 𝜙low, it gradu-
ally decreases the buffer to improve responsiveness. Values
between 𝜙low and 𝜙high do not trigger an adjustment, prevent-
ing small latency fluctuations from causing oscillation. For
different models and deployment environments, the input sig-
nal can incorporate additional metrics, such as network jitter,
to enable faster and more sensitive adaptation to short-term
delivery changes.
4
Preliminary Validation
Experiment settings. We conducted a preliminary experi-
ment using MiniCPM-o-4.5 [9], an open-source full-duplex
omni-modal model, deployed on an AWS instance with one
NVIDIA L40S GPU (48 GB VRAM). The client runs on
another cloud provider, while both the client and the server
are located in the US East region and communicate over the
public Internet. We use the MiniCPM demo repository as
baseline and emulate the four network profiles in Table 3 us-
ing Linux Netem, ranging from high-bandwidth, low-latency
conditions to severely constrained links. For all profiles with
nonzero jitter, we set the jitter correlation to 25%.
Preliminary results and analysis. Figure 7 compares CON-
FLUX with the baseline across increasingly constrained net-
work profiles. As shown in Figure 7a, TTFR remains between
5


--- Page 6 ---
Ziqian Liu, Minghao Li, and Yiming Qiu
L1
L2
L3
L4
0
1500
3000
4500
6000
7500
Latency (ms)
Baseline
Conflux
(a) Time to first response.
L1
L2
L3
L4
0
25
50
75
100
125
Avg DM (ms/chunk)
Baseline
Conflux
(b) Per-chunk playback DM.
Figure 7: End-to-end QoE across network profiles.
User Simulator
Inference Backend
Network Emulator
Telemetry
Accuracy, Network, QoE
Optimization 
Policy
OmniGym
Profile 
Task List
Figure 8: An envisioned OmniGym.
1.39 and 1.88 s across all profiles, compared with 1.77–5.41 s
for the baseline. The improvement is modest under L1, at
21.3%, but becomes substantially larger as network condi-
tions deteriorate, reaching 74.4% under L4. Notably, TTFR
under L4 is lower than under L3, suggesting that the cur-
rent scheduling policy responds differently across network
regimes and leaves room for further exploration and tuning.
Figure 7b reports the average per-chunk lag beyond its
playback deadline. CONFLUX keeps this lag below 10 ms
across all profiles, while the baseline increases from 46 ms
under L1 to 94 ms under L4, indicating that chunks generated
and delivered by CONFLUX are more closely aligned with
the intended playback timeline even under L4 constrained
network conditions. Together, these results show that the
design improves both initial responsiveness and sustained
deadline adherence under network degradation.
5
Discussion and Future Work
Exploring optimization policies with OmniGym. Since the
networking community currently has limited understanding of
full-duplex models and their impact on networks, a promising
direction is to build an OmniGym for systematically explor-
ing and evaluating optimization mechanisms for AI-native
real-time communication. As shown in Figure 8, OmniGym
could simulate diverse user interactions, emulate network and
serving conditions, and perturb individual input modalities
to evaluate their impact on model accuracy, grounding qual-
ity, turn-taking, and response latency. Such a platform would
enable controlled and reproducible comparisons of alterna-
tive transport, scheduling, buffering, and modality adaptation
policies before deploying them in real systems. It could also
help identify effective configurations across different models,
workloads, and operating conditions, thereby accelerating the
design of model-aware end-to-end optimizations.
Protocols for AI-native RTC. CONFLUX currently sched-
ules channels over existing protocols according to their trans-
port characteristics, such as latency, reliability, ordering, and
congestion-control behavior. However, their heavyweight ab-
stractions are difficult to adapt at the packet level for AI-
specific behavior. In contrast, real-time AI communication is
naturally chunk-based, with explicit timing, priority, modal-
ity, and validity semantics. This motivates a new lightweight
UDP- or QUIC-based [24] protocol that exposes such AI-
native delivery semantics directly to the transport layer.
Chunk-level serving engine observability. As full-duplex
model serving shifts from request-level execution to contin-
uous chunk processing, inference engines need fine-grained
chunk-level observability and traceability. In particular, fu-
ture systems should not only preserve the correspondence
between input and output chunks, but also trace their execu-
tion across batching, modality encoding, LLM inference, and
output generation, with a latency breakdown for each stage.
Such visibility would enable accurate diagnosis of model
backpressure and support chunk-aware scheduling across the
serving, transport, and playback stages.
Generalizing to other real-time AI media. Although CON-
FLUX targets full-duplex omni-model interaction, its abstrac-
tion can be extended to other real-time AI media, including
live-stream recommendation, real-time translation, meeting
assistants, and interactive avatars. These workloads consume
live multimodal streams under task-specific latency, fidelity,
and alignment requirements. By expressing such requirements
as model-centric specifications, the framework can combine
them with network state and inference backpressure to make
delivery and scheduling decisions across diverse applications.
6
Concluding Remarks
Full-duplex AI-native interaction transforms sender-receiver
real-time communication into a closed-loop system in which
network transport, model inference, and user playback jointly
determine interaction quality. This paper argues that model-
facing chunks provide a common abstraction for coordinat-
ing these stages and presents CONFLUX, an AI-native real-
time communication framework that combines model-defined
transport requirements, network- and session-aware inference
scheduling, and adaptive receiver-side playback. Preliminary
6


--- Page 7 ---
The Model in the Middle: Toward AI-Native Real-Time Communication
results demonstrate substantial QoE gains under constrained
networks, highlighting the potential of jointly designing trans-
port, serving, and playback architectures for real-time AI.
References
[1] Introducing gpt-live. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-live/.
[2] WebRTC: Real-time communication in browsers. W3C recommenda-
tion, World Wide Web Consortium, 2025.
[3] Webtransport. W3C working draft, World Wide Web Consortium,
2026.
[4] N. Agarwal, R. Pan, F. Y. Yan, and R. Netravali. Mowgli: Passively
Learned Rate Control for Real-Time Video. In USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI ’25), Apr. 2025.
[5] R. Arakawa, H. Yakura, K. Akuzawa, and S. Kubo. Ai for meeting
minutes: Promises and challenges in designing human-ai collaboration
on a production saas platform. In Proceedings of the Extended Abstracts
of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
1–6, 2025.
[6] G. Carlucci, L. De Cicco, S. Holmer, and S. Mascolo. Analysis and
design of the google congestion control for web real-time communica-
tion (webrtc). In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on
Multimedia Systems, pages 1–12, 2016.
[7] X. Chen, Z. Feng, W. Zhao, J. Ding, K. Sun, and X. Zhang. From bits to
tokens:{Knowledge-Driven} generative communication of multimodal
data. In 23rd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 26), pages 191–207, 2026.
[8] Y. Cheng, Z. Zhang, H. Li, A. Arapin, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu,
K. Du, X. Zhang, F. Y. Yan, et al. {GRACE}:{Loss-Resilient}{Real-
Time} video through neural codecs. In 21st USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 24), pages
509–531, 2024.
[9] J. Cui, B. Xu, C. Wang, T. Yu, W. Sun, Y. Xu, T. Wang, Z. He, W. Ma,
T. Cai, et al. Minicpm-o 4.5: Towards real-time full-duplex omni-modal
interaction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.27393, 2026.
[10] D-ID. Ai agents: Create an interactive visual agent. https://www.d-
id.com/ai-agents/.
[11] A. S. Dandage, V. R. Rupnar, T. A. Pise, and A. Mulani. Real-time
language translation application using tkinter. International Journal of
Digital Communication and Analog Signals, 11(01), 2025.
[12] Doubao. Doubao. https://www.doubao.com/, 2026.
[13] J. Duan, S. Yu, H. L. Tan, H. Zhu, and C. Tan. A survey of embodied
ai: From simulators to research tasks. IEEE Transactions on Emerging
Topics in Computational Intelligence, 6(2):230–244, 2022.
[14] Duolingo. What is duolingo max? https://www.duolingo.com/help/wh
at-is-duolingo-max, 2026.
[15] I. Fette and A. Melnikov. The websocket protocol. Technical report,
Internet Engineering Task Force.
[16] S. Fouladi, J. Emmons, E. Orbay, C. Wu, R. S. Wahby, and K. Win-
stein. Salsify:{Low-Latency} network video through tighter integration
between a video codec and a transport protocol. In 15th USENIX Sym-
posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 18),
pages 267–282, 2018.
[17] M. Geleta, H. Sodoma, and H. Gamper. Spatial audio rendering for
real-time speech translation in virtual meetings. International Journal
of Human–Computer Interaction, pages 1–21, 2026.
[18] Google. Gemini live. https://gemini.google/overview/gemini-live/.
[19] HeyGen. Liveavatar: Lifelike real-time avatar api for conversational ai.
https://www.liveavatar.com/.
[20] M. Houtti, M. Zhou, L. Terveen, and S. Chancellor. Observe, ask, inter-
vene: Designing ai agents for more inclusive meetings. In Proceedings
of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 1–18, 2025.
[21] INMO. Inmo. https://inmolens.com/, 2026.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Ziqian Liu, Minghao Li, and Yiming Qiu
[22] S. Khairy, G. Mittag, V. Gopal, F. Y. Yan, Z. Niu, E. Ameri, S. Inglis,
M. Golestaneh, and R. Cutler. ACM MMSys 2024 Bandwidth Estima-
tion in Real Time Communications Challenge. In ACM Multimedia
Systems Conference (MMSys ’24), Apr. 2024.
[23] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez,
H. Zhang, and I. Stoica. Efficient memory management for large
language model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the
29th symposium on operating systems principles, pages 611–626, 2023.
[24] A. Langley, A. Riddoch, A. Wilk, A. Vicente, C. Krasic, D. Zhang,
F. Yang, F. Kouranov, I. Swett, J. Iyengar, et al. The quic transport
protocol: Design and internet-scale deployment. In Proceedings of the
conference of the ACM special interest group on data communication,
pages 183–196, 2017.
[25] Y. Ma, Z. Song, Y. Zhuang, J. Hao, and I. King. A survey on vision–
language–action models for embodied ai. IEEE Transactions on Neural
Networks and Learning Systems, 2026.
[26] H. Meng, Y. Zhuang, Y. Noushirvani, X. Huang, and Z. Meng. {MAE}:
More adaptive video encoder for consistent low latency in {High-
Quality}{Real-Time} communication. In 23rd USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 26), pages
1417–1430, 2026.
[27] J. Meng and B. Li. Sema: Semantic transport for real-time multimodal
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.20940, 2026.
[28] Z. Meng and M. Xu. Latency Optimization in Interactive Multimedia
Streaming. Springer, 2024.
[29] Microsoft. Using copilot vision with microsoft copilot. https://suppor
t.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-copilot/using-copilot-vision-with-
microsoft-copilot, 2025.
[30] OpenAI. Chatgpt. https://chatgpt.com/, 2026.
[31] Qwen Team.
Qwen3.5-omni technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.15804, 2026.
[32] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al. Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision. In International
conference on machine learning, pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021.
[33] C. Ruan, Y. Chen, D. Tian, Y. Shi, Y. Wu, J. Li, and C. Li. Libra:
Flexible request partitioning and scheduling for serving unbalanced
and dynamic {LLM} workloads. In 23rd USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 26), pages 1243–
1258, 2026.
[34] R. Shahmerdanova. Artificial intelligence in translation: Challenges
and opportunities. Acta Globalis Humanitatis et Linguarum, 2(1):62–
70, 2025.
[35] Y. Shen, R. Chen, B. Wang, J. Chen, H. Zhang, M. Wang, M. Xu, and
Z. Meng. Mortise: Auto-tuning congestion control to optimize {QoE}
via {Network-Aware} parameter optimization. In 23rd USENIX Sym-
posium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 26),
pages 2303–2321, 2026.
[36] J. Sohn, N. S. Kim, and W. Sung. A statistical model-based voice
activity detection. IEEE signal processing letters, 6(1):1–3, 1999.
[37] SoulFun. Soulfun. https://www.soulfun.ai/, 2026.
[38] B. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhao, W. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Li, and W. Lin.
Llumnix: Dynamic scheduling for large language model serving. In
18th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementa-
tion (OSDI 24), pages 173–191, 2024.
[39] Tavus. Conversational video interface. https://www.tavus.io/cvi.
[40] J. Wu, Z. Ren, L. Liu, and X. Zhang. Chat with ai: The surprising turn
of real-time video communication from human to ai. In Proceedings of
the 24th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks, pages 402–410,
2025.
[41] J. Wu, Z. Ren, J. Zhong, L. Liu, and X. Zhang. Artic: Ai-oriented
real-time communication for mllm video assistant. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2602.12641, 2026.
[42] xAI. Grok. https://grok.com/, 2026.
[43] D. Yao, J. Zhou, C. Yang, C. Qin, H. Hou, Z. Liang, C. Wang, Y. Cao,
S. Ye, S. Xie, et al. Joyai-vl-interaction: Real-time vision-language
interaction intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.14777, 2026.
[44] P. Yin, J. Zhu, H. Gao, C. Zheng, Y. Huang, T. Zhou, R. Yang, W. Liu,
W. Chen, C. Guo, et al. vllm-omni: Fully disaggregated serving for any-
to-any multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.02204, 2026.
[45] D. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wei, Y. Shan, R. Chen, and H. Chen.
{BlitzScale}: Fast and live large model autoscaling with o (1) host
caching. In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation (OSDI 25), pages 275–293, 2025.
[46] H. Zhang, A. Zhou, Y. Hu, C. Li, G. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Ma, L. Wu,
A. Chen, and C. Wu. Loki: improving long tail performance of learning-
based real-time video adaptation by fusing rule-based models. In
Proceedings of the 27th Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, pages 775–788, 2021.
[47] H. Zhang, A. Zhou, J. Lu, R. Ma, Y. Hu, C. Li, X. Zhang, H. Ma, and
X. Chen. Onrl: Improving mobile video telephony via online rein-
forcement learning. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pages 1–14, 2020.
[48] L. Zheng, L. Yin, Z. Xie, C. Sun, J. Huang, C. H. Yu, S. Cao,
C. Kozyrakis, I. Stoica, J. E. Gonzalez, et al. Sglang: Efficient ex-
ecution of structured language model programs. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 37:62557–62583, 2024.
[49] Zhipu AI. GLM-Realtime. https://zhipu-ef7018ed.mintlify.app/cn/gui
de/models/sound-and-video/glm-realtime, 2026.
8
