--- Page 1 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution
Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference∗
Gregory Hyegang Jun
UIUC
hgjun2@illinois.edu
Wesley Pang
UIUC
qpang2@illinois.edu
Eddie Richter
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
eddie.richter@amd.com
Mehdi Saeedi
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
mehdi.saeedi@amd.com
Aporva Amarnath
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
aporva.amarnath@amd.com
Pallavi Ferrao
Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
pallavi.ferrao@amd.com
Deming Chen
UIUC
dchen@illinois.edu
Abstract
Modern edge system-on-chips (SoCs) increasingly combine CPUs,
integrated graphics processing units (iGPUs), and neural process-
ing units (NPUs) to meet the growing compute demands of edge
AI. However, existing LLM runtimes do not fully optimize this
heterogeneity. Production frameworks typically make only coarse
device-level decisions, while prior research often focuses on opti-
mizing operations locally rather than holistically accelerating the
LLM task graph. As a result, much of the available heterogeneous
opportunity remains unrealized, especially on unified-memory edge
platforms where performance depends not only on where an op-
eration runs, but also on how execution is coordinated across the
task graph.
We argue that edge LLM inference on such systems should be
treated as a heterogeneity-first scheduling problem rather than
a coarse-grained accelerator-mapping problem, and present Het-
eroMosaic to realize this view. We first develop a heterogeneous
roofline model to characterize the potential benefit of heterogeneity
across systems with different relative iGPU and NPU capabilities.
Guided by this analysis, HeteroMosaic decomposes LLM execution
into dependency-preserving micro-batches that expose additional
opportunities to overlap work across accelerators. It then uses trace-
guided optimizations to jointly tune this new schedule with device
allocation so that critical stages complete earlier despite real system
effects such as device variation, unified-memory contention, DVFS,
and NPU runtime behavior.
We implement HeteroMosaic in PyTorch C++ and evaluate it on
three AMD Ryzen™AI platforms spanning NPU-heavy, balanced,
and iGPU-heavy designs. On a balanced system, across select off-
the-shelf models, HeteroMosaic achieves up to 1.73× speedup over
an iGPU baseline, 1.78× over an NPU baseline, and up to 2.05×
over strong existing frameworks such as llama.cpp, while using
up to 45.3% less energy. Compared with prior heterogeneous edge
AI solutions, HeteroMosaic improves performance by up to 2.35×.
Keywords
edge AI, heterogeneous computing, large language models, neural
processing units, runtime scheduling, unified memory
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are transforming computing systems
from passive tools into active agents that interpret, generate, and
∗To appear in the Proceedings of MICRO 2026.
reason over complex data [14, 56–58]. As advances in quantization,
distillation, and efficient model design push increasingly capable
models from datacenters to user-facing devices, edge inference
is becoming attractive not only for privacy and cost, but also for
latency-sensitive applications such as personal assistants, AR/VR,
robotics, local search, and industrial automation [36, 47, 66, 78, 80,
84–86]. These deployments are especially sensitive to time-to-first-
token and sustained throughput because the model often sits inside
an interactive control loop rather than serving one-shot requests.
As a result, practical edge inference is constrained not only by
model size, but also by the growing cost of serving long-context
workloads under tight latency and power limits.
Modern edge platforms attempt to meet this demand through
heterogeneous system-on-chips (SoCs) that combine CPUs, inte-
grated graphics processing units (iGPUs), and neural processing
units (NPUs) [7, 15, 40, 68]. Yet current software stacks still ex-
pose this heterogeneity mostly through coarse backend choices
rather than fine-grained cross-accelerator workload scheduling.
AMD exposes GPU and NPU execution through separate software
stacks, ROCm and ONNX Runtime [10, 13], respectively; Apple
Core ML [16] allows developers to choose compute units while
leaving dispatch to the runtime; and Qualcomm QNN / AI Engine
Direct [71] likewise relies on explicit backend targets. On unified-
memory edge SoCs such as those mentioned above, this abstraction
still leaves performance on the table. Unlike datacenter settings
with clear host-device memory separation [46, 76], unified mem-
ory eliminates host-device copy overheads and makes fine-grained
cross-accelerator mapping practical. But this opportunity is rarely
explicit in the original LLM graph: it must first be exposed through
careful scheduling, and then mapped onto the right accelerator
under tight thermal and power constraints.
The key open question is whether heterogeneity itself improves
end-to-end LLM inference once confounding factors are removed.
Prior edge LLM systems show that heterogeneous SoC execution
can be useful, but their gains are often coupled with model restruc-
turing, sparsity, outlier routing, or quantization changes [89, 90].
GPU–NPU systems such as HeteroInfer [21] study heterogeneous
mapping more directly, but still focus primarily on greedy tensor-
level placement on highly imbalanced mobile SoCs. More broadly,
prior work does not jointly study two complementary sources of
heterogeneous opportunity, overlapping independent work across
the graph and splitting individual operations across accelerators.
This gap matters most on unbalanced SoCs, where a policy that only
optimizes local operation placement can either mostly reproduce
1
arXiv:2607.12839v2  [cs.DC]  15 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Figure 1: Overview of HeteroMosaic. Using off-the-shelf LLMs, HeteroMosaic restructures execution into dependency-preserving
micro-batches and jointly optimizes cross-accelerator overlap and per-stage assignment using a heterogeneous roofline model
and trace-guided critical-interval co-optimization. The resulting schedule executes across the CPU, iGPU, and NPU with unified
memory, shared weights, low-overhead synchronization, and NPU-aware queue management.
the stronger accelerator’s behavior or offload too much work to the
weaker one, obscuring when heterogeneity is genuinely beneficial.
HeteroMosaic addresses this gap by treating edge LLM infer-
ence on heterogeneous SoCs as a scheduling problem, not just as
an accelerator placement problem. We first develop a heteroge-
neous roofline model to characterize when heterogeneous execu-
tion should help across systems with different relative iGPU and
NPU capabilities. Guided by this analysis, HeteroMosaic decom-
poses execution into dependency-preserving micro-batches that
expose additional opportunities to overlap work across accelera-
tors. Exposing this overlap is only the first step: once these new
scheduling choices exist, their benefits become interdependent on
real systems. On real systems, the best greedy accelerator assign-
ment is not always the best global choice. A mapping that is faster
in isolation can still degrade end-to-end performance if, because
of accelerator asymmetry, unified-memory contention, DVFS, or
NPU runtime behavior, it delays stages that are more critical to the
overall execution graph. HeteroMosaic therefore uses trace-guided
critical-interval co-optimization to jointly tune the schedule, decide
which accelerator executes each stage, and adjust stage completion
times around the measured critical path.
We realize HeteroMosaic on three AMD Ryzen™AI SoCs span-
ning NPU-heavy, balanced, and iGPU-heavy designs. We focus on
AMD Ryzen™AI for two reasons. First, AMD Ryzen™AI exposes
low-level software stacks for both the iGPU and NPU, enabling
optimized custom kernels on each accelerator together with low-
overhead interoperability and control across them. Second, AMD
Ryzen™AI offers a broad range of CPU, iGPU, and memory con-
figurations, allowing us to study heterogeneous execution across
diverse balance points while keeping the LLM model and frame-
work fixed. Across these systems, we show that heterogeneity can
be the winning solution when it is jointly scheduled at the graph
and operation levels. Our key contributions are as follows.
• Problem reformulation. We show that heterogeneous edge
LLM inference on unified-memory SoCs is fundamentally a
scheduling problem, not just an operation-placement problem.
Much of the heterogeneous opportunity is not explicit in the
original execution graph and must first be exposed before it can
be exploited.
• Analytical model. We develop a heterogeneous roofline model
that characterizes when heterogeneous execution should help
across systems with different relative iGPU and NPU capabili-
ties, and use it as a principled target for the runtime.
• Algorithmic. We show that decomposing LLM execution into
dependency-preserving micro-batches exposes additional op-
portunities to overlap work across accelerators that are unavail-
able in the monolithic schedule.
• Scheduling. We show that exploiting this exposed opportu-
nity is inherently non-greedy on real systems, and introduce
trace-guided critical-interval co-optimization to jointly tune
the schedule, accelerator assignment, and stage timing under
practical runtime effects such as DVFS, device asymmetry, and
NPU runtime behavior.
2


--- Page 3 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
A2
A1
B
C2
C1
(a) M Split
A2
A1
C1
B2
B1
C1
(b) K Split
A
B2
B1
C2
C1
(c) N Split
Figure 2: Different tensor partitioning schemes in GEMM.
Table 1: AMD Ryzen™AI SoC specifications. All CPUs use
Zen 5 cores. The table reports CPU core/thread count, iGPU
RDNA generation and compute units (CUs), NPU generation
and AIE core count, and peak memory bandwidth under the
maximum LPDDR5X configuration.
SoC
CPU
Zen 5
iGPU
RDNA / CUs
NPU
Gen.
NPU
AIEs
Mem.
BW
AMD Ryzen™
AI 7 350
8c/16t
RDNA 3.5, 8 CUs
XDNA 2
32
128 GB/s
AMD Ryzen™
AI 9 HX 370
12c/24t
RDNA 3.5, 16 CUs
XDNA 2
32
128 GB/s
AMD Ryzen™
AI Max+ 395
16c/32t
RDNA 3.5, 40 CUs
XDNA 2
32
256 GB/s
• Systems and empirical. We realize this design on three AMD
Ryzen™AI SoCs spanning NPU-heavy, balanced, and iGPU-
heavy designs, and show that heterogeneity-first scheduling
outperforms strong single-accelerator and prior heterogeneous
baselines while reducing energy and improving tokens per watt
by up to 45.3%. Compared with prior SOTA, we achieve an
average 1.25× speedup across platforms and models, with a
peak of 2.35× and a minimum of 1.07×.
2
Background
2.1
AMD Ryzen™AI
AMD Ryzen™AI SoCs [2, 8, 9] contain an x86 CPU, an RDNA iGPU,
and an XDNA NPU. These components are connected through
AMD’s Infinity Fabric, which integrates the compute engines and
connects them to a unified memory architecture. The AMD Ryzen™
AI product family spans multiple use cases and system require-
ments. Table 1 summarizes three current generation AMD Ryzen™
AI configurations, showing differences in CPU resources, iGPU size,
NPU generation, and memory bandwidth.
2.2
LLM Inference
LLM inference consists of two distinct phases. The first phase,
prompt encoding or prefill, processes the entire prompt and pro-
duces the first output token. Prefill is dominated by large matrix
multiplications and is therefore primarily constrained by dense
general matrix multiply (GEMM) throughput. The commonly used
metric time to first token (TTFT) captures the latency of processing
a prompt of 𝑁tokens and producing the first generated token.
The second phase, token generation or decode, produces one token
at a time by attending to both the encoded prompt and previously
generated tokens. Decode relies more heavily on general matrix-
vector multiplication (GEMV) operations and KV-cache traffic, and
is therefore often constrained by memory bandwidth rather than
raw arithmetic throughput. The standard performance metric for
this phase is tokens per second (TPS), which measures the sustained
generation throughput after prefill.
2.3
LLM Micro-Batching
Micro-batching [4, 28, 31] reduces peak prefill memory by splitting a
single long prompt into smaller contiguous prompt segments. Here,
a micro-batch does not refer to a batch of independent requests,
as in conventional training or batched inference. Instead, it refers
to a sub-sequence of tokens from the same prompt. Rather than
executing one monolithic prefill pass over the full prompt, the
runtime processes these prompt segments sequentially. As each
micro-batch is processed, the KV cache is incrementally extended,
while temporary activations are materialized only for the current
segment.
Importantly, attention can still attend to preceding tokens through
the KV cache, meaning the KV cache is used not only during decode
but also during prefill. Micro-batch size determines the size of 𝑄,
while 𝐾and 𝑉continue to grow through the KV cache. Because
LLM models employ causal attention, later micro-batches see a
deeper KV history and therefore incur higher attention cost than
earlier micro-batches. Causality is what makes this decomposition
exact. A later micro-batch may attend to tokens from earlier micro-
batches through the KV cache, but it does not depend on tokens
that have not yet been processed.
From a computational perspective, micro-batching does not
change the final mathematical result, but it does change the ex-
ecution schedule. It increases dispatch frequency, reuses weights
across multiple smaller launches, and changes how attention cost
evolves across micro-batches. Those properties make it useful not
only as a memory optimization, but also as a scheduling primitive
for heterogeneous execution.
2.4
Tensor Parallelism
Tensor parallelism distributes a single operation across multiple
compute units [77]. In LLM inference, the most common target
operations are GEMM operations because they dominate the arith-
metic cost of prefill. These dense linear operations are natural split
targets because partitioning preserves regular independent sub-
problems with predictable communication. Figure 2 shows three
natural split dimensions. 𝑀- and 𝑁-splits partition the input / out-
put space and require gathering of results, while a 𝐾-split produces
partial sums that must be reduced. In unified-memory SoCs, these
communication patterns still matter even though the gather or re-
duction ultimately resolves through unified memory rather than
explicit multi-accelerator collectives.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
2.5
Community-Driven NPU Programming
IRON [39] is an open-source framework for programming AMD’s
XDNA NPUs, combining fine-grained control over compute kernels
with higher-level abstractions for data movement and synchroniza-
tion. Its open-source nature has enabled the broader community to
build optimized custom kernels on top of this stack. In particular,
we leverage community-developed AWQ [49] W4A16 kernels [34]
as a key component in enabling heterogeneous execution across
the NPU and iGPU.
3
Related Work
Prior work on edge LLM inference on unified-memory systems
has shown evidence of the potential benefits of heterogeneous SoC
execution, but often conflates heterogeneity with other sources of
improvement. Existing systems combine heterogeneous execution
with model restructuring, quantization changes, activation sparsity,
outlier routing, or accelerator capability imbalance, where practi-
cal compute throughput is heavily skewed toward one accelerator.
Moreover, the closest GPU–NPU edge LLM studies are largely evalu-
ated on Qualcomm Gen3-class mobile SoCs [70], where HeteroInfer
reports a roughly 1:10 practical GPU-to-NPU throughput ratio [21].
As a result, it is difficult to determine whether the reported gains
come from heterogeneity itself or from coupled factors such as
reduced work, changed numerical formats, platform-specific quan-
tization paths, or accelerator imbalance. Thus, while prior work
establishes that SoC heterogeneity can be useful, it leaves open
the key question: can heterogeneity itself, when optimized from
first principles, become the winning strategy for off-the-shelf LLM
architectures and standard quantization formats?
3.1
Sparse and Model-Restructured Inference.
3.1.1
Activation-sparse and storage-aware inference. PowerInfer-
2 [90] improves edge LLM inference by combining heterogeneous
execution with activation sparsity and storage-aware execution.
Rather than executing each linear layer as a dense operation, it
decomposes computation into fine-grained neuron clusters, maps
dense activation clusters to the NPU, and handles sparse clusters
on the CPU. It further coordinates compute with flash I/O through
segmented neuron caching and pipelining, allowing models that
exceed DRAM capacity to execute more efficiently.
The key distinction is that PowerInfer-2 changes the amount
and structure of computation exposed to the hardware. Activation
sparsity allows inactive or low-importance neuron clusters to be
skipped or delayed, so part of the speedup may come from reducing
the effective number of dense operations rather than from better
scheduling the same dense workload across accelerators. This does
not diminish the value of PowerInfer-2, but it makes the source of
improvement different from HeteroMosaic. HeteroMosaic keeps
the off-the-shelf LLM graph and standard weight-only quantization
path intact, then improves performance by changing when and
where existing work executes.
In addition, sparsity policies are only as reliable as the calibration
or profiling inputs used to construct them. If those inputs do not
match deployment prompts, the active-neuron distribution can
shift, causing the sparse execution plan to lose either performance
predictability or accuracy.
3.1.2
Outlier-routed NPU inference. Fast On-device LLM Inference
with NPUs [89] leverages heterogeneity by adapting the model ex-
ecution path to better match the target hardware. During quantiza-
tion, the original dense matrix computation is split into two paths:
a low-precision dense main path and a high-precision shadow-
outlier path for activation–weight interactions that cannot be safely
represented within the low-precision format. At runtime, the low-
precision main path is mapped to the NPU, while the high-precision
outlier path is executed on the CPU. In this sense, the system ex-
ploits heterogeneity by reshaping the model so that each backend
handles the precision and compute intensity it supports best. This
work is among the first to study outlier execution from a hardware-
systems perspective, while later work such as SVDQuant [48] stud-
ies the quantization side of outlier handling more directly.
Although this work makes NPU execution practical under mobile-
SoC constraints, it also couples heterogeneity with a changed execu-
tion structure. The model is explicitly restructured so that the main
low-precision path fits the NPU, while the numerically sensitive
outlier path is separated onto the CPU. As a result, the reported
benefit reflects both hardware-aware outlier decomposition and
heterogeneous CPU–NPU mapping. This differs from HeteroMo-
saic, which does not introduce a separate numerical path or depend
on outlier routing; instead, it keeps the off-the-shelf LLM execution
structure intact and improves performance by exposing graph-level
overlap, shaping stage latency, and coordinating existing work
across accelerators.
Consequently, this model-restructuring requirement [89] nar-
rows the generality of the reported heterogeneous-execution result:
because the method relies on separating the computation into an
NPU-friendly low-precision main path and a CPU-routed shadow-
outlier path, its benefit is tied to how cleanly that decomposition
matches the target model and backend capabilities. If the computa-
tion does not separate in this way, or if the outlier path becomes
too expensive, it is unclear whether the same heterogeneous strat-
egy would remain effective. Moreover, as with activation sparsity,
shadow-outlier selection can depend strongly on calibration repre-
sentativeness: if the calibration data does not capture the activation
outliers that appear during deployment, either accuracy can de-
grade or more work may be routed through the expensive shadow
path.
3.2
NPU Optimizations, Runtime Optimizations,
and Tensor Parallelism
3.2.1
NPU-oriented optimizations. ScalingNPU [35], although not
a heterogeneous inference framework, makes evident the potential
of mobile NPUs for efficient LLM execution when the runtime and
kernels are co-designed around the hardware. Its key contribution
is NPU-centric execution: it uses test-time scaling to expose addi-
tional decoding parallelism, then realizes that parallelism through
hardware-tailored quantization layouts, fused NPU kernels, and
carefully optimized runtime scheduling. In this sense, ScalingNPU
shows that NPUs can serve as effective LLM execution engines,
but only when the workload structure, data layout, and runtime
are designed around the hardware rather than treated as a generic
accelerator backend.
4


--- Page 5 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
ScalingNPU thus demonstrates that practical NPU performance
depends heavily on low-level runtime and kernel co-design. Specif-
ically, it shows that Qualcomm Gen3 NPUs cannot efficiently con-
sume the fine-grained weight-only quantization layouts commonly
used in LLM deployment, such as AWQ-style W4A16 group quanti-
zation. From an accuracy standpoint, ScalingNPU further shows
that QNN [71] per-channel W4A16 severely degrades Llama3.2-
1B-Instruct accuracy compared with AutoAWQ per-group W4A16,
especially on reasoning benchmarks. To address this mismatch,
ScalingNPU introduces an NPU-tailored tile quantization layout,
fused NPU kernels, and LUT-based implementations that reduce
runtime dequantization overhead.
However, optimizing specifically for the NPU can also reduce
compatibility with GPU execution paths, since an NPU-tailored
weight layout may not be directly usable by GPU kernels. Hetero-
Mosaic targets this broader systems problem by building compatible
iGPU and NPU execution kernels, then applying graph-level and
operation-level heterogeneity. This is possible because the NPU
and GPU execution paths use the same underlying LLM model and
quantization scheme, enabling heterogeneous scheduling without
requiring separate model representations for each accelerator.
3.2.2
Heterogeneous Tensor Parallelism. HeteroInfer [21] studies
heterogeneity more directly by mapping LLM inference across the
GPU and NPU of a mobile SoC. It uses the NPU as the primary
compute engine and the GPU as a secondary accelerator, combin-
ing layer-level and tensor-level partitioning with profiling-guided
scheduling and lightweight synchronization. Its focus is therefore
closer to heterogeneous accelerator mapping than sparsity- or
outlier-based systems.
At the same time, the evaluation leaves the source of the reported
gains difficult to isolate. The evaluated platform is highly NPU-
skewed: HeteroInfer reports roughly a 1:10 practical GPU-to-NPU
throughput ratio on Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 [70]. In other words, the
NPU is approximately an order of magnitude faster than the GPU
for the evaluated kernels. In this regime, assigning more work to
the NPU should improve performance even without demonstrating
complementary GPU–NPU execution. Thus, without an NPU-only
baseline for the same model and software stack, it is difficult to
determine whether the reported gains come from heterogeneity
itself, from improved tensor placement, or simply from assigning
more work to the stronger accelerator. This ambiguity is reinforced
by Qualcomm AI Hub results, which report an optimized Llama-
v2-7B-Chat deployment for Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 using W4A16
weights with W8A16 in some layers [69] that meets or exceeds the
heterogeneous performance numbers reported by HeteroInfer.
There are also quantization and backend-equivalence issues that
complicate attribution. Related work on Qualcomm Gen3 NPUs,
such as ScalingNPU [35], notes that the available QNN [71] quanti-
zation path differs from blockwise LLM quantization schemes and
can affect prediction metrics such as perplexity. Since HeteroInfer
uses different backend stacks for different devices, QNN for the
NPU and OpenCL for the GPU, the evaluation may conflate hetero-
geneous scheduling with backend-specific quantization and kernel
behavior. These factors do not diminish HeteroInfer’s contribu-
tion as an important GPU–NPU study, but they limit how directly
its results establish heterogeneity itself as the source of the gain.
HeteroMosaic differs by treating heterogeneity as an end-to-end
scheduling problem: it first exposes graph-level overlap through
causal micro-batching, then uses heterogeneous partitioning to
shape critical and non-critical stage latencies under measured sys-
tem effects.
3.2.3
Portable GPU-oriented LLM runtimes. llama.cpp [27] is one
of the most practical and portable single-accelerator frameworks
for edge LLM inference, primarily targeting CPU or GPU execution,
with more recent support for select NPU backends. Built around
the ggml/GGUF [29] execution stack, llama.cpp emphasizes porta-
bility across a wide range of backend hardware rather than fine-
grained heterogeneous orchestration across accelerators. Its back-
end ecosystem spans Apple Silicon through Metal [17], NVIDIA
GPUs through CUDA [53], AMD GPUs through HIP/ROCm [5],
Intel and NVIDIA GPUs through SYCL [30, 44], generic GPUs
through Vulkan and OpenCL [43, 45], CPUs through BLAS/BLIS
and ZenDNN [3, 26, 51], and emerging accelerator targets such
as OpenVINO, CANN, Hexagon, WebGPU, RPC, and VirtGPU [30,
33, 38, 41, 72, 88]. This broad backend support makes llama.cpp a
strong community-driven deployment framework, but its primary
abstraction is backend portability rather than heterogeneous graph
scheduling.
llama.cpp also provides its own GGUF quantization formats to
balance model size, bandwidth, and performance across devices, in-
cluding 4-bit, 5-bit, 6-bit, 8-bit, and 16-bit weight formats [32]. It also
supports micro-batching to reduce peak memory pressure on low-
memory systems by splitting long prompt processing into smaller
execution units [28, 31]. However, in llama.cpp, micro-batching
is primarily a memory-management mechanism within a selected
backend path, not a mechanism for exposing cross-accelerator over-
lap. Moreover, because llama.cpp prioritizes portability across
diverse backends, its execution path can leave performance on the
table on GPUs; for example, backend-agnostic tensor transitions
may introduce unnecessary data movement or intermediate casting
to preserve a common execution model across hardware targets.
HeteroMosaic targets a different point in the design space: it extends
micro-batching into a heterogeneous scheduling primitive, builds
compatible iGPU and NPU kernels around a shared quantization
path, and then combines graph-level overlap with operation-level
partitioning to improve end-to-end latency and energy.
4
Heterogeneous Roofline Model
We develop an operation-level heterogeneous roofline model for
our target AMD Ryzen™AI platforms, illustrated in Figure 3. The
figure first contrasts two bounds: the red curve denotes the con-
ventional single-accelerator roofline, while the green curve denotes
the best-case operation-level heterogeneous roofline when multiple
accelerators are active. The red curve is limited by the compute
throughput and memory bandwidth of a single accelerator. The
green curve raises the peak operation throughput as heterogeneous
execution combines compute resources across accelerators. At the
same time, both curves remain constrained by the unified off-chip
memory system and by system effects such as DVFS.
Figure 3 should therefore be interpreted as an operation-level
view of attainable performance, not as a roofline for the full end-
to-end LLM workload. The blue point denotes an operation that is
5


--- Page 6 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
directly suitable for heterogeneous execution, since, relative to the
single-accelerator roofline, it remains sufficiently compute-limited
that heterogeneous execution can raise its attainable performance
toward the heterogeneous bound. The red point denotes an opera-
tion that is a poor heterogeneous candidate because of its proximity
to the bandwidth-bound regime and therefore cannot benefit much
from additional heterogeneous compute capability.
The roofline model therefore serves two purposes. First, it quanti-
fies the best-case upper bound of heterogeneous opportunity across
different relative accelerator capabilities within a SoC. Second, it
reveals why a placement-only view is insufficient. Some operations
are good heterogeneous targets in the original graph, while others
appear unsuitable under local operation placement alone. However,
these seemingly unsuitable opportunities can become useful when
scheduling moves bandwidth-bound work off the critical path or
exposes new overlap that was not visible in the original monolithic
graph.
This distinction explains why an operation-level roofline is nec-
essary but not sufficient for end-to-end LLM inference. Although it
can identify which individual operations are promising heteroge-
neous candidates, it cannot determine whether accelerating a given
operation shortens the global application-level schedule, nor can it
expose overlap that is absent from the original execution graph. We
therefore treat the roofline as an analytical target rather than an
end-to-end predictor. The scheduling framework in the following
section restructures execution through causal micro-batching and
uses trace-guided critical-interval optimization to determine how
much of that target can be realized in practice.
Having established the operation-level intuition behind Figure 3,
we now formalize the heterogeneous roofline. We start from the clas-
sical roofline model and extend it to AMD Ryzen™AI platforms that
combine CPU, iGPU, and NPU resources under a shared memory
system. The classical roofline model [87] defines single-accelerator
attainable performance as
𝑃= min(𝑃peak, 𝐵· 𝐼),
where 𝑃peak is peak compute throughput, 𝐵is peak off-chip mem-
ory bandwidth, and 𝐼is operational intensity, defined as arithmetic
operations per byte accessed. For floating-point kernels, this corre-
sponds to FLOPs/byte; for quantized kernels, we report ops/byte
to match the TOP/s-based throughput model. This model captures
the trade-off between compute-bound and memory-bound regimes,
which we adapt to reason about heterogeneous execution across
multiple accelerators sharing a common memory system.
We adopt Gables [37] to model 𝑁compute units operating con-
currently on a unified memory system. Each accelerator 𝑖has peak
compute throughput 𝑃peak,𝑖, memory bandwidth 𝐵𝑖, and executes
a fraction 𝑓𝑖of the workload with operational intensity 𝐼𝑖, where
Í
𝑖𝑓𝑖= 1. We write the attainable whole-operation performance
allowed by accelerator 𝑖as
𝑃𝑖
attainable = min(𝐵𝑖· 𝐼𝑖, 𝑃peak,𝑖)
𝑓𝑖
.
The numerator is the local roofline limit for accelerator 𝑖on its as-
signed partition, while the division by 𝑓𝑖converts this local partition
throughput into an equivalent whole-operation throughput. The
workload fractions 𝑓𝑖correspond to the accelerator-side partitions
induced by the heterogeneous tensor split, such as the 𝑀-, 𝐾-, and
𝑁-split GEMM decompositions shown in Figure 2 and described in
Section 2.4.
For this fixed accelerator-side split, the system-wide average
operational intensity, denoted as 𝐼avg = 1/
Í𝑁−1
𝑖=0
𝑓𝑖
𝐼𝑖

, is computed
using the weighted harmonic mean of the individual intensities. For
a fixed work split, the attainable heterogeneous performance is
limited by the slowest assigned accelerator partition and by the
shared-memory bandwidth cap:
𝑃attainable = min

𝑃CPU
attainable, 𝑃iGPU
attainable, 𝑃NPU
attainable, 𝐵peak · 𝐼avg

.
This minimum captures the bottleneck for one heterogeneous split.
The full operation cannot complete faster than the slowest partici-
pating accelerator or the shared-memory system that feeds them.
The heterogeneous roofline shown as the green curve in Figure 3
is then the best attainable envelope over feasible work splits:
𝑃∗
hetero =
max
{𝑓𝑖}:Í
𝑖𝑓𝑖=1 𝑃attainable.
Thus, the inner minimization gives the attainable performance
for one split, while the outer maximization selects the split that
best balances the CPU, iGPU, and NPU and produces the best-case
heterogeneous bound.
To account for practical inefficiencies, we introduce a perfor-
mance efficiency parameter 𝜂𝑖for accelerator 𝑖, where 0 < 𝜂𝑖≤1,
and a bandwidth efficiency factor 𝛼𝑖. Here,𝜂𝑖captures effective com-
pute efficiency, measured as achieved TOP/s divided by published
peak TOP/s, while 𝛼𝑖captures effective memory-bandwidth effi-
ciency after cache behavior, access-pattern effects, unified-memory
contention, and runtime overheads. These values are not fixed
constants during execution: on real SoCs, they vary with DVFS,
thermal state, kernel shape sensitivity, NPU runtime behavior, and
memory contention. The effective compute and bandwidth for each
accelerator are
𝑃eff
𝑖
= 𝜂𝑖· 𝑃peak,𝑖,
𝐵eff
𝑖
= 𝛼𝑖· 𝐵𝑖.
Using these effective terms, the attainable whole-operation perfor-
mance allowed by accelerator 𝑖becomes
𝑃𝑖
attainable = min(𝐵eff
𝑖
· 𝐼𝑖, 𝑃eff
𝑖)
𝑓𝑖
.
This formulation preserves the roofline structure while allowing
the model to account for software overheads, thermal throttling,
runtime inefficiencies, and memory contention by scaling effective
compute and bandwidth. In particular, when the iGPU and NPU
contend for unified memory, effective bandwidth degrades, reduc-
ing the attainable performance of both devices and shifting the
practical heterogeneous bound downward.
We then use this model to project the best-case heterogeneous
speedup as a function of achieved iGPU and NPU efficiency. Figure 4
plots this projected speedup surface.1 The figure should not be
read as assigning a single fixed 𝜂or 𝛼to each device. Instead,
it sweeps achieved iGPU and NPU efficiency values relative to
each platform’s published peak capability [2, 8, 9]. In the idealized
projection, runtime overheads and memory-contention losses are
1The CPU is omitted because of its relatively limited dense-compute capabilities.
6


--- Page 7 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
Figure 3: Illustration of the heterogeneous roofline model.
Some operations are strong candidates for heterogeneous ex-
ecution, while others remain bandwidth-bound when viewed
in isolation.
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
iGPU Efficiency
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
NPU Efficiency
1.50×
3.00×
4.50×
6.00×
7.50×
9.00×
10.50×
1.2
3.0
4.8
6.6
8.4
10.2
12.0
Speedup (×)
(a) AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
iGPU Efficiency
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
NPU Efficiency
1.80×
2.40×
3.00×
3.60×
4.20×
4.80×
5.40×
6.00×
1.2
2.1
3.0
3.9
4.8
5.7
6.6
7.5
Speedup (×)
(b) AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
iGPU Efficiency
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
NPU Efficiency
1.25×
1.50×
1.75×
2.00×
2.25×
2.50×
2.75×
3.00×
3.25×
1.05
1.35
1.65
1.95
2.25
2.55
2.85
3.15
3.45
3.75
Speedup (×)
(c) AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395
Figure 4: Projected heterogeneous speedup over the iGPU
baseline from the heterogeneous roofline model as a func-
tion of iGPU and NPU efficiency. The contours indicate the
projected speedup for different iGPU–NPU efficiencies.
excluded; the measured microbenchmarks and traces later calibrate
how far real execution falls below this ceiling.
To ground the efficiency ranges used in Figure 4, we calibrate
the NPU and iGPU terms separately rather than assuming that
published peak TOPS are fully attainable. For the NPU, we conser-
vatively use 0.4 as a favorable upper efficiency setting, consistent
with prior academic studies of AMD NPUs [81–83]. For the iGPU,
prior AMD GPU GEMM benchmarking reports optimized dense-
linear-algebra efficiency of roughly 0.7 [20]. However, we still leave
iGPU efficiency as a broader sweep because iGPU performance
is more sensitive to operation shape, kernel implementation, and
runtime state than isolated GEMM benchmarks. Under the idealized
assumption that all compute is heterogeneously mappable, and that
software overheads, memory contention, and other runtime effects
are absent, the model projects approximate upper bounds of 3×,
1.8×, and 1.25× over each iGPU baseline for the AMD Ryzen™AI 7
350, AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370, and AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395,
respectively.
These projected bounds indicate that heterogeneity can be ben-
eficial in principle, but they do not by themselves explain how to
realize that opportunity on a real system. In particular, the roofline
model does not determine which parts of the graph are immediately
profitable to map heterogeneously, which parts become profitable
only after schedulable opportunity has been exposed, or how either
should be scheduled under practical effects such as unified-memory
contention, runtime overheads, and device-specific behavior. The
remainder of the paper focuses on exactly this gap: exposing latent
heterogeneous opportunity in the execution graph and develop-
ing a runtime that can realize as much of the analytical bound as
possible in practice.
5
HeteroMosaic Overview
Figure 1 illustrates the overall design of HeteroMosaic. HeteroMo-
saic starts from the fixed structure of off-the-shelf decoder-only
LLMs and implements model execution as a compiled C++ function-
call path following the transformer architecture. PyTorch C++ [67]
is used for tensor and weight management, while the execution
graph seen by the scheduler is explicitly exposed through C++ stage
boundaries in this custom C++ transformer path. These boundaries
form coarse graph nodes, such as 𝐺1, Attention, and 𝐺2, with edges
derived from program order and KV-cache causality. KV-cache
updates, RoPE variants, and FlashAttention-style execution are
represented as explicit C++/HIP stages, with the FlashAttention-
style path implemented as a custom HIP kernel. HeteroMosaic then
restructures this explicitly defined graph into causally valid micro-
batches and uses the heterogeneous roofline model, microbench-
marks, and trace-guided optimization to decide how work should be
overlapped and assigned across the iGPU and NPU. The resulting
schedule is executed through a unified runtime with shared weights,
cross-device synchronization, and NPU-aware queue management.
The central challenge is therefore not merely to map compatible
operations onto multiple devices, but to expose and schedule het-
erogeneous opportunity within the compiled C++ execution path
under real system constraints.
Our roofline analysis shows why this distinction matters. If het-
erogeneous execution is restricted only to operations that are di-
rectly compatible across the iGPU and NPU, then the achievable
speedup is fundamentally bounded by the fraction of runtime spent
in those operations. While this limitation is less restrictive at shorter
contexts, it becomes increasingly important for longer prompts. For
example, in Llama3-8B [50], non-GEMM operations account for
only a small fraction of runtime at short prompts, but at a prompt
length of 16,384 they can grow to as much as 35% of total execution
time. As a result, heterogeneous GEMM execution alone cannot
fully realize the available opportunity, especially across SoCs with
widely different iGPU-to-NPU balance points.
7


--- Page 8 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
(a) Illustration of our Abstracted LLM Graph.
(b) Illustration of Serial Micro-Batching.
(c) Illustration of Parallel Micro-Batch Dispatch.
(d) Example of a Latency-Shaped Micro-Batched Schedule.
Figure 5: Illustration of Heterogeneous Micro-Batching.
HeteroMosaic addresses this in two steps. It first restructures
execution to expose additional graph-level heterogeneous oppor-
tunity, then applies operation-level partitioning and trace-guided
co-optimization to realize that opportunity on the true critical path.
Supporting this in practice requires a unified runtime with cross-
device and cross-stream synchronization, NPU schedule manage-
ment, and dynamic iGPU/NPU execution optimizations. Hetero-
Mosaic therefore combines PyTorch C++ tensor and weight man-
agement with open-source IRON-based fused NPU kernels and
compatible iGPU kernels tailored to the shared heterogeneous exe-
cution path.
5.1
Heterogeneous Tensor Parallelism
Tensor parallelism is the natural first step for heterogeneous ex-
ecution because it distributes a single operation across multiple
compute engines. As introduced in Section 2.4, GEMM has three
natural split dimensions: 𝑀-, 𝐾-, and 𝑁-splits. On heterogeneous
SoCs, these splits can be extended across accelerators when an
operation exposes sufficient data parallelism and both backends
can execute the same computation. In such cases, a single GEMM
can be partitioned across the iGPU and NPU rather than assigned
entirely to one device.
Although conceptually simple, heterogeneous splitting remains
nontrivial on a unified-memory SoC because unified memory only
removes data-copy overhead, not coordination overhead. The accel-
erators can access the same model buffers without full weight dupli-
cation, but the profitability of a split still depends on shared-memory
contention, synchronization cost, accelerator balance, backend
shape sensitivity, and runtime state. Thus, the best split cannot
be inferred from peak TOPS or total arithmetic work alone; it must
be characterized empirically and selected in the context of the global
schedule.
5.1.1
Split-dimension trade-offs under unified memory. Prior het-
erogeneous LLM frameworks for edge SoCs use tensor-level parti-
tioning, but do not fully characterize how split dimensions behave
under unified-memory contention, DVFS, accelerator imbalance,
and backend shape sensitivity [21]. This matters because 𝑀-, 𝐾-,
and 𝑁-splits stress the system differently. For a GEMM 𝐶= 𝐴𝐵,
where 𝐴∈R𝑀×𝐾and 𝐵∈R𝐾×𝑁, an 𝑀-split partitions rows of
𝐴and 𝐶. This avoids cross-device reduction, but each accelerator
must still read the same weight matrix 𝐵. When 𝐵is large and
DDR bandwidth is fixed, this duplicated weight traffic can reduce
or eliminate the benefit of using both accelerators.
An 𝑁-split partitions columns of 𝐵and 𝐶. This can avoid dupli-
cate weight reads, but instead duplicates activation reads and can
be sensitive to how downstream operators consume the output. If
the split introduces extra gathers, transposes, or backend-specific
layout conversions, local GEMM speedup may not translate into
end-to-end benefits. A 𝐾-split partitions the reduction dimension,
so each accelerator computes a partial result that must later be
accumulated. This adds partial-𝐶read/write traffic and a reduction
step, but when 𝐾is large, the extra merge cost can be amortized by
the greater amount of parallel work. Since GEMM kernels are often
highly sensitive to the reduction dimension and how it maps onto
finite compute resources, 𝐾-split can become preferable for large-𝐾
or large-weight GEMMs despite being more computationally and
memory intensive.
The split choice also introduces accelerator-specific shape sensi-
tivity. A tensor split changes the local GEMM shape seen by each
backend, and that shape determines occupancy, tiling efficiency,
vector utilization, memory coalescing, and launch overhead. A split
that appears balanced by total FLOPs may still leave one backend
with a subproblem that is too small, poorly aligned with its tile
shape, or unable to saturate its available compute units. Data lay-
out further complicates this trade-off: contiguous DDR access is
important for both accelerators, but the iGPU and NPU may prefer
different packed layouts, tiling orders, and vectorization patterns.
5.1.2
Why tensor parallelism alone is insufficient. These split-level
effects necessitate an empirical characterization of single-operation
heterogeneity. A scheduler cannot make accurate global decisions
if it assumes that all split-friendly GEMMs behave similarly. It
must know which split dimensions are profitable for a given shape,
how stable those gains are under DVFS and memory contention,
and how much overhead is introduced by synchronization and
gather operations. Our microbenchmarks in Section 6.1 provide
this calibration by measuring 𝑀-, 𝐾-, and 𝑁-split behavior across
the three AMD Ryzen™AI balance points.
At the same time, tensor parallelism alone cannot fully realize
the heterogeneous opportunity. Operation-level partitioning can
improve dense GEMM- and GEMV-like operations either by sharing
compute across accelerators or by matching a shape to the device
that executes it best. However, this opportunity is not uniformly
distributed across the LLM graph. Reduction-heavy, normalization-
heavy, and fusion-sensitive operations are weaker targets for op-
eration only sharing; for example, softmax introduces row-wise
reductions and normalization, while flash attention [23] relies on
fused tiling and on-chip reuse whose benefits can be diluted by
partitioning or offload.
As a result, HeteroMosaic treats tensor parallelism as a sched-
uling primitive rather than a standalone placement rule. The mi-
crobenchmarks provide candidate split dimensions and split ratios,
8


--- Page 9 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
but the final choice is made in the context of the global schedule. A
split that is fastest for one GEMM in isolation may still hurt end-
to-end latency if it increases memory contention, delays a critical
stage, or causes downstream layout overhead. HeteroMosaic there-
fore combines operation-level tensor partitioning with graph-level
overlap and critical-path-aware scheduling, rather than greedily
optimizing each split-friendly dense layer in isolation.
This limitation motivates HeteroMosaic’s graph-level compo-
nent: rather than treating heterogeneity exclusively as operation-
level mapping, we restructure execution to expose new overlap
opportunities across the execution graph.
5.2
Heterogeneity-Aware Scheduling
Figure 5a shows the coarse graph abstraction used by the scheduler.
In our implementation, this graph is derived from the compiled
PyTorch C++ function-call structure of the model, where nested
layer and operator calls are traced into coarse stage nodes such
as 𝐺1, Attention, and 𝐺2. In the original monolithic prefill graph,
each layer exposes a mostly serial stage sequence, 𝐺1 →Attention
→𝐺2, over the full prompt. However, this initial graph contains
little dependency-valid overlap because there are no independent
nodes to schedule. Through micro-batching, we restructure the
graph by replicating these nodes per 𝜇B and adding only the KV-
cache dependency edges required for causal correctness. As a result,
nodes such as 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺2 and 𝜇𝐵2-Attention can become independent
once the required KV-cache update is complete, exposing overlap
that is absent from the original monolithic execution graph.
5.2.1
Causal Parallel Micro-Batching. HeteroMosaic uses micro-
batching not merely as a memory optimization, but as a mechanism
for exposing concurrent heterogeneous opportunity. As illustrated in
Figure 5a, we view each LLM transformer block as three coarse
stages: operations before attention that generate and write entries
into the KV cache (𝐺1), the attention computation, and operations
that follow attention (𝐺2). This abstraction lets us describe prefill
not as one monolithic pass over the full prompt, but as a sequence
of smaller causally ordered chunks, or micro-batches (𝜇Bs). Each
𝜇B processes only a subset of prompt tokens, writes its new keys
and values into the KV cache, and allows later 𝜇Bs to attend to
the tokens that have already been processed. This preserves the
same causal semantics as the original prefill, because a later 𝜇B can
read earlier KV-cache entries but never depends on future tokens.
Figure 5b shows the conventional serial form used by frameworks
such as llama.cpp: 𝜇𝐵1 executes first and extends the KV cache,
then 𝜇𝐵2 executes using the deeper causal history created by 𝜇𝐵1,
and the final output is produced after the last micro-batch. Later
𝜇Bs therefore attend over a longer KV history and incur longer
attention time.
Our first scheduling insight is that these micro-batches can them-
selves execute in parallel. However, to preserve attention causality,
a subsequent 𝜇𝐵may only read from the KV cache after the pre-
ceding 𝜇𝐵has written its entries. Figure 5c illustrates the resulting
schedule. Compared with the serial schedule in Figure 5b, 𝜇𝐵2 does
not need to wait for all of 𝜇𝐵1 to finish; once 𝜇𝐵1 has produced the
required KV-cache entries, 𝜇𝐵2 can begin its attention stage while
𝜇𝐵1 continues into 𝐺2. Thus, work such as 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺2 can overlap with
𝜇𝐵2-Attention, creating heterogeneous overlap that is absent in the
original monolithic schedule.
HeteroMosaic realizes this overlap using a small pool of CPU
work-dispatch threads that arbitrate dependency-ready micro-batch
stages. Each dispatch thread selects ready work from the global
schedule and forwards it to the appropriate backend. iGPU work
is issued asynchronously through independent HIP streams, with
hipEventRecord [11] used to enforce cross-stream dependencies
at KV-cache update points. NPU work is not dispatched directly
through additional general-purpose work threads; instead, it is
enqueued to a dedicated NPU management thread, which serializes
and coalesces NPU requests before issuing them to the NPU runtime,
as described in Section 5.3.2.
The number of work-dispatch threads is therefore a tunable
runtime parameter rather than a fixed design choice. It depends on
the available CPU cores, iGPU compute units, and platform power
budget. In our evaluated systems, the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 and
AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370 use two work-dispatch threads, while
the larger AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395 uses three. The additional
CPU resources, larger iGPU, and higher power budget on the AMD
Ryzen™AI Max+ 395 allow more independently dispatched GPU
work to improve iGPU occupancy without overwhelming host-
device coordination, while the NPU remains managed through its
single dedicated queueing path.
Importantly, parallel micro-batching alone does not necessar-
ily reduce end-to-end LLM latency on a single-accelerator system,
since all work still contends for the same execution resources. In
our experiments, asynchronous parallel dispatch of micro-batches
could even hurt performance due to cache-level interference; for ex-
ample, 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺1 and 𝜇𝐵2-𝐺1 may simultaneously read duplicate QKV
weights into the iGPU LLC, leading to cache thrashing. In a hetero-
geneous system, however, these same causally valid micro-batches
can be separated across devices and converted into useful overlap.
This connects directly back to the roofline model: the roofline iden-
tifies where heterogeneous opportunity exists in principle, while
micro-batching reshapes the execution graph to expose schedulable
opportunity that is hidden in the original monolithic schedule. In
this sense, micro-batching does not change the analytical bound
itself; rather, it makes more of the bound reachable in practice by
uncovering previously hidden heterogeneous opportunity.
5.2.2
Heterogeneous Critical-Interval Latency Shaping. Once causal
parallel micro-batching has exposed additional graph-level overlap,
HeteroMosaic uses heterogeneous allocation as a latency-shaping
mechanism that controls when a node in the task graph completes
relative to the global schedule. The key control is the allocation
choice for that node. A tensor-parallel split close to the device-
optimal balance point can decrease the node’s execution time by
using both accelerators effectively. For non-critical nodes, how-
ever, HeteroMosaic can choose slower but less interfering alloca-
tions: single-accelerator execution on the fastest accelerator, single-
accelerator execution on the second-fastest accelerator, or a de-
liberately less aggressive split. Thus, the allocation space spans
fast tensor-parallel configurations for critical nodes and slower
single-device or weakly split configurations for non-critical nodes.
Algorithm 1 formalizes this policy for a single node within a criti-
cal interval, a window in time in which dependency-ready stages
9


--- Page 10 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Algorithm 1 Runtime-Aware Latency Shaping
1: Input: node 𝑛, competing stages 𝐶𝑤
2: Output: edit 𝑞𝑛
3: 𝑆←GetSystemInfo ⊲DVFS, device balance, NPU runtime
4: 𝑞𝑛←NoEdit
⊲default edit
5: 𝑏𝑛←0
⊲no bubble by default
6: if not IsHeteroCompatible(𝑛) then
7:
if not IsCritical(𝑛) then
8:
𝑏𝑛←ChooseBubble(𝑛,𝐶𝑤,𝑆)
9:
𝑞𝑛←InsertBubble(𝑛,𝑏𝑛)
10:
return 𝑞𝑛
11: 𝛽𝑛←TargetBalancePoint(𝑛,𝑆)
⊲e.g., turbo →0.5, sustained →0.6
12: 𝑠𝑛←QuantizeSplit(𝑛, 𝛽𝑛)
13: if IsCritical(𝑛) then
14:
𝑠𝑛←BiasTowardMaxResources(𝑛,𝑠𝑛,𝑆)
15: else
16:
𝑠𝑛,𝑏𝑛←BiasBubbleAwayFromCriticalNodes(𝑛,𝑠𝑛,𝑆)
17: 𝑞𝑛←SetSplitAndBubble(𝑛,𝑠𝑛,𝑏𝑛)
18: return 𝑞𝑛
from overlapping micro-batches execute concurrently and contend
for the same SoC resources. Within such an interval, HeteroMo-
saic contracts nodes on the critical path while relaxing non-critical
nodes through weaker allocations or bubbles, freeing resources for
the stages that determine interval completion. Figure 5c shows the
overlapping micro-batch structure that creates these intervals, and
Figure 5d illustrates how latency shaping changes stage completion
times within them.
The key idea in Algorithm 1 is that heterogeneous allocation is
both runtime-aware and dependency-preserving. Candidate nodes
are considered in topological order over the traced micro-batched
DAG, while the competing set 𝐶𝑤captures the stages that overlap
with the current node inside the critical interval. This topological
order preserves producer–consumer constraints, such as KV-cache
writes before later attention reads; it does not serialize execution,
since dependency-ready nodes from different micro-batches may
still execute concurrently. Figure 5d illustrates how the policy uses
this dependency-valid overlap. In the constrained region, critical
stages such as 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺1 are biased toward faster allocations so that
they complete earlier and unblock dependent work. In the relaxed-
latency region, non-critical stages such as 𝜇𝐵2-𝐺2 may use a less
aggressive allocation or an inserted bubble so that they finish just
in time without extending the global critical path.
Given a node and its competing stages, the algorithm first checks
whether the node is heterogeneity-compatible. If not, the only re-
maining control is whether to insert a bubble for a non-critical
node so that it interferes less with the critical path, as shown by the
delayed 𝜇𝐵2-𝐺1 stage in Figure 5d. If the node is compatible, the
runtime queries the current system state and selects a target bal-
ance point before quantizing that decision into a concrete split. This
system state includes DVFS behavior, effective iGPU–NPU asym-
metry, and NPU runtime effects such as queueing and configuration
pressure.
(a) Limits of Micro-Batching and Latency Shaping.
(b) Example of an Asymmetric Schedule.
Figure 6: Example of Asymmetric Micro-Batching Schedules.
The concrete latency-shaping decision can therefore change
across SoC variations and runtime regimes. In particular, the bal-
ance point can shift between a short-lived turbo regime, in which
the SoC operates at temporarily elevated power and frequency, and
a sustained regime, in which the chip settles to a lower long-term
operating point under thermal and power constraints. A split that is
favorable while the SoC remains in turbo may no longer be optimal
once execution enters the sustained-power regime, and NPU-side ef-
fects such as reconfiguration pressure can further bias the preferred
allocation. HeteroMosaic therefore does not use a fixed split rule;
instead, as shown in Algorithm 1, it selects a runtime-aware target
balance point and then biases the final split differently depending
on whether the node is critical or non-critical.
This distinction matters because graph-level overlap becomes
substantially more valuable when combined with operation-level
latency shaping. By adjusting the allocation of work across the
iGPU and NPU, HeteroMosaic can control the execution time of
stages such as 𝐺1 and 𝐺2 so that they better align with the global
graph schedule. Critical stages are biased toward allocations that
minimize completion time under the current system state, while
non-critical stages may use less aggressive splits, single-accelerator
execution, or bubbles so that they do not interfere with more impor-
tant work. In this way, heterogeneous allocation is used not merely
to distribute computation, but to shape node latency around the
critical path under practical runtime effects.
5.2.3
Asymmetric Micro-Batching for Long Contexts. The fixed
micro-batch schedules discussed so far implicitly assume that het-
erogeneity provides sufficient dynamic range to align node com-
pletion times with the global schedule. This assumption becomes
increasingly fragile at long context lengths and SoCs with accelera-
tor asymmetry. In Transformer-based graphs, the root cause is the
different scaling behavior of linear projections and attention. For a
fixed model width, the computational complexity of linear projec-
tions scales linearly with prompt length, while the computational
complexity of attention scales quadratically. More concretely, pro-
jection layers scale as 𝑂(𝑁𝑑2), whereas attention scales as 𝑂(𝑁2𝑑),
where 𝑁is the prompt length and 𝑑is the embedding dimension.
As a result, when 𝑁is small, non-attention computation occupies a
larger share of the schedule, but as 𝑁grows, attention increasingly
10


--- Page 11 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
dominates. As illustrated in Figure 6a, exaggerated here for clar-
ity, naive micro-batching of long prompts can produce schedules
in which the growing attention time, driven both by the intrinsic
complexity of attention and by the deeper KV history seen by later
micro-batches, overwhelms the latency-shaping range available
through heterogeneous tensor parallelism. This challenge becomes
even more severe on unbalanced systems, where the achievable
heterogeneous dynamic range may be insufficient to satisfy the
schedule induced by the graph.
The limitation is that, for long prompts, a fixed micro-batch
schedule can create stage imbalance that heterogeneous latency
shaping cannot fully absorb. As later micro-batches see a deeper KV
history, their attention stages grow and begin to dominate the micro-
batched schedule. The maximum acceleration each micro-batch can
achieve is bounded by the dynamic range of the latency-shaping
mechanism. Here, dynamic range refers to how much the runtime
can change a node’s execution time through tensor-parallel splits,
single-accelerator assignment, or bubbles. This range is larger on
balanced systems: if the iGPU and NPU have comparable capability,
using both accelerators can ideally provide close to a 2× latency
reduction over either single-accelerator baseline. On a skewed sys-
tem, however, the range relative to the stronger accelerator is much
smaller. For example, with a 1:4 NPU-to-iGPU compute ratio, the
ideal heterogeneous speedup over the iGPU is only (1+4)/4 = 1.25×.
Thus, when attention growth exceeds this limited shaping range, the
runtime cannot contract the long-attention micro-batches enough
to achieve the same degree of speedup observed at shorter prompt
lengths.
HeteroMosaic addresses this limitation by expanding the search
space to include not only heterogeneous allocation, but also micro-
batch size selection. Rather than assuming a fixed, equal-size micro-
batch schedule, it identifies a micro-batch strategy that better matches
the available latency-shaping range. The intuition is illustrated in
Figure 6b, which replaces the fixed schedule in Figure 6a with an
example gradually decreasing micro-batch size. In the fixed sched-
ule, later micro-batches spend disproportionate time in attention
because attention cost grows with the deeper KV history. The de-
creasing schedule counteracts this by making later micro-batches
smaller, reducing the attention time that would otherwise dom-
inate those stages. Larger earlier micro-batches preserve useful
projection work when the attention history is still shallow. This
better balances attention time across micro-batches and reduces
the amount of linear projection work that remains on the critical
path for deeper micro-batches. Although this strategy is not always
the winning solution, we find it particularly useful on systems with
limited heterogeneous range and for long prompt lengths, where
fixed schedules can otherwise become too rigid.
5.2.4
Critical-Interval Co-Optimization. The exposed overlap cre-
ates a non-greedy schedule optimization problem: locally faster
mappings can worsen end-to-end latency by perturbing more criti-
cal stages. In a heterogeneous micro-batched schedule, graph-level
overlap and operation-level allocation are inherently coupled. For
example, in Figure 5c, greedily optimizing 𝜇𝐵2-𝐺2 can negatively
impact 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺1, and vice versa, because both execute within a shared
runtime environment and contend for the same heterogeneous re-
sources. As a result, local improvements do not necessarily translate
into global gains. HeteroMosaic therefore introduces a trace-guided
critical-interval co-optimization algorithm that leverages its ex-
plicit C++ runtime to emit fine-grained execution traces. Each trace
record contains the stage identifier, micro-batch identifier, back-
end assignment, tensor split ratio, start timestamp, end timestamp,
and measured latency. These records are then used to evaluate
graph-level overlap and operation-level resource allocation against
measured end-to-end latency.
Algorithm 2 summarizes this procedure. We adopt a trace-driven
approach because graph nodes in real systems can skew in time due
to scheduler race conditions, DVFS, and runtime-specific behaviors.
Since the algorithm depends on accurately identifying the true crit-
ical interval, relying on a static schedule or purely analytical timing
model proved insufficient. As shown in lines 3–8 of Algorithm 2,
the method first evaluates candidate micro-batch schedules, exe-
cutes each one, and constructs an internal DAG from the resulting
runtime trace. It then selects the schedule that minimizes measured
critical-path pressure.
After this initialization step, the algorithm repeatedly builds
critical intervals, i.e., time windows in which the same set of stage
instances are simultaneously active and therefore contend for the
same GPU/NPU environment. Lines 11–17 of Algorithm 2 then
iterate over nodes in the current traced DAG and invoke Algorithm 1
to propose a node-level edit. Each edit applies the latency-shaping
mechanism described in Section 5.2.2 in the context of the measured
global schedule, adjusting a node’s split, accelerator assignment,
or bubble so that the node completes earlier or later as needed to
reduce critical-path pressure rather than optimizing the node in
isolation. In this way, Algorithm 1 provides the local runtime-aware
policy, while Algorithm 2 decides whether that local edit is globally
beneficial.
Within each interval, HeteroMosaic jointly optimizes two deci-
sions: the heterogeneous allocation, and optional bubbles for non-
critical nodes, which intentionally delay execution when doing so
protects the global critical path. Every proposed edit is re-executed
and accepted only if it improves measured end-to-end latency, as
shown in lines 13–16 of Algorithm 2. This structure is important
because a node-level improvement from Algorithm 1 does not nec-
essarily reduce overall latency once the full schedule is re-executed.
This tuning is performed offline once per model/device configura-
tion. In our current implementation, the full trace-guided search
takes on the order of eight hours and produces reusable configura-
tions for representative prompt-length ranges. At deployment time,
HeteroMosaic selects the corresponding configuration and does not
repeat the full search. Thus, the search cost is paid during offline
calibration rather than on the latency-critical inference path.
5.3
AMD Ryzen™AI Runtime Realization
The previous subsection described the scheduling concepts under-
lying HeteroMosaic. We now describe the AMD Ryzen™AI-specific
runtime mechanisms required to realize them efficiently in practice.
These mechanisms are not the primary algorithmic contribution of
the paper; rather, they are the platform-specific enablers that allow
the scheduling framework to execute effectively on unified-memory
AMD Ryzen™AI SoCs.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Algorithm 2 Trace-Guided Critical-Interval Co-Optimization
1: Input: initial configuration 𝐶0, micro-batch schedule 𝑆0
2: Output: tuned configuration (𝐶★,𝑆★)
3: for all 𝑠∈S0 do
4:
(𝑇𝑠, 𝐿𝑠) ←RunModelAndCollectTrace(𝐶0,𝑠)
⊲Execute schedule 𝑠and record trace 𝑇𝑠and latency 𝐿𝑠
5:
𝐺𝑠←BuildInternalDAG(𝑇𝑠)
⊲Build a stage DAG from traced dependencies and timing
6:
𝑃𝑠←MeasureCriticalPathPressure(𝐺𝑠)
⊲Critical-path pressure metric
7:
if 𝑃𝑠< 𝑃★then
⊲𝑃★initialized to ∞
8:
𝑆★,𝐶★,𝑇★,𝐺★, 𝑃★, 𝐿★←𝑠,𝐶0,𝑇𝑠,𝐺𝑠, 𝑃𝑠, 𝐿𝑠
9: for 𝑖= 1 to 𝐵do
⊲Search budget 𝐵
10:
𝑊←BuildCriticalIntervals(𝐺★)
11:
for all 𝑛∈𝐺★do
12:
𝑞𝑛←LatencyShaping(𝑛,𝑊)
13:
𝐶𝑞←ApplyEdit(𝐶★,𝑞𝑛)
14:
(𝑇𝑞, 𝐿𝑞) ←RunModelAndCollectTrace(𝐶𝑞,𝑆★)
15:
𝐺𝑞←BuildInternalDAG(𝑇𝑞)
16:
if 𝐿𝑞< 𝐿★then
17:
𝐶★,𝑇★,𝐺★, 𝐿★←𝐶𝑞,𝑇𝑞,𝐺𝑞, 𝐿𝑞
18: return (𝐶★,𝑆★)
5.3.1
Unified Memory and Synchronization. A primary challenge
in mapping compute across the iGPU and NPU on AMD Ryzen™
AI is reconciling separate memory and runtime models. On AMD
Ryzen™AI running Linux, we implement unified memory across dif-
ferent runtimes through the Direct Rendering Manager (DRM) [42]
stack, which allows us to create shareable buffers across devices.
A second challenge is synchronization across heterogeneous run-
times. On the iGPU, execution follows an asynchronous stream-
based model through ROCm [5], where the host dispatches work
non-blockingly and dependencies are preserved within each stream.
The NPU, by contrast, follows a host-dispatch-and-return model,
where the host submits work and blocks until completion. Hetero-
Mosaic reconciles these differing runtimes by using independent
HIP streams to preserve correctness within a micro-batch, while
combining hipEventRecord and hipStreamWaitValue32 [11, 12]
as host-mediated signaling mechanisms to preserve dependencies
across multiple iGPU streams and the NPU.
5.3.2
Runtime NPU Management. AMD Ryzen™AI NPUs, when
implemented well, can exhibit lower GEMM shape sensitivity than
prior mobile NPU paths such as HeteroInfer, where fixed systolic-
array tiling and tensor order/shape alignment introduce stage-,
order-, and shape-sensitive performance variation [21]. However,
this comes at the cost of fixed reconfiguration overhead. Prior
work [75] has shown that NPU reconfiguration can negatively
impact end-to-end performance. On AMD Ryzen™AI, the NPU
exposes two levels of configuration: (i) datapath reconfiguration,
which is expensive because it reprograms tile internals and switch-
box routes, and (ii) DMA reconfiguration, which updates the DMA
engines and is effectively negligible even for microsecond-scale
kernels. The central challenge is therefore to choose an NPU sched-
ule that maximizes reuse of datapath configurations. This issue
becomes even more important in parallel micro-batched schedules,
where, without careful alignment, the NPU may thrash between
configurations across adjacent micro-batches.
To address this, we implement a dedicated NPU management
thread that services requests generated by the main micro-batch
schedule shown in Figure 1. Independent micro-batches enqueue
NPU operations into this thread, which then coalesces requests
with compatible datapath configurations. In addition, the same
operation often appears across multiple micro-batches and differs
only in its activation inputs. Without optimization, operations such
as 𝜇𝐵1-𝐺1 and 𝜇𝐵2-𝐺1 would be dispatched separately, causing
the NPU to reread the same 𝑄weights multiple times. When such
operations recur within a suitable interval, the NPU management
thread can coalesce these otherwise independent but structurally
identical operations, thereby reducing both NPU dispatch overhead
and redundant weight reads.
5.3.3
Custom Heterogeneous GPU Kernels. The IRON-based NPU
kernels available through the open-source fork in [34] rely on a cus-
tom weight layout. As a result, to share weights effectively between
the iGPU and NPU, HeteroMosaic cannot rely on existing GPU ker-
nels. We therefore develop optimized iGPU kernels whose weight
layout is compatible with the NPU layout, eliminating weight du-
plication across accelerators. Beyond GEMM, we also implement
framework-tailored iGPU kernels for non-GEMM stages such as
normalization, KV-cache handling, and FlashAttention-style atten-
tion [23]. In our experiments, these optimized iGPU kernels outper-
form available W4A16 implementations such as llama.cpp [27],
largely because they are specialized for RDNA-based iGPUs [6] and
HeteroMosaic’s execution path.
6
Evaluation
To evaluate HeteroMosaic, we study three current-generation AMD
Ryzen™AI devices spanning NPU-heavy, balanced, and iGPU-heavy
designs: the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350, AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370,
and AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, respectively. Our evaluation is
organized to test the two-stage argument of this paper. First, we
use microbenchmarks to measure the directly accelerable core of in-
ference and to evaluate whether the achievable behavior of GEMM
aligns with the roofline-based opportunity identified in Section 4.
Second, we use end-to-end LLM inference to test whether Hetero-
Mosaic can expose and recover that opportunity at the graph level
under realistic runtime constraints. We then contextualize these
results against relevant prior heterogeneous frameworks, analyze
the contribution of HeteroMosaic’s individual components through
ablations, and study whether the resulting speedups translate into
lower energy under the TDP-constrained behavior of modern SoCs.
6.1
Microbenchmarks
Microbenchmarks isolate the directly accelerable GEMM core of
inference and provide the cleanest measured view of the roofline-
identified opportunity. They also quantify the split-dimension de-
sign space introduced in Section 2.4 and Section 5.1 by answering
four questions. First, do the measured gains match the opportu-
nity predicted by the roofline model? Second, how do those gains
vary across SoCs with different iGPU–NPU balance points? Third,
which tensor-parallel split dimension is most effective for different
GEMM shapes? Fourth, how much of the observed behavior reflects
12


--- Page 13 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350
AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370
AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395
M-split
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM M on GPU
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM M on GPU
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM M on GPU
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
K-split
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM K on GPU
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM K on GPU
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM K on GPU
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
N-split
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM N on GPU
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM N on GPU
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fraction of GEMM N on GPU
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Speedup over iGPU
2048_2048_2048
4096_4096_4096
8192_4096_14336
8192_8192_8192
8192_14336_4096
Figure 7: Speedup of heterogeneous execution for GEMMs of varying sizes on the NPU and iGPU, normalized to the iGPU
baseline. Results are shown for M-, K-, and N-dimension tensor splits across three AMD Ryzen™AI systems.
genuine heterogeneous opportunity rather than shape sensitivity,
memory contention, or kernel artifacts [1, 59]?
We map GEMM operations heterogeneously using the 𝑀-, 𝐾-,
and 𝑁-split strategies described in Section 2.4. Figure 7 summarizes
the results. Each point is averaged over 1024 GEMM runs, with error
bars indicating variation across those repeated runs. This variation
primarily reflects SoC power-management behavior, where execu-
tion can move between a transient turbo/high-power state and a
sustained TDP-limited state. Shorter GEMMs are especially sensi-
tive to which regime they execute under, which is evident across
platforms for shapes such as 2048×2048×2048. Longer GEMMs
can also show variation when a run spans a turbo-to-sustained
transition or begins from a different thermal/power state, as seen
for larger shapes such as 8192×14336×4096 on the AMD Ryzen™
AI 9 HX 370. Overall, the measured trends follow the roofline intu-
ition: the NPU-heavy AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 exposes the largest
heterogeneous speedups over the iGPU, while the balanced AMD
Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370 shows moderate but still substantial gains,
and the iGPU-heavy AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395 shows the smallest
headroom because the iGPU baseline is already strong.
Across the full sweep, 𝑀-split is the most consistently effective
strategy. 𝑀-split avoids cross-device reduction and works well for
small and moderate GEMMs where duplicated weight reads do not
dominate execution. However, on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 and
AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370, where DDR bandwidth and iGPU com-
pute capability are more limited than on the AMD Ryzen™AI Max+
395, 𝐾-split can outperform 𝑀-split for larger GEMMs. Using the
notation 𝑀×𝐾×𝑁for GEMM shapes, with 𝐴∈R𝑀×𝐾, 𝐵∈R𝐾×𝑁,
and𝐶∈R𝑀×𝑁for𝐶= 𝐴𝐵, examples of large GEMMs where 𝐾-split
becomes favorable include 8192×8192×8192 and 8192×14336×8192.
In these cases, splitting along 𝐾creates subproblems that better
utilize both accelerators, despite the additional reduction step.
The 𝐾-split results also illustrate why empirical calibration is nec-
essary. Several GEMM shapes, including 2048×2048×2048, 4096×
4096×4096, and 8192×4096×14336, perform noticeably worse than
what a simple FLOP-balanced split would suggest. This behavior
is consistent with backend shape sensitivity: the split creates lo-
cal GEMM shapes that map awkwardly onto the backend tiling
and compute resources, reducing occupancy or tiling efficiency
even when the total arithmetic work appears balanced. This ef-
fect is most pronounced on the AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370 for the
4096×4096×4096 GEMM, which shows sharp performance drops at
certain split ratios, such as around 37% and 56% GPU assignment.
Thus, the best split cannot be inferred from FLOP balance alone;
it depends on how the partitioned shape maps onto the physical
compute resources of each backend.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
𝑁-split is generally the weakest strategy in our measurements.
Although it can reduce duplicate weight reads in principle, it inter-
acts poorly with the packed weight layout used by our heteroge-
neous kernels. Because 𝑁-split partitions columns of 𝐵and𝐶, it can
require strided weight reads and scatter-like writes into the final 𝐶
tensor. These non-contiguous accesses reduce memory coalescing
and introduce gather/scatter overhead, often preventing 𝑁-split
from converting its reduced weight traffic into measured speedup.
On the AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, 𝑀-split remains best across the
evaluated shapes because higher memory bandwidth and a stronger
iGPU make simple output-row partitioning more effective than the
reduction overhead of 𝐾-split or the gather/scatter overhead of
𝑁-split.
These results provide the empirical bridge between the roofline
model and the HeteroMosaic scheduler. For compute-heavy GEMMs,
the measured iGPU–NPU speedups track the roofline model’s pre-
dicted opportunity, while deviations mainly reflect shape sensi-
tivity, memory contention, and runtime overheads. However, the
best tensor-parallel strategy still depends on GEMM shape, split
ratio, SoC balance, memory bandwidth, layout compatibility, and
accelerator-specific shape sensitivity. HeteroMosaic therefore uses
these microbenchmarks to calibrate candidate splits, while the
global scheduler ultimately determines which split that improves
the end-to-end critical path.
6.2
End-to-End LLM Evaluation
Thus, to evaluate whether and to what extent the heterogeneous
gains observed in the microbenchmarks translate to the full end-
to-end application, we evaluate HeteroMosaic across a series of
LLMs with different model sizes and prompt lengths, as shown in
Figure 8. This setting is substantially more challenging than the
microbenchmark setting because full-model inference includes at-
tention and KV-cache traffic, non-partitionable operators, layerwise
shape variation, synchronization overhead, NPU runtime behavior,
unified-memory contention, and DVFS/thermal effects. For each
model–device pair, we report results across several prompt lengths
and normalize performance to the corresponding iGPU baseline.
Our comparison includes five configurations: our iGPU-only
baseline, our NPU-oriented baseline, llama.cpp [27]2, a HeteroInfer-
style baseline, and HeteroMosaic.
For HeteroInfer [21], we implement a faithful re-creation based
on the published design, since the original system is not open source
and is not natively compatible with AMD Ryzen™AI.3 To validate
that this re-creation captures the published behavior, we emulate
the reported iGPU:NPU imbalance of roughly 1:10 by inserting
2We base these results on llama.cpp commits from March 2026 and use the ROCm
backend with Q4_K_S, the closest available proxy to AWQ-style W4A16 execution
in llama.cpp. Q4_K_S is a llama.cpp-specific 4-bit K-quant format that keeps the
linear-layer weights in 4-bit form, whereas Q4_K_M uses a mixed variant that retains
selected tensors at higher precision. We therefore use Q4_K_S to better approximate a
uniform 4-bit weight-only baseline.
3When details are ambiguous, we use conservative implementation choices that avoid
penalizing the baseline. For example, AMD Ryzen™AI NPUs exhibit less shape sensi-
tivity than reported in the original paper, and Qualcomm’s QNN stack differs from
AMD Ryzen™AI in both quantization support and kernel availability [35, 73, 74]. We
therefore use the strongest corresponding implementation available on our platform:
fused IRON-based NPU kernels together with our heterogeneity-compatible iGPU
AWQ W4A16 kernels, rather than directly mirroring QNN’s channel-wise quantization
path.
bubbles on the iGPU path so that the effective ratio matches the
performance characteristics described in HeteroInfer.4
Our iGPU baseline uses the same micro-batching schedule as
llama.cpp to keep the comparison fair, yet it still consistently out-
performs llama.cpp, largely because our iGPU kernels are more
tightly optimized for AMD Ryzen™AI. Our NPU-oriented baseline
follows a HeteroInfer-like placement strategy, in which linear pro-
jections run on the NPU while operations such as attention and
normalization remain on the iGPU.
6.2.1
Analysis of Prefill Results. Figure 8 shows a clear device-
level trend across all evaluated models. HeteroMosaic performs
best on the left column (AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350), remains clearly
beneficial in the middle column (AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370), and
still provides consistent gains in the right column (AMD Ryzen™
AI Max+ 395). This trend follows the underlying SoC balance point:
as the system shifts from NPU-heavy to balanced and then to iGPU-
heavy, the total heterogeneous headroom above the iGPU base-
line shrinks. Averaged across the raw prefill results, HeteroMosaic
achieves about 2.30×, 1.50×, and 1.17× speedup over the iGPU
baseline on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350, AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX
370, and AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, respectively. This ordering is
consistent with the roofline and GEMM microbenchmarks, but the
absolute end-to-end gains are lower than the operation-level peaks
because full inference also includes non-partitionable operators, at-
tention and KV-cache bandwidth, synchronization overhead, finite
split granularity, NPU reconfiguration, unified-memory contention,
shape sensitivity, and DVFS/thermal effects. The HeteroInfer-style
tensor-partitioning baseline falls even further below the GEMM
microbenchmark peaks, showing that local operation partitioning
alone does not preserve GEMM-level opportunity once embedded
in the full execution graph.
A key point in Figure 8 is that HeteroMosaic consistently outper-
forms both comparison strategies across all three devices. Relative
to our NPU-oriented baseline, HeteroMosaic is still about 1.35×
faster on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350, 1.60× faster on the AMD
Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370, and 2.86× faster on the AMD Ryzen™AI Max+
395 on average. This comparison makes clear that HeteroMosaic’s
advantage is not just a byproduct of favoring the NPU. Instead,
these gains come from exposing additional graph-level overlap and
then co-optimizing accelerator allocation around the actual critical
path. HeteroMosaic also remains ahead of HeteroInfer across the
full figure, with average improvements of about 1.22×, 1.28×, and
1.32× on the same three devices. The rightmost column is especially
instructive: even though the absolute iGPU-normalized headroom
is smaller there, HeteroMosaic still retains an advantage because
schedule-level overlap and latency shaping continue to matter after
simple tensor placement has largely run out of room.
Across models, HeteroMosaic also shows that the amount of re-
coverable heterogeneous opportunity depends on model structure.
Models with larger embedding dimensions, such as Qwen2.5-14B
and Llama3-70B, naturally expose more operation-level heteroge-
neous work. Phi-3.5-3.8B is also relatively favorable because its
4Under this calibration, on AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 with Llama3-8B at prompt length
256, our re-creation reaches roughly 6.1× versus the reported 5.6× relative to its
respective iGPU baseline. We attribute the remaining gap to differences in device
characteristics and implementation details not fully specified in the paper.
14


--- Page 15 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350
AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370
AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395
Phi3.5-3.8B
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
Llama3-8B
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
Qwen2.5-14B
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
Llama3-70B
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
1024
2048
4096
8192
16384
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
llama.cpp(iGPU)
iGPU-baseline
NPU-baseline
HeteroInfer
HeteroMosaic
Figure 8: End-to-end LLM prompt latency speedup across AMD Ryzen™AI devices and across multiple AWQ W4A16 models
from Hugging Face. Columns correspond to devices and rows to models. In each subplot, the x-axis shows input prompt length
in tokens, and the y-axis shows speedup over the iGPU baseline, computed as baseline latency divided by method latency;
higher is better. We note that for Llama3-70B, the 16K runs without micro-batching failed due to OOM.
MHA design retains larger 𝐾and 𝑉projections than the GQA-
based models. Even so, the central pattern is consistent across rows:
HeteroMosaic remains the strongest method because it combines
operation-level partitioning with graph-level overlap and runtime-
aware schedule shaping, rather than relying only on a placement
policy for split-friendly dense layers. At long contexts, especially
for Llama3-70B, the gains of all methods become more muted as
execution moves deeper into the sustained-power regime, where
the SoC has moved past short-lived turbo behavior and settles into
a lower steady-state throughput under thermal and power lim-
its. Even in this constrained regime, HeteroMosaic maintains the
strongest overall performance. At 16K, it is the only heterogeneous
method among these baselines that completes across all three de-
vices while preserving positive speedup over the iGPU baseline.
Beyond exposing heterogeneous overlap, its micro-batching also
manages memory footprint, allowing large cases such as Llama3-
70B at 16K to avoid OOM failures. Taken together, the prefill results
show that tensor placement alone recovers only part of the avail-
able heterogeneous opportunity, whereas HeteroMosaic more fully
Table 2: Normalized TPS decode performance (HeteroMosaic
/ iGPU) across three AMD Ryzen™AI platforms.
Model
AMD Ryzen™
AI 7 350
AMD Ryzen™
AI 9 HX 370
AMD Ryzen™
AI Max+ 395
Phi3.5-3.8B
1.00×
1.11×
1.11×
Llama3-8B
1.13×
1.02×
0.995×
Qwen2.5-14B
1.07×
0.99×
0.996×
Llama3-70B
1.09×
0.98×
1.00×
realizes that opportunity by jointly reasoning about graph structure,
operation shape, SoC balance, and runtime system effects.
6.2.2
Analysis of Decode Results. Decode performance is funda-
mentally memory-bound. However, similar to HeteroInfer [21], we
find that heterogeneous GEMV can still be beneficial when the
iGPU alone does not fully utilize the available memory system or
when GEMV shapes underutilize the iGPU. As shown in Table 2,
this occurs most consistently on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 for the
15


--- Page 16 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Time (s)
0
2
4
6
8
Current (A)
45.3% less J
29.5% less J
16.6% less J
turbo
Ryzen AI 7 350-HeteroMosaic
Ryzen AI 7 350-iGPU
Ryzen AI 9 HX 370-HeteroMosaic
Ryzen AI 9 HX 370-iGPU
Ryzen AI Max+ 395-HeteroMosaic
Ryzen AI Max+ 395-iGPU
Figure 9: Measured current (A) over time during the same
LLM inference workload across three platforms.
larger evaluated models, where the weaker iGPU benefits modestly
from additional CPU/NPU parallelism. On the AMD Ryzen™AI 9
HX 370 and AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, heterogeneous decode
is usually neutral or slightly harmful because the stronger iGPU
already approaches the useful memory-bandwidth limit and the
added synchronization overhead can outweigh the benefit. Phi3.5-
3.8B is an exception: its smaller GEMV dimensions leave more room
for shape- and launch-efficiency effects, allowing modest heteroge-
neous decode gains on the larger platforms as well. These results
are consistent with the broader thesis of the paper: decode offers
limited heterogeneous headroom on unified-memory SoCs once the
iGPU can already drive sufficient memory traffic, whereas prefill
remains the primary setting in which graph-level scheduling and
latency shaping recover substantial heterogeneous benefit.
6.3
Power Study
A natural concern with heterogeneous execution is that activat-
ing more accelerators will simply increase power. However, on
TDP-constrained edge SoCs, as shown in Figure 9, the iGPU alone
often already operates near the system power limit.5 Instead, the
more relevant question is whether heterogeneous scheduling can
complete more useful work within roughly the same power enve-
lope. Under this view, any speedup achieved without materially
increasing peak power should reduce the total energy required to
complete inference.
We validate this experimentally by measuring current using a
lab bench power supply [60] at a sampling rate of 10 Hz. The results,
summarized in Figure 9, support this intuition: HeteroMosaic im-
proves performance without introducing a corresponding increase
in peak current. We also observe that AMD Ryzen™AI SoCs exhibit
a turbo regime in which the chip operates at an elevated power level
for a short interval before settling into a lower sustained operating
point. HeteroMosaic can extend this high-performance interval,
most clearly on the AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, which is consistent
with our broader thesis that heterogeneity is most effective when
it is co-optimized against real system behavior.
6.4
Ablation Study
An ablation study of HeteroMosaic is by nature non-trivial as its
optimizations are co-dependent: removing one component changes
5In heterogeneous execution, adding iGPU participation can cause the package to
approach its TDP limit through iGPU DVFS regardless of the exact NPU fraction, so
heavier NPU use does not necessarily translate into lower instantaneous power.
1024
2048
4096
8192
Prompt size
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
2.25
2.50
2.75
3.00
Speedup over iGPU
Ryzen AI 7
 350
Ryzen AI 9
 HX 370
Ryzen AI
 MAX+ 395
Tensor Parallel
Critical Interval B
Asymmetric B
NPU Scheduling
DVFS
2.08x
0.33x
2.45x
0.27x
2.30x
2.13x
0.28x
1.46x
0.24x
0.28x
Figure 10: Ablation of HeteroMosaic for Llama3-8B across
AMD Ryzen™AI devices and prompt sizes. Bar height indi-
cates speedup over the iGPU baseline, while colored segments
show the contribution of each optimization.
the globally optimal schedule. In particular, tensor parallelism,
asymmetric 𝜇𝐵, DVFS-aware scheduling, critical-interval micro-
batching, and NPU scheduling build on one another rather than
contributing independently. For example, the full benefit of tensor
parallelism cannot be realized to the same extent without critical-
interval micro-batched scheduling, which exposes additional graph-
level parallelism for heterogeneity to exploit. We therefore perform
ablation by removing each component, re-co-optimizing the re-
maining system, and then measuring the resulting speedup so that
each component’s contribution is isolated as fairly as possible.
Figure 10 helps explain where HeteroMosaic’s gains come from.
First, tensor parallelism provides the raw heterogeneous leverage
by allowing compute to be mapped across devices; across systems
and prompt lengths, this is the dominant source of speedup. Sec-
ond, critical-interval scheduling determines whether that leverage
survives globally, since locally beneficial mappings do not necessar-
ily translate into lower end-to-end latency without schedule-level
coordination. Third, as prompt length grows and attention becomes
more dominant, the contribution of asymmetric 𝜇𝐵becomes more
visible because it expands the schedule space and exposes addi-
tional schedulable work. Fourth, DVFS-aware scheduling matters
because realized performance is not nominal performance: by parti-
tioning work between the NPU and iGPU in a DVFS-aware manner,
HeteroMosaic can keep the SoC in a higher turbo state for longer,
increasing effective performance beyond what a static mapping
would suggest. Finally, NPU scheduling matters because runtime
effects such as reconfiguration overhead and redundant weight
movement can otherwise erase a meaningful fraction of the gain.
6.5
Comparison with Other Frameworks
To contextualize HeteroMosaic against llama.cpp iGPU-ROCm [27]
and production AMD LLM frameworks, including FastFlowLM
16


--- Page 17 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
1024
2048
4096
1024
2048
4096
1024
2048
4096
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
Prefill / TTFT (seconds)
3.72s
8.05s
18.32s
2.21s
4.70s
10.28s
0.81s
1.60s
3.40s
2.96s
5.19s
8.17s
2.54s
5.14s
8.02s
2.90s
4.24s
8.07s
1.91s
3.60s
8.86s
1.91s
3.61s
9.80s
1.83s
3.74s
8.88s
1.39s
2.66s
6.40s
1.42s
2.43s
4.97s
0.59s
1.19s
2.45s
AMD Ryzen AI 7 350
AMD Ryzen AI 9 HX 370
AMD Ryzen AI MAX+ 395
llama.cpp(iGPU)
FLM
RyzenOGA
HeteroMosaic
(a) TTFT comparison. Lower is better.
1024
2048
4096
1024
2048
4096
1024
2048
4096
0
10
20
30
40
Decode Throughput / TPS (tokens/s)
12.55
12.18
11.51
15.57
15.33
14.68
40.00
39.24
37.50
12.45
11.49
11.25
10.63
9.94
9.89
10.59
10.36
8.82
12.91
12.36
10.58
15.55
15.62
14.06
33.35
29.89
26.33
14.59
14.19
13.48
16.94
16.44
15.68
39.78
38.92
37.18
AMD Ryzen AI 7 350
AMD Ryzen AI 9 HX 370
AMD Ryzen AI MAX+ 395
llama.cpp(iGPU)
FLM
RyzenOGA
HeteroMosaic
(b) TPS comparison. Higher is better.
Figure 11: Cross-framework comparison for Llama3-8B
across AMD Ryzen™AI platforms.
(FLM) [25] and the Ryzen ONNX Hybrid Runtime (Ryzen-OGA)6 [10],
we evaluate Llama3-8B [50] across AMD Ryzen™AI platforms. We
report raw TTFT and TPS in Figure 11 so that cross-platform and
cross-device performance can be compared more directly. These
comparisons are not numerically identical across implementations:
for example, llama.cpp on the iGPU uses integer computation,
Ryzen-OGA uses BFP16 [79] activations, and HeteroMosaic uses
BF16, while the exact internal behavior of FLM is not openly doc-
umented. Therefore, these experiments should be interpreted as
a coarse cross-framework and cross-platform comparison rather
than a strict apples-to-apples evaluation.
For TTFT, HeteroMosaic is consistently the strongest solution
across the evaluated platforms, with the largest benefits appear-
ing when heterogeneous resources can be effectively exposed and
scheduled at the graph level. A particularly notable result is that
HeteroMosaic on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 achieves a 2048-token
TTFT of 2.66 s, which is not only substantially faster than the
same-platform llama.cpp baseline of 8.05 s, but also faster than
the stronger llama.cpp iGPU baseline on the AMD Ryzen™AI 9
HX 370 of 4.70 s. This corresponds to a 1.76× TTFT advantage over
the AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370 llama.cpp baseline, demonstrating
that well-orchestrated heterogeneous execution can outperform
stronger iGPU-only baselines. This suggests that balanced hetero-
geneous compute, low-overhead shared memory, and fine-grained
synchronization can provide more practical benefit for transformer
inference than simply increasing iGPU resources alone.
For TPS, the picture is more nuanced because decode is more
strongly constrained by memory bandwidth. HeteroMosaic remains
competitive and often leads, but the gains are smaller than for TTFT,
especially on the AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395, where both Hetero-
Mosaic and llama.cpp already operate near the bandwidth ceiling.
In contrast, on the AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350 and AMD Ryzen™AI 9
6Ryzen-OGA runs prompt encoding on the NPU and decode on the iGPU.
HX 370, HeteroMosaic continues to provide measurable throughput
advantages over FLM and Ryzen-OGA while remaining competitive
with, or exceeding, the llama.cpp baseline.
7
Discussion and Future Work
Although the evaluation in this paper uses AMD Ryzen™AI as a
concrete implementation target, the broader goal is to provide a
principled methodology to reason about when fine-grained hetero-
geneity becomes useful. In its current realization, HeteroMosaic
benefits from three platform properties: programmable accelera-
tors, shared or low-cost memory access across devices, and low-
overhead synchronization mechanisms. These properties are not
unique to AMD Ryzen™AI, but they are also not guaranteed across
all heterogeneous systems. Thus, future systems that build on the
insights of HeteroMosaic would need to develop the correspond-
ing platform-specific runtime mechanisms, including GPU/NPU
kernels, memory-layout compatibility, queue management, and
synchronization, while preserving the same scheduling abstraction.
Beyond LLM inference, the same scheduling formulation should
be applicable to other transformer-based workloads, including
vision-language-action models for robotics such as OpenPI/𝜋0, 𝜋0.5,
and NVIDIA GR00T [52, 55, 63–66], as well as transformer-based
diffusion and flow models [18, 19, 24, 62]. These workloads contain
fundamentally similar mixtures of dense projections, attention-like
stages, memory-sensitive operators, and cross-stage dependencies,
making them natural candidates for graph-level heterogeneous
scheduling. HeteroMosaic, when applied to these similar work-
loads, may expose additional opportunities because their modality-
specific components can create more heterogeneous scheduling
choices than text-only LLMs. However, these workloads also intro-
duce new constraints, such as image-token preprocessing, vision
encoder stages, control-loop latency requirements, and diffusion-
step dependencies. Thus, extending HeteroMosaic to these settings
would require extending the current model from a single trans-
former execution path to multiple heterogeneous model stages
that connect and execute together, while also accounting for how
modality-specific stages interact with the critical path.
The cross-platform TTFT results also suggest a hardware-design
implication where a smaller heterogeneous platform may have the
potential to outperform a stronger iGPU-only baseline if the soft-
ware can expose enough parallel work and coordinate the accelera-
tors efficiently. This does not imply that larger iGPUs are unhelpful;
rather, it suggests that balanced accelerator design, shared-memory
efficiency, and low-overhead synchronization can matter as much
as raw single-accelerator scale for transformer inference.
Finally, extending this formulation to heterogeneous datacenter
systems is another possible direction, where the same heteroge-
neous scheduling idea could be applied across a mixture of accel-
erators spanning different CPU and GPU generations, compute
capabilities, and more unconventional accelerators such as field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). However, this extension would
require explicit communication modeling. Unlike unified-memory
edge SoCs, datacenter accelerators often communicate through
PCIe [61], CXL [22], NVLink [54], or network-level links. In that
17


--- Page 18 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
setting, accelerator placement must account for activation move-
ment, synchronization latency, collective overheads, and intercon-
nect contention. The same critical-interval optimization principle
may still apply, but the cost model would first need to treat com-
munication as a first-class scheduling constraint and then apply
heterogeneous scheduling around that constraint.
8
Conclusion
Edge AI is increasingly defined by heterogeneous SoCs, yet current
inference systems still treat heterogeneity too coarsely and there-
fore underutilize the full combination of on-chip compute resources.
In this paper, we present HeteroMosaic, a heterogeneity-first frame-
work that treats edge LLM inference primarily as a scheduling
problem rather than merely a placement problem. HeteroMosaic
first uses a heterogeneous roofline model to determine when het-
erogeneity should help in principle, then restructures execution
through causal micro-batching to expose latent cross-device over-
lap, and finally realizes that opportunity through latency shaping
and trace-guided critical-interval co-optimization under real system
effects.
Across three AMD Ryzen™AI platforms, HeteroMosaic improves
end-to-end LLM inference over strong baselines without increasing
peak power. This shows that, on TDP-constrained edge SoCs, co-
optimized heterogeneity can complete more work within the same
practical power envelope, improving both energy efficiency and
tokens per watt. Although the exact implementation depends on
platform-specific runtime mechanisms, the underlying scheduling
principles are broader than any one SoC family. Taken together,
HeteroMosaic shows that fine-grained heterogeneity, when exposed
and controlled through scheduling, is a practical path toward faster
and more energy-efficient edge LLM inference.
Acknowledgment
We thank Paul Hartke from AMD, and other AMD colleagues who
provided valuable feedback and technical guidance throughout
this work. This work is supported in part by the AMD Center of
Excellence at UIUC.
References
[1] 2024.
Matrix Multiplication Performance Guide.
Technical Report.
NVIDIA. https://docs.nvidia.com/deeplearning/performance/dl-performance-
matrix-multiplication/index.html
[2] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2025.
AMD Ryzen™AI 9 HX 370.
https://www.amd.com/en/products/processors/laptop/ryzen/ai-300-
series/amd-ryzen-ai-9-hx-370.html
[3] Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2026. AMD Zen Deep Neural Network Library.
https://www.amd.com/en/developer/zendnn.html. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[4] Amey Agrawal, Ashish Panwar, Jayashree Mohan, Nipun Kwatra, Bhargav S.
Gulavani, and Ramachandran Ramjee. 2024. Taming Throughput-Latency Trade-
off in LLM Inference with Sarathi-Serve. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24). 117–136.
[5] AMD. [n. d.]. ROCm. https://github.com/ROCm.
[6] AMD. 2023. How to accelerate AI applications on RDNA 3 using WMMA. https:
//gpuopen.com/learn/wmma_on_rdna3/ Describes RDNA 3 WMMA instructions
and supported data types (FP16, BF16, INT8, INT4). Accessed: 2025-11-02.
[7] AMD. 2025. AMD XDNA Architecture. https://www.amd.com/en/technologies/
xdna.html. Accessed: 2025-07-28.
[8] AMD. 2026.
AMD Ryzen™AI 7 350.
https://www.amd.com/en/products/
processors/laptop/ryzen/ai-300-series/amd-ryzen-ai-7-350.html. Product page,
accessed 2026-04-02.
[9] AMD. 2026. AMD Ryzen™AI Max+ 395. https://www.amd.com/en/products/
processors/laptop/ryzen/ai-300-series/amd-ryzen-ai-max-plus-395.html. Prod-
uct page, accessed 2026-04-02.
[10] AMD. 2026. OnnxRuntime GenAI (OGA) Flow — Ryzen AI Software. https:
//ryzenai.docs.amd.com/en/latest/hybrid_oga.html. Accessed: 2026-03-23.
[11] AMD
ROCm
Team.
2024.
HIP
Runtime
API:
hipEventRecord.
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/develop/doxygen/html/group___
event.html#ga5df2309c9f29ca4c8e669db658d411b4 Accessed: 2025-07-28.
[12] AMD ROCm Team. 2024.
HIP Runtime API: hipStreamWaitValue32.
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/docs-develop/reference/hip_
runtime_api/modules/stream_memory_operations.html Accessed: 2025-07-28.
[13] AMD ROCm Team. 2025.
HIP Runtime API: Streams and Synchro-
nization.
https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/HIP/en/latest/understand/
programming_model.html Accessed: 2025-07-28.
[14] Anthropic. 2025. Claude Code. https://www.anthropic.com. AI coding assistant
built on Claude; accessed 31 Jul 2025.
[15] Apple. [n. d.]. The Most Powerful Neural Engine Ever. https://www.apple.com/
newsroom/2024/05/apple-introduces-m4-chip.
[16] Apple. 2026. Core ML | Apple Developer Documentation. https://developer.apple.
com/documentation/coreml. Accessed: 2026-03-23.
[17] Apple Inc. 2026. Metal | Apple Developer Documentation. https://developer.
apple.com/documentation/metal. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[18] Fan Bao, Shen Nie, Kaiwen Xue, Yue Cao, Chongxuan Li, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu.
2023. All are Worth Words: A ViT Backbone for Diffusion Models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 22669–
22679. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2209.12152 arXiv:2209.12152 [cs.CV]
[19] Black Forest Labs. 2024. FLUX. https://github.com/black-forest-labs/flux. Official
inference repository for FLUX.1 models.
[20] Cade Brown, Ahmad Abdelfattah, Stanimire Tomov, and Jack Dongarra. 2020.
Design, Optimization, and Benchmarking of Dense Linear Algebra Algorithms
on AMD GPUs. In 2020 IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference
(HPEC). 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1109/HPEC43674.2020.9286214
[21] Le Chen, Dahu Feng, Erhu Feng, Yingrui Wang, Rong Zhao, Yubin Xia, Pinjie
Xu, and Haibo Chen. 2025. Characterizing Mobile SoC for Accelerating Hetero-
geneous LLM Inference. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on
Operating Systems Principles. https://doi.org/10.1145/3731569.3764808
[22] Compute Express Link Consortium. [n. d.]. Compute Express Link Specification.
CXL Consortium Specification. https://www.computeexpresslink.org Accessed:
2026-06-17.
[23] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher R’e. 2022.
FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Attention with IO-Awareness.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, Vol. 35. 16344–16359.
arXiv:2205.14135 [cs.LG] https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.14135
[24] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas M"uller,
Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, Dustin Podell,
Tim Dockhorn, Zion English, Kyle Lacey, Alex Goodwin, Yannik Marek, and Robin
Rombach. 2024. Scaling Rectified Flow Transformers for High-Resolution Image
Synthesis. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.03206 arXiv:2403.03206 [cs.CV]
[25] FastFlowLM. 2026. FastFlowLM. https://github.com/FastFlowLM/FastFlowLM.
GitHub repository, accessed 2026-04-04.
[26] FLAME Project. 2026. BLIS: BLAS-like Library Instantiation Software Framework.
https://github.com/flame/blis. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[27] GGML-ORG. [n. d.]. llama.cpp. https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp.
[28] ggml-org. 2024. What’s the difference between batch-size and ubatch-size?
Discussion #6328. https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/discussions/6328. Ac-
cessed: 2026-03-24.
[29] ggml-org. 2026. ggml: Tensor library for machine learning. https://github.com/
ggml-org/ggml. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[30] ggml-org. 2026. llama.cpp Build Documentation. https://github.com/ggml-org/
llama.cpp/blob/master/docs/build.md. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[31] ggml-org. 2026. llama.cpp common.h. https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/
blob/master/common/common.h. Accessed: 2026-03-24.
[32] ggml-org. 2026. llama.cpp Quantization Tool Documentation. https://github.
com/ggml-org/llama.cpp/blob/master/tools/quantize/README.md. Accessed:
2026-05-17.
[33] ggml-org. 2026. llama.cpp RPC Backend Documentation. https://github.com/
ggml-org/llama.cpp/blob/master/tools/rpc/README.md. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[34] glassescrab. 2026. mlir-aie: An Open-Source Fork of the IRON API and MLIR-
Based AI Engine Toolchain. https://github.com/glassescrab/mlir-aie. GitHub
repository, accessed 2026-03-27.
[35] Zixu Hao, Jianyu Wei, Tuowei Wang, Minxing Huang, Huiqiang Jiang, Shiqi
Jiang, Ting Cao, and Ju Ren. 2026. Scaling LLM Test-Time Compute with Mobile
NPU on Smartphones. In Proceedings of the 21st European Conference on Computer
Systems (EuroSys ’26). 2157–2172. https://doi.org/10.1145/3767295.3769382
[36] Jyothi Hariharan, Rahul Rama Varior, and Sunil Karunakaran. 2023. Real-time
Driver Monitoring Systems on Edge AI Device. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.01555
(2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.01555
[37] Mark Hill and Vijay Janapa Reddi. 2019. Gables: A roofline model for mobile socs.
In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA). IEEE, 317–330.
18


--- Page 19 ---
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jun et al.
[38] Huawei. 2026. CANN: Ascend AI Computing Platform. https://www.hiascend.
com/en/cann. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[39] Erika Hunhoff, Joseph Melber, Kristof Denolf, Andra Bisca, Samuel Bayliss,
Stephen Neuendorffer, Jeff Fifield, Jack Lo, Pranathi Vasireddy, Phil James-
Roxby, and Eric Keller. 2025. Efficiency, Expressivity, and Extensibility in a
Close-to-Metal NPU Programming Interface. arXiv:2504.18430 [cs.SE] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2504.18430
[40] Intel. [n. d.]. Quick overview of Intel’s Neural Processing Unit (NPU). https:
//intel.github.io/intel-npu-acceleration-library/npu.html.
[41] Intel. 2026. OpenVINO Documentation. https://docs.openvino.ai/. Accessed:
2026-05-17.
[42] kernel.org. [n. d.]. DRM Memory Management. https://www.kernel.org/doc/
html/v4.15/gpu/drm-mm.html.
[43] Khronos Group. 2026. OpenCL Registry. https://registry.khronos.org/OpenCL/.
Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[44] Khronos Group. 2026. SYCL 2020 Specification. https://registry.khronos.org/
SYCL/specs/sycl-2020/html/sycl-2020.html. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[45] Khronos Group. 2026. Vulkan Specification. https://registry.khronos.org/vulkan/
specs/latest/html/vkspec.html. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[46] Hyungyo Kim, Nachuan Wang, Qirong Xia, Jinghan Huang, Amir Yazdanbakhsh,
and Nam Sung Kim. 2025. LIA: A Single-GPU LLM Inference Acceleration
with Cooperative AMX-Enabled CPU-GPU Computation and CXL Offloading. In
Proceedings of the 52nd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA ’25). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 544–558.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3695053.3731092
[47] Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakr-
ishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov, Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi,
Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake, Dorsa Sadigh,
Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. 2024. OpenVLA: An Open-Source
Vision-Language-Action Model.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.09246
arXiv:2406.09246 [cs.RO]
[48] Muyang Li, Yujun Lin, Zhekai Zhang, et al. 2024. SVDQuant: Absorbing Outliers
by Low-Rank Components for 4-Bit Diffusion Models.
https://arxiv.org/abs/
2411.05007
[49] Ji Lin, Jiaming Tang, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Wei-Chen Wang, Wei-Ming
Chen, Guangxuan Xiao, Xingyu Dang, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2023. AWQ:
Activation-aware Weight Quantization for LLM Compression and Acceleration.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00978 (2023).
[50] Meta. [n. d.]. Llama 3. https://ai.meta.com/blog/meta-llama-3.
[51] Netlib. 2026. BLAS: Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms. https://www.netlib.org/
blas/. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[52] NVIDIA. 2025. NVIDIA Isaac GR00T N1. https://developer.nvidia.com/isaac/gr00t.
Official product page.
[53] NVIDIA. 2026. CUDA Toolkit Documentation. https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/.
Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[54] NVIDIA. 2026. NVIDIA NVLink and NVLink Switch. NVIDIA Data Center Tech-
nology Overview. https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/data-center/nvlink/ Accessed:
2026-06-17.
[55] NVIDIA, Johan Bjorck, Fernando Casta neda, Nikita Cherniadev, Xingye Da,
Runyu Ding, Linxi Fan, Yu Fang, Dieter Fox, Fengyuan Hu, Spencer Huang,
Joel Jang, Zhenyu Jiang, Jan Kautz, Kaushil Kundalia, Lawrence Lao, Zhiqi
Li, Zongyu Lin, Kevin Lin, Guilin Liu, Edith Llontop, Loic Magne, Ajay Man-
dlekar, Avnish Narayan, Soroush Nasiriany, Scott Reed, You Liang Tan, Guanzhi
Wang, Zu Wang, Jing Wang, Qi Wang, Jiannan Xiang, Yuqi Xie, Yinzhen Xu,
Zhenjia Xu, Seonghyeon Ye, Zhiding Yu, Ao Zhang, Hao Zhang, Yizhou Zhao,
Ruijie Zheng, and Yuke Zhu. 2025. GR00T N1: An Open Foundation Model
for Generalist Humanoid Robots.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2503.14734
arXiv:2503.14734 [cs.RO]
[56] OpenAI. 2023. ChatGPT. https://openai.com/chatgpt. Large-language-model
conversational agent; accessed 31 Jul 2025.
[57] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. (2023). arXiv:2303.08774 [cs.CL] https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774
[58] OpenAI. 2023. Khan Academy. https://openai.com/index/khan-academy/ An-
nounces GPT-4 powering Khanmigo as a tutor and classroom assistant.
[59] Muhammad Osama, Duane Merrill, Cris Cecka, Michael Garland, and John D.
Owens. 2023. Stream-K: Work-Centric Parallel Decomposition for Dense Matrix-
Matrix Multiplication on the GPU. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM SIGPLAN
Annual Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (Montreal,
QC, Canada) (PPoPP ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 429–431. https://doi.org/10.1145/3572848.3577479
[60] OWON Technology. 2026. OWON SPE Series 1 CH 100W–300W DC Power Sup-
ply. https://www.owon.com.hk/products_owon_spe_series_1_ch_100w-300w_
dc_power_supply. Product page, accessed 2026-04-03.
[61] PCI-SIG. 2025. PCI Express Base Specification Revision 7.0. PCI-SIG Specification
Library. https://pcisig.com/specifications Accessed: 2026-06-17.
[62] William Peebles and Saining Xie. 2023. Scalable Diffusion Models with Transform-
ers. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision.
4195–4205. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.09748 arXiv:2212.09748 [cs.CV]
[63] Physical Intelligence. 2025. Open Sourcing 𝜋0. https://www.pi.website/blog/
openpi. Project blog post.
[64] Physical Intelligence. 2025. openpi: Open-Source Models and Packages for Ro-
botics. https://github.com/Physical-Intelligence/openpi. GitHub repository.
[65] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, James Darpinian, Karan Dhabalia,
Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Manuel Y.
Galliker, Dibya Ghosh, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon
Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Devin LeBlanc, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-Bell,
Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Allen Z. Ren, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi,
Laura Smith, Jost Tobias Springenberg, Kyle Stachowicz, James Tanner, Quan
Vuong, Homer Walke, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Lili Yu, and Ury Zhilinsky.
2025. 𝜋0.5: A Vision-Language-Action Model with Open-World Generalization.
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.16054 arXiv:2504.16054 [cs.LG]
[66] Physical Intelligence, Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail,
Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian
Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian Li-
Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James
Tanner, Quan Vuong, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. 2024.
𝜋0: A Vision-Language-Action Flow Model for General Robot Control. https:
//doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2410.24164 arXiv:2410.24164 [cs.LG]
[67] PyTorch. 2025. PyTorch. https://pytorch.org/. Accessed: 2025-07-28.
[68] Qualcomm. [n. d.]. A new era of possibility with on-device AI. https://www.
qualcomm.com/products/technology/artificial-intelligence.
[69] Qualcomm. 2026.
Llama-v2-7B-Chat.
https://aihub.qualcomm.com/models/
llama_v2_7b_chat?domain=Generative+AI&useCase=Text+Generation&
chipsets=qualcomm-snapdragon-8gen3.
Qualcomm AI Hub model card,
accessed 2026-03-27.
[70] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2023.
Snapdragon 8 Gen 3 Mobile Plat-
form. https://www.qualcomm.com/smartphones/products/8-series/snapdragon-
8-gen-3-mobile-platform. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[71] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2026. Qualcomm AI Engine Direct SDK Documen-
tation. https://docs.qualcomm.com/nav/home/QNN_general_overview.html?
product=1601111740009302. Accessed: 2026-03-23.
[72] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2026. Qualcomm Hexagon SDK Documentation.
https://docs.qualcomm.com/nav/home?product=1601111740010422. Accessed:
2026-05-17.
[73] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2026. Quantization — Qualcomm AI Engine Direct
SDK Documentation. https://docs.qualcomm.com/bundle/publicresource/topics/
80-63442-10/quantization.html. Accessed: 2026-03-26.
[74] Qualcomm Technologies, Inc. 2026. Writing QNN HTP Op Package — Qualcomm
AI Engine Direct SDK Documentation.
https://docs.qualcomm.com/bundle/
publicresource/topics/80-63442-10/writing_op_package.html. Accessed: 2026-
03-26.
[75] André Rösti and Michael Franz. 2025. Unlocking the AMD Neural Processing
Unit for ML Training on the Client Using Bare-Metal-Programming Tools. In 33rd
IEEE Annual International Symposium on Field-Programmable Custom Computing
Machines (FCCM) 2025, Fayetteville, AR, USA, May 4–7, 2025. IEEE, 271. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/FCCM62733.2025.00031
[76] Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Binhang Yuan, Zhuohan Li, Max Ryabinin, Beidi
Chen, Percy Liang, Christopher Ré, Ion Stoica, and Ce Zhang. 2023. FlexGen:
high-throughput generative inference of large language models with a single
GPU. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
(Honolulu, Hawaii, USA) (ICML’23). JMLR.org, Article 1288, 23 pages.
[77] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper,
and Bryan Catanzaro. 2019. Megatron-LM: Training Multi-Billion Parameter
Language Models Using Model Parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.08053 arXiv:1909.08053 [cs.CL]
[78] Yushan Siriwardhana, Pawani Porambage, Madhusanka Liyanage, and Mika
Ylianttila. 2021. A Survey on Mobile Augmented Reality With 5G Mobile Edge
Computing: Architectures, Applications, and Technical Aspects. IEEE Commu-
nications Surveys & Tutorials 23, 2 (2021), 1160–1192. https://doi.org/10.1109/
COMST.2021.3061981
[79] Zhiyi Song et al. 2018. Computation Error Analysis of Block Floating Point
Arithmetic Oriented Convolution Neural Network Accelerator Design. In AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
[80] Nazish Tahir and Ramviyas Parasuraman. 2025.
Edge Computing and its
Application in Robotics: A Survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00523 (2025).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.00523
[81] Endri Taka, Andre Roesti, Joseph Melber, Pranathi Vasireddy, Kristof Denolf, and
Diana Marculescu. 2025. Striking the Balance: GEMM Performance Optimization
Across Generations of Ryzen AI NPUs. arXiv:2512.13282 [cs.AR] https://arxiv.
org/abs/2512.13282
[82] Chengyue Wang, Wesley Pang, Xinrui Wu, Gregory Jun, Luis Romero, Endri Taka,
Diana Marculescu, Tony Nowatzki, Pranathi Vasireddy, Joseph Melber, Deming
Chen, and Jason Cong. 2025. Can Asymmetric Tile Buffering Be Beneficial?
arXiv:2511.16041 [cs.DC] https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.16041
[83] Erwei Wang, Samuel Bayliss, Andra Bisca, Zachary Blair, Sangeeta Chowdhary,
Kristof Denolf, Jeff Fifield, Brandon Freiberger, Erika Hunhoff, Phil James-Roxby,
19


--- Page 20 ---
Jun et al.
HeteroMosaic: Exposing and Exploiting Heterogeneous Execution Opportunities for Energy-Efficient Edge LLM Inference
Jack Lo, Joseph Melber, Stephen Neuendorffer, Eddie Richter, André Rosti, Javier
Setoain, Gagandeep Singh, Endri Taka, Pranathi Vasireddy, Zhewen Yu, Niansong
Zhang, and Jinming Zhuang. 2026. From Loop Nests to Silicon: Mapping AI
Workloads onto AMD NPUs with MLIR-AIR. ACM Trans. Reconfigurable Technol.
Syst. (Jan. 2026). https://doi.org/10.1145/3785670 Just Accepted.
[84] Xubin Wang, Zhiqing Tang, Jianxiong Guo, Tianhui Meng, Chenhao Wang, Tian
Wang, and Weijia Jia. 2025. Empowering Edge Intelligence: A Comprehensive
Survey on On-Device AI Models. Comput. Surveys 57, 9 (2025), 1–39.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3724420
[85] Yichuan Wang, Zhifei Li, Shu Liu, Yongji Wu, Ziming Mao, Yilong Zhao, Xiao
Yan, Zhiying Xu, Yang Zhou, Ion Stoica, Sewon Min, Matei Zaharia, and Joseph E.
Gonzalez. 2025. LEANN: A Low-Storage Vector Index. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arXiv.2506.08276 arXiv:2506.08276 [cs.IR]
[86] Zijie J. Wang and Duen Horng Chau. 2024. MeMemo: On-device Retrieval
Augmentation for Private and Personalized Text Generation. In Proceedings of
the 47th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval. https://doi.org/10.1145/3626772.3657662
[87] Samuel Williams, Andrew Waterman, and David A. Patterson. 2009. Roofline:
An Insightful Visual Performance Model for Multicore Architectures. Commun.
ACM 52, 4 (April 2009), 65–76. https://doi.org/10.1145/1498765.1498785
[88] World Wide Web Consortium. 2026. WebGPU Specification. https://www.w3.
org/TR/webgpu/. Accessed: 2026-05-17.
[89] Daliang Xu, Hao Zhang, Liming Yang, Ruiqi Liu, Gang Huang, Mengwei Xu, and
Xuanzhe Liu. 2025. Fast On-Device LLM Inference with NPUs. In Proceedings of
the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming
Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’25). 445–462.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3669940.3707239
[90] Zhenliang Xue, Yixin Song, Zeyu Mi, Le Chen, Yubin Xia, and Haibo Chen. 2024.
PowerInfer-2: Fast Large Language Model Inference on a Smartphone. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.06282 (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2406.06282
20
