--- Page 1 ---
Uncertainty-Aware Simulation-Based Inference for Operations
Research with Large Language Models
Guo Liang1, Shaochong Lin2, Zuo-Jun Max Shen3, and Kun Zhang4
1Institute of Statistics and Big Data, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China.
liangguo000221@ruc.edu.cn
2Department of Data and Systems Engineering, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
999077, China. shaoclin@hku.hk
3Faculty of Engineering & Faculty of Business and Economics, The University of Hong
Kong 999077, Hong Kong, China. maxshen@hku.hk
4School of Information, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China.
kunzhang@ruc.edu.cn
Abstract
Deploying large language models (LLMs) for operations research (OR) tasks remains chal-
lenging because correctness depends on a coherent modeling process, not merely a correct final
answer. Standard autoregressive generation operates on a myopic policy, which sometimes fails
to anticipate whether a partial formulation can be validly extended into a globally consistent
optimization model.
Consequently, locally plausible steps may propagate into catastrophic
downstream formulation or solver code errors.
To address this, we propose an uncertainty-
aware, training-free inference framework for OR mathematical modeling. Without updating
model parameters, our method evaluates intermediate candidate steps using short lookahead
simulations to quantify downstream predictive uncertainty or probability concentration. Candi-
dates that demonstrate a higher likelihood of yielding coherent mathematical formulations are
then dynamically selected via importance resampling. Empirical evaluations across multiple OR
benchmarks (including NL4OPT, MAMO, and IndustryOR) demonstrate that our framework
consistently outperforms both standard and low-temperature baselines, establishing an eﬀicient,
training-free paradigm for reliable OR formulation generation.
1
arXiv:2608.00019v1  [cs.LG]  1 Jul 2026


--- Page 2 ---
Key words: LLMs; uncertainty-aware; reward function; importance resampling.
1
Introduction
Operations research (OR) translates complex decision problems into structured mathematical for-
mulations consisting of variables, constraints and objectives, whose structural integrity directly
governs the quality of high-stakes resource allocation, scheduling and planning decisions. In the
past, this translation process has been hindered by the scarcity of expert modelers capable of re-
liably reconstructing coherent optimization models from natural language requirements.
While
the recent advent of large language models (LLMs) offers a promising avenue to automate this
pipeline, their underlying generation paradigm remains inherently constrained by token-by-token1
autoregression, which evaluates each subsequent step based solely on immediate local probabili-
ties. Consequently, a sequence of individually plausible choices, such as introducing an isolated
constraint or an unindexed variable, frequently compounds into a globally inconsistent formulation
characterized by conflicting constraints or undefined decision domains. The fundamental structural
diﬀiculty lies in this misalignment that the correctness of a mathematical model is a global property
of the entire formulation, whereas the generation policy that constructs it operates locally, meaning
that local optimality provides no guarantee of global coherence.
When generation is unstable, a standard mitigation strategy is low-temperature sampling2,
which reduces the temperature parameter to sharpen the local distribution and induces more deter-
ministic commitments to the most probable choices at each step (Chen et al., 2021). This heuristic
is well-motivated for tasks where correctness depends primarily on individual token accuracy, such
as translation fluency and basic syntactic validation. In those domains, higher local probability
often correlates with higher correctness, and suppressing low-probability alternatives effectively
reduces random variation. However, in OR modeling, the dominant failure mode stems from a fun-
damentally different source. A generated formulation must satisfy global consistency requirements,
meaning that variables must be defined before use, constraints must reference the correct index
sets, and objective functions must align with decision domains. A high-probability token is not
1In a language model, a token is a text unit that the model generates at each step. Figure 1 illustrates how tokens
are generated in an LLM.
2Low-temperature sampling is also called low-temperature decoding in the LLM literature. In this paper, we
employ “sampling” to guide the generation process of the LLM.
2


--- Page 3 ---
inherently more capable of preserving these properties downstream than a less probable alterna-
tive. When an early modeling error lies on a highly probable path, low-temperature sampling does
not avoid the mistake, but rather arrives at it more deterministically. Consequently, temperature
reduction addresses the wrong source of variation by controlling token-level statistical uncertainty
while leaving formulation-level structural uncertainty completely untouched.
Unlike low-temperature sampling, which operates strictly at the token level, reinforcement learn-
ing with verifiable rewards (RLVR) evaluates the generation process against a trajectory-level ob-
jective (Guo et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2025). By shifting probability mass toward candidate paths
that optimize a global reward, this approach reweights intermediate choices according to their
downstream potential rather than their immediate local probability. In this sense, reinforcement
learning addresses the correct structural problem by evaluating partial formulations based on their
long-horizon future consequences. However, deploying this paradigm for OR tasks encounters two
substantial obstacles. The first is practical. Evaluating mathematical formulations typically re-
quires dense solver integration to verify feasibility, optimality, and constraint satisfaction. This
makes automated feedback computationally expensive, sparse, and diﬀicult to design without intro-
ducing unintended incentives during iterative training (Rafailov et al., 2023). The second obstacle
is more fundamental. Recent evidence suggests that post-training reinforcement learning primarily
functions by reallocating probability mass toward reasoning paths already available within the base
model distribution, rather than injecting entirely new capabilities (Karan and Du, 2025; Yue et al.,
2025). These practical and conceptual limitations underscore the need for a training-free alter-
native that can explicitly evaluate downstream formulation coherence at inference time 3 without
requiring model retraining, external reward models, or parameter updates.
In this paper, we develop such an alternative through an uncertainty-aware inference framework
that combines lookahead evaluation with importance resampling. Instead of updating model pa-
rameters, the framework shifts probability during generation by using short future simulations to
assess the reliability of the current partial formulation. The intuition is that a well-aligned partial
formulation should lead to future extensions that remain concentrated around compatible variables,
constraints, and code structures, whereas a misaligned one is more likely to branch into inconsistent
3Note that in the context of LLMs, “inference time” refers to the operational phase where an LLM generates
outputs from input prompts. This should be distinguished from “inference” in statistics, which typically involves
drawing conclusions about population parameters or testing hypotheses based on observed data.
3


--- Page 4 ---
or unstable downstream formulations. We formalize this intuition through two lookahead-based
reward functions: one based on downstream probability concentration and the other on predictive
uncertainty. By estimating these rewards through multiple short rollouts from the base model and
applying importance resampling, the framework assigns greater selection probability to candidates
with higher structural reliability. In this way, it improves OR generation without additional su-
pervision, external reward models, or gradient-based updates. Specifically, we make the following
main contributions in this paper.
1. Examples of myopic policy failures in OR modeling. We establish that local plausi-
bility does not guarantee the global structural integrity required for valid OR formulations.
Through two complementary analyses, we demonstrate that locally probable modeling choices
can propagate into globally invalid formulations and solver errors – a risk that persists even
under low-temperature sampling, which often increases the model’s confidence in its early
mistakes. By quantifying the path dependency of OR reasoning, we find that correct final an-
swers almost exclusively originate from flawless intermediate reasoning chains with negligible
recovery from early errors, a characteristic that necessitates a shift toward trajectory-level
assessment.
2. Eﬀicient inference-time framework that integrates multi-path rollouts with im-
portance resampling. This approach introduces two reward functions (power reward and
entropy reward) to assess partial formulations by their downstream probability concentration
and predictive uncertainty, capturing the intuition that well-aligned modeling steps lead to
more coherent future continuations.
By integrating these rewards into an importance re-
sampling procedure, the framework dynamically reallocates probability mass toward reliable
reasoning paths during generation without requiring model parameter updates or external
reward models, ensuring an inference overhead that remains practically scalable for complex
deployment.
3. Empirical validation across diverse OR benchmarks. We provide extensive empiri-
cal evidence of the framework’s effectiveness across multiple representative OR benchmarks,
including NL4OPT, MAMO, and IndustryOR. Our results demonstrate that the proposed
method consistently outperforms standard sampling and competitive low-temperature base-
4


--- Page 5 ---
lines across various levels of problem complexity. Notably, the framework yields the most
significant performance gains in highly constrained optimization scenarios, implying that
uncertainty-aware trajectory evaluation is particularly vital for solving sophisticated, industrial-
scale modeling tasks where structural consistency is paramount.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews the related literature
on applying LLMs to optimization modeling, uncertainty in text generation, and inference-time
intervention methods. Section 3 introduces the background of LLM generation and motivates our
approach by demonstrating the insuﬀiciency of myopic sampling policies in highly path-dependent
OR tasks. Section 4 formally presents our uncertainty-aware inference framework, detailing the
lookahead-based reward design and the importance resampling procedure. Section 5 reports the
numerical experiments and empirical results across multiple OR benchmarks. Finally, Section 6
concludes the paper and discusses potential directions for future research. All mathematical proofs
and additional generation examples are provided in the appendices.
2
Literature Review
2.1
LLMs for Optimization Modeling
The application of language models to OR has progressed from auto-formulation systems to more
specialized agentic and training-based frameworks. Early work translates problem descriptions into
optimization models and establishes NL4Opt as a benchmark for this task (Ramamonjison et al.,
2022, 2023).
To handle more complex instances, OptiMUS decomposes modeling into formula-
tion, solver-code generation, debugging, and testing (AhmadiTeshnizi et al., 2024), while Chain-
of-Experts introduces specialized agents with planning and reflection (Xiao et al., 2024). More
recently, lightweight few-shot and tool-use frameworks have been developed for large-scale opti-
mization modeling without task-specific fine-tuning (Liang et al., 2026).
Another stream relies on benchmarks, synthetic data, and model training. The MAMO bench-
mark evaluates mathematical modeling ability with solver-verifiable instances (Huang et al., 2024),
while the OptiBench benchmark measures optimization modeling over diverse problem types and
introduces ReSocratic data synthesis for supervised fine-tuning (Yang et al., 2024). Along this line,
the ORLM framework improves open-source models through semi-automated data synthesis and in-
5


--- Page 6 ---
struction tuning (Huang et al., 2025), and the LLMOPT framework further adds multi-instruction
tuning and self-correction for general optimization problems (Jiang et al., 2025).
Recent test-
time reinforcement learning methods further improve modeling and solving performance with fewer
synthetic examples (Ding et al., 2026). Despite these advances, complex constraint construction
remains a major bottleneck as task complexity increases (Chen et al., 2026). Unlike the above
studies, which mainly improve OR modeling through agents or training, our method keeps the base
model fixed and focuses on controlling intermediate formulation choices at inference time.
2.2
Uncertainty in Language Model Generation
Uncertainty estimation is widely used to assess the reliability of LLM outputs. Calibration studies
show that language models can be poorly calibrated in question answering (Jiang et al., 2021).
Larger models can sometimes estimate whether their own proposed answers are true, though
this ability depends on task and prompting format (Kadavath et al., 2022). Beyond answer-level
confidence, recent inference-time methods use uncertainty to allocate computation. For example,
Entropy-Tree branches only at high-entropy reasoning positions (Wei et al., 2025), foresight-based
decoding uses future simulations to evaluate candidate steps (Zhao et al., 2024) and adaptive con-
fidence sampling relies on answer stability to guide resampling and termination (Shi et al., 2025).
Another related direction measures semantic rather than token-level uncertainty.
Semantic
entropy groups meaning-equivalent generations and improves correctness prediction (Kuhn et al.,
2023). The same idea has also been used to detect hallucinations at scale (Farquhar et al., 2024).
However, semantic uncertainty usually requires entailment models, LLM judges, or clustering over
generated meanings.
2.3
Inference-Time Intervention and Resampling
Inference-time intervention methods modify generation without changing model parameters. Guided
and contrastive decoding intervene at the token-probability level. For example, the FUDGE method
uses future discriminators to steer generation toward desired attributes (Yang and Klein, 2021), the
DExperts method combines expert and anti-expert distributions through product-of-experts (Liu
et al., 2021), and the DoLa method contrasts logits from different layers to improve factuality
(Chuang et al., 2024). These methods mainly target controllability or factuality, while our setting
6


--- Page 7 ---
requires maintaining mathematical consistency across a full OR formulation.
Other methods generate multiple reasoning paths and select or reweight outputs.
The self-
consistency method aggregates complete chains of thought by majority vote (Wang et al., 2023),
while the confidence-guided early stopping method reduces the required number of samples by
stopping once posterior confidence is high (Aghazadeh et al., 2025). More generally, the twisted
sequential Monte Carlo framework provides a potential-based view of trajectory reweighting (Zhao
et al., 2024). Process reward models instead evaluate intermediate reasoning steps, but typically
require human-labeled process data or a trained verifier (Lightman et al., 2024). Our framework
is closest to process-level steering, but derives the steering signal from short lookahead rollouts of
the frozen base model rather than from final-output aggregation or an external reward model.
3
Background and Motivation
3.1
Background
Let X be a finite vocabulary of tokens, where a token is the basic text unit used by the language
model. Given an input prompt c, a generated response can be represented as a sequence of tokens
x = x1:T = (x1, . . . , xT ) ∈X T , where each xt ∈X. Modern large language models (LLMs) generate
such sequences by assigning a probability to each next token conditional on both the prompt and
the tokens already generated. That is, they define an autoregressive distribution over X T by the
factorization p(x|c) = QT
t=1 p(xt|c, x<t), where x<t = (x1, ..., xt−1) denotes the generated prefix
before step t. Similar notation is used for x>t, x≤t, and x≥t. The generation procedure of an LLM
is shown in Figure 1. For open-source models, the conditional distribution p(·|c, x1:t−1) at each
step is directly accessible. When the prompt c is clear from context, we write p(x) as shorthand
for p(x|c). Throughout this paper, p(x) denotes the base language model after supervised fine-
tuning (SFT) on OR tasks. We assume that this model already captures substantial task-relevant
knowledge and reasoning patterns, and our goal is to improve how such knowledge is utilized during
generation.
In practice, a common way to stabilize LLM reasoning is low-temperature sampling. At each
step, the base model assigns a probability distribution p(·|x<t) over possible next tokens. Temper-
7


--- Page 8 ---
Prompt: c
Answer
x1:T
c, x1
c, x1:2
c, x1:T −2
c, x1:T −1
x1 ∼p(·|c)
x2 ∼p(·|c, x1)
...
xT −1 ∼p(·|c, x1:T −2)
xT ∼p(·|c, x1:T −1)
Figure 1: How an LLM generates text step by step. Starting from the input question (prompt) c,
the model repeatedly predicts a distribution over the next possible text unit (token), samples one,
appends it to the current prefix (specifically, at step t, prefix is c, x1:t−1), and continues until the
full answer x1:T is produced.
ature sampling rescales this distribution as
pτ(xt|x<t) =
p(xt|x<t)1/τ
P
a∈X p(a|x<t)1/τ ,
where τ > 0 denotes the temperature parameter. When τ = 1, this recovers the original model
distribution. When τ < 1, the distribution becomes more concentrated on tokens that already have
high probability under the base model, thereby reducing randomness in generation.
3.2
Insuﬀiciency of Myopic Policy
Although low-temperature sampling (which constitutes a myopic policy, as it relies solely on the
local probability p(xt|x<t) while remaining agnostic to the downstream information at subsequent
steps t + 1, ..., T) is widely adopted as a strong baseline, its inherent preference for high-probability
tokens is poorly aligned with the requirements of OR problem solving. In OR tasks, correctness
depends not on textual fluency but on mathematical consistency, implementation correctness, and
solution quality. To understand why myopic policy is insuﬀicient under these conditions, we combine
a case study with a Pass@k versus CoT-Pass@k comparison. Together, these analyses reveal two
compounding limitations.
First, the following case study demonstrates that a locally plausible modeling choice can later
invalidate the global formulation. Consider an OR prompt in which the task is to construct a
mathematical model and its corresponding Python implementation. Specifically, the problem is to
8


--- Page 9 ---
determine the optimal quantities of six available food items (Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broccoli, Rice,
and Spinach) so as to meet given nutritional requirements (protein, carbohydrates, and calories)
while minimizing total cost.
A Toy Example
Prompt: Below is an operations research question. Build a mathematical model and corresponding
python code using ‘coptpy’ that appropriately addresses the question.
Question: Imagine you are a dietitian and you have been tasked with creating a meal plan for a
bodybuilder. You have six food items to choose from: Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broccoli, Rice, and Spinach.
Each food provides certain amounts of protein, carbohydrates, and calories, and each has its own cost.
Here’s the nutritional value and cost of each food: Steak: It gives you 14 grams of protein, 23 grams
of carbohydrates, and 63 calories. Tofu: It offers 2 grams of protein, 13 grams of carbohydrates, and
162 calories. Chicken: It packs a punch with 17 grams of protein, 13 grams of carbohydrates, and gives
you 260 calories for. Broccoli: It provides 3 grams of protein, a mere 1 gram of carbohydrates, and
55 calories. Rice: It gives a hearty 15 grams of protein, 23 grams of carbohydrates, and 231 calories.
Spinach: It provides 2 grams of protein, 8 grams of carbohydrates, and a huge 297 calories.
Your goal is to ensure that the bodybuilder gets at least 83 grams of protein, 192 grams
of carbohydrates, and 2089 calories from whatever combination of these foods you choose.
The challenge is to keep the cost as low as possible while meeting these nutritional targets.
What is the minimum cost to meet these nutritional requirements with the available food
options?
Under low-temperature sampling, a natural and highly probable early step is to define variables
as nonnegative food quantities, which is an approach consistent with the standard linear program-
ming formulation of diet problems. This tendency arises because base models have been extensively
exposed to linear programming examples, leading them to favor continuous formulations as a de-
fault “reasonable” template. However, if the food quantities must represent discrete servings or
units, the correct feasible set is Z6
+ rather than R6
+. Omitting the integrality restriction transforms
the problem from an integer optimization model into its continuous relaxation. Although the re-
sulting derivation may remain syntactically coherent and even yield a lower objective value, the
solution can contain fractional food items and therefore may be infeasible for the original problem.
The following contrast between low-temperature sampling and correct model illustrates this failure
mode.
9


--- Page 10 ---
Low-temperature sampling
• Mathematical Model: To solve the dietitian’s optimization problem, we will establish a linear
programming model aimed at minimizing the cost of food while meeting the nutritional requirements
of the bodybuilder.
• Decision Variables: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6: Represent the quantities of Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broc-
coli, Rice, and Spinach, respectively.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ≥0, as the quantities of food cannot be nega-
tive.” [integer restriction missing]
• …
Correct model
• Mathematical Model: To solve this diet optimization problem, we will establish a linear program-
ming model. The objective is to minimize the total cost while meeting the nutritional requirements.
• Decision Variables: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6: Represent the quantities of Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broc-
coli, Rice, and Spinach, respectively.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ≥0 and should be integers to ensure fea-
sible integer solutions.”
• …
From the above case study, a locally plausible token choice at the variable-definition stage can
shift the feasible region of the downstream problem, ultimately yielding an invalid optimization
model. This suggests that relying solely on immediate likelihood, even when high, can be risky.
One might argue that this risk is acceptable if the LLM can robustly recover from local mistakes, i.e.,
occasional errors that still lead to correct final code and results. In that scenario, low-temperature
sampling would remain a practical choice. However, in OR model generation, we observe a dif-
ferent dynamic. Once an erroneous modeling decision is made, subsequent generation steps are
conditioned on a flawed mathematical structure, and backtracking seldom occurs. This reveals a
deeper issue, which we examine next as our second observation.
Second, OR reasoning is highly path-dependent and admits little room for retrospective recovery.
Once the model commits to an erroneous modeling choice, later steps are generated conditional on
the resulting mathematical semantics. For example, a wrong variable domain, a missing constraint,
or a mismatched objective term is not merely a local textual error, it also changes the optimization
10


--- Page 11 ---
problem that subsequent constraints, solver code, and numerical answers are built upon.
To characterize this feature, we compare two notions of success: Pass@k and CoT-Pass@k (see,
Wen et al., 2025). For a given instance, let s(1), ..., s(k) denote k independently sampled solution
trajectories from the model, where each trajectory contains both an intermediate reasoning process
and a final answer. Let 1ans(s) ∈{0, 1} indicate whether the final answer produced by trajectory
s is correct, and let 1cot(s) ∈{0, 1} indicate whether its reasoning process is correct. We define
Pass@k = Pr

∃i ∈{1, ..., k}, 1ans

s(i)
= 1

,
and
CoT-Pass@k = Pr

∃i ∈{1, ..., k}, 1ans

s(i)
1cot

s(i)
= 1

.
Thus, Pass@k measures whether at least one sampled trajectory yields the correct final answer,
whereas CoT-Pass@k requires at least one sampled trajectory to be correct both in its reasoning
and in its final answer.
By construction, CoT-Pass@k ≤Pass@k. The gap between them measures the probability that
a model obtains the correct final answer without following a correct reasoning trajectory. This gap
is informative because it reflects the extent to which errors in intermediate reasoning can be benign
or recoverable. In answer-only reasoning tasks (e.g., math and multi choices), such a gap can be
non-negligible because a model may arrive at the correct final answer through a lucky shortcut,
an implicit correction, or a partially flawed chain of thought that nevertheless produces the right
terminal response. In such settings, increasing k can improve the chance of sampling a correct final
answer even when some successful trajectories contain imperfect reasoning.
OR tasks are different. The final answer is usually the consequence of an explicit modeling-and-
solving pipeline. If the variable definition, feasible region, objective function, or implementation is
wrong, the resulting numerical solution is normally wrong or infeasible as well. Therefore, answer
correctness is tightly coupled with reasoning correctness. Equivalently, trajectories with 1ans(s) = 1
but 1cot(s) = 0 should be rare in OR generation. In this case, Pass@k and CoT-Pass@k should
be close to each other, because the model cannot easily compensate for a wrong intermediate
formulation at the final answer stage.
11


--- Page 12 ---
1
2
4
8
16
32
k
0.750
0.775
0.800
0.825
0.850
0.875
0.900
0.925
Probability
Pass@k vs COT-Pass@k
Pass@k
COT-Pass@k
(a) Pass@k and COT-Pass@k in MAMOEasyLP.
1
2
4
8
16
32
k
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
0.175
0.200
Probability
Pass@k vs COT-Pass@k
Pass@k
COT-Pass@k
(b) Pass@k and COT-Pass@k in AIME2025.
Figure 2: Pass@k versus COT-Pass@k can behave differently across domains. The key distinction is
whether correct final answers can be produced without a correspondingly correct reasoning process.
Figure 2 supports this distinction. On MAMOEasyLP, Pass@k and CoT-Pass@k nearly coincide
across different values of k, suggesting that correct final answers almost always arise from correct
reasoning trajectories. By contrast, on AIME2025 (a mathematical reasoning benchmark), a visible
gap remains between the two curves, indicating that final-answer correctness can sometimes be
achieved even when the chain of thought is not fully correct. This comparison highlights a key
structural property of OR generation: once the reasoning path deviates from a valid formulation,
subsequent generation rarely recovers the trajectory into a correct final solution.
The case study and the Pass@k versus CoT-Pass@k comparison identify why myopic policy is
inadequate for OR generation. Specifically, the case study shows that a locally plausible modeling
choice can later invalidate the global formulation, while the Pass@k versus CoT-Pass@k compar-
ison shows that, once such a choice is made, the induced error is rarely corrected by subsequent
continuation. Thus, LLMs for OR questions face a compounded risk: local likelihood may favor
a misleading intermediate commitment, and the effect of that commitment can persist through
the variables, constraints, objective, and solver code.
Therefore, at each step, reliable method
should assess candidate continuations before committing to them, rather than relying only on their
immediate probability under the base model.
12


--- Page 13 ---
3.3
Motivation
To improve the performance of LLMs, one promising approach is to generate diverse responses
and then conduct reinforcement learning based on preferences, e.g., reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) and reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards (RLVR). In paradigms
like RLVR, model post-training is formulated as a reward maximization problem. Given a reward
function r(x) that evaluates generated answers, the objective is to learn a policy q(·) that maximizes
expected reward while remaining close to the base model p(·):
max
q(·) Ex∼q[r(x)] −1
λDKL[q(x)||p(x)],
(3.1)
where λ > 0 and DKL denotes the Kullback-Leibler divergence of two different distributions. Under
standard regularization assumptions, the optimal policy given reward function r(x) admits the form
q(x) = 1
Z p(x) exp(λr(x)),
(3.2)
where λ controls the strength of reward shaping and Z = P
x p(x) exp(λr(x)) is a partition function.
By defining a reward function that evaluates the final generated answers, the model learns a
policy that optimizes global trajectories rather than just local tokens. Specifically, it follows from
(3.2) that
q(xt|x<t) = q(x<t, xt)
q(x<t)
=
P
x>t q(x<t, xt, x>t)
P
x′
t
P
x>t q(x<t, x′
t, x>t) ∝
X
x>t
p(x<t, xt, x>t) exp(λr(x<t, xt, x>t))
= p(x<t)p(xt|x<t)
X
x>t
p(x>t|x≤t) exp(λr(x<t, xt, x>t))
∝p(xt|x<t)Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t)[exp(λr(x))]
= p(xt|x<t)ϕ(x≤t),
(3.3)
where ϕ(x≤t) = Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t)[exp(λr(x))] denotes a conditional expectation that aggregates the
expected quality of future continuations after step t. Therefore, under RLVR, the preference over
each candidate token is determined not only by its immediate likelihood under the base model
but also by the downstream potential. This demonstrates that viewing reasoning as a trajectory-
dependent process with lookahead capabilities can significantly improve the performance of the
13


--- Page 14 ---
base LLMs.
However, applying reinforcement learning in OR poses significant practical challenges. Such
approaches typically require iterative training, substantial computational resources, and carefully
designed reward signals, which are often sparse or expensive to obtain in practice. Furthermore,
there is an ongoing discussion regarding whether RLVR fundamentally endows models with novel
intrinsic capabilities, or if its gains primarily arise from shifting probability toward valid reasoning
paths that are already available to the base model. Given this debate, alongside the prohibitive
costs of post-training, a natural question arises: can we make better inference-time decisions among
competing intermediate continuations without relying on costly parameter updates?
If the fundamental advantage of RLVR lies in assessing the future consequences of local choices,
we can bypass the training phase by directly incorporating this lookahead mechanism into the
inference process. Instead of implicitly learning a global policy through parameter updates, we can
explicitly evaluate each candidate continuation based on the quality of the complete solution that
follows from it. To formalize this intuition, we introduce a value function V that represents the
probability of eventually arriving at a correct final answer given the current generated prefix and a
candidate continuation. The next section develops this inference-time alternative and details how
we approximate this ideal value function eﬀiciently during generation.
4
Method
Before detailing our method, we first clarify where our framework intervenes in the generation pro-
cess. When deploying LLMs, a critical distinction is whether the probability engine and the control
program that assembles the final output are separable. In closed-source commercial application pro-
gramming interfaces (APIs), these two components are coupled into a black box: the user submits
a prompt and receives a complete sequence, with no access to the intermediate probability distri-
butions or the token-by-token selection logic. In an open-source environment, the model exposes
two primitive operations: it returns the conditional distribution p(·|prefix) and can draw samples
from that distribution, but it does not dictate which sample is selected. The actual generation loop
that chooses a specific token at each step and iteratively constructs the full sequence is an external
control program that the user can modify (see Figure 3). As shown in the figure, this intervention
relies on a resampling mechanism, which we will formally define later in this section.
14


--- Page 15 ---
Base LLM
get_prob(x)
return p = Pr(· | x)
sample(p)
draw one token z ∼p
sample_N_tokens(p,N)
draw N candidate tokens from p
Standard Generation
prefix = prompt
while generation:
p = LLM.get_prob(prefix)
# Local one-step decision
token = LLM.sample(p)
prefix = prefix + token
Our Intervention
prefix = prompt
while generation:
p = LLM.get_prob(prefix)
candidates = LLM.sample_N_tokens(p,N)
# Estimate reward
for c in candidates:
sim_prefix = prefix + c
for h = 1,…,H:
q = LLM.get_prob(sim_prefix)
z = LLM.sample(q)
sim_prefix = sim_prefix + z
R[c] = reward(sim_prefix)
w[c] ∝p(c) × R[c]
best_c = resample(candidates, w)
prefix = prefix + best_c
Figure 3: The base LLM (top) serves strictly as a frozen probability engine.
While standard
methods (left) blindly follow the default myopic sampling code, our framework (right) intervenes
in the decoding script by generating multiple candidates and using short-lookahead simulations
to estimate structural stability. This allows us to reweight the output distribution and steer the
generation toward mathematically coherent OR formulations.
This separation means we do not need to retrain the model or modify its parameters. Instead,
we rewrite the external control program to embed a simulation-based lookahead search. Before
committing to a candidate continuation, our algorithm uses the model’s probability engine to
project several steps forward, evaluating the structural stability of the resulting trajectory. It then
selects the candidate whose downstream behavior is most concentrated and coherent, rather than
the one with the highest immediate probability. By replacing the default myopic selection rule
rather than the model weights, we steer generation toward formulations that are more likely to
remain mathematically consistent.
15


--- Page 16 ---
4.1
Reward Design
As motivated in the previous section, stabilizing OR generation requires evaluating the global
consequences of local choices. Suppose that at step t, the model has already generated a prefix x<t,
and let At denote the set of candidate tokens or blocks under consideration. Ideally, the model
should choose the continuation that maximizes the probability of eventually arriving at a correct
final answer. Formally, for any candidate a ∈At, define
V (x<t ⊕a) = Pr (final answer is correct | x<t ⊕a) ,
where x<t ⊕a denotes the new prefix formed by appending a to x<t. The ideal decision rule is then
a⋆
t ∈arg maxa∈At V (x<t ⊕a), and the next output is chosen as a⋆
t .
In principle, one can estimate V (x<t ⊕a) by simulation. That is, for each candidate a, we tem-
porarily fix a as the continuation at step t, sample a suﬀiciently large number of full trajectories
from x<t ⊕a, and use the empirical success rate of the final answers as an estimator of V (x<t ⊕a).
This corresponds to propagating terminal correctness information back to the current local decision
and related ideas have been explored in Zhao et al. (2024). However, V (x<t⊕a) is generally diﬀicult
to use during generation. In OR tasks, correctness is typically a terminal property, i.e., whether a
candidate is truly valid can usually be determined only after the complete formulation, implementa-
tion, and final answer have been generated. As a result, directly estimating V for each intermediate
candidate would require repeated full-path evaluation, which is not only computationally expensive
but also poorly suited to timely decision-making during inference.
This observation motivates the need for a surrogate reward of V . Ideally, such a proxy should
satisfy two requirements. First, it should be informative about the true terminal value V (x<t ⊕a),
so that improving the proxy also tends to improve final correctness. Second, it should be estimable
from partial future information, without requiring the model to complete and verify the entire
remaining path for every candidate.
In other words, we seek a signal that is correlated with
eventual success, yet can already be extracted from partial future information.
Our intuition is that downstream uncertainty provides such a signal, which has also been studied
by Farquhar et al. (2024). Importantly, the relevant uncertainty in OR tasks is not one-dimensional.
It may appear in several forms, including divergent variable semantics, inconsistent objective for-
16


--- Page 17 ---
mulations, incompatible constraints, conflicting implementation choices, or other structural mis-
matches in the downstream reasoning process. A candidate that appears locally plausible may
still induce substantial branching across these dimensions, indicating that it is not on a stable
formulation path. By contrast, a strong candidate is more likely to support a concentrated and
coherent set of future continuations. Moreover, these uncertainties often reveal themselves over a
relatively short horizon. In OR generation, many structural errors do not remain latent until the
final answer. For example, an incorrect variable definition may quickly lead to different objective
terms, mismatched constraints, or inconsistent code structure in the subsequent steps. Therefore,
it is often unnecessary to simulate the entire remaining path in order to assess candidate quality.
To illustrate this relationship between uncertainty and correctness, we consider a concrete ex-
ample in Figure 4. At “variable definition” step in an MAMOEasyLP instance, we examine 16
candidate continuations and, for each candidate, simulate 32 full downstream rollouts. We then
manually cluster these rollouts and compute the empirical entropy bH(a) = −PC(a)
c=1 bπc(a) log bπc(a),
where bπc(a) is the fraction of rollouts assigned to structural cluster c, and C(a) is the number of
induced clusters. We also estimate the empirical success rate bV (a) =
1
32
P32
m=1 1ans
 τ (m)
a

, where
τ (m)
a
is the m-th rollout under candidate a. As shown in the figure, lower structural entropy tends
to be associated with higher success rate. For example, the candidate with bH = 0.68 achieves a
success rate of 87.5%, whereas the candidate with bH = 1.85 achieves only 9.4%. We can see that
candidates a10 and a14 appear highly similar at the local level, yet their downstream uncertainty
and eventual correctness differ substantially. This does not prove that uncertainty alone determines
correctness, but it strongly suggests that downstream uncertainty contains useful information about
whether a candidate continuation remains on a valid OR reasoning path.
It is not suﬀicient to only use the uncertainty because a candidate may have low downstream
entropy simply because the model is confidently following a wrong but internally consistent path.
Hence, we also need to retain the local preference of the base model, i.e., whether the current token
or block appears natural under p(·). This leads to reward functions that combine local plausibility
and future stability. For simplicity, we present the method at token-level notation in the following.
That is, at step t we consider selecting the next token xt. It is worth noting that in practical OR
generation, it is often more meaningful to apply the same idea at the block level, since a single token
rarely reveals whether a formulation choice is sound, whereas a complete variable declaration, a
17


--- Page 18 ---
Candidate
Uncertainty
Outcome
a9
x: Budget units allocated to channel X.
18
6
6
H = 1.42
19/32
V = 0.59
a10
XX: Budget allocated to channel X (in dollars).
9
9
10
H = 1.85
3/32
V = 0.09
a13
x_X: Yu Li (channel X) effort.
21
6
H = 1.13
22/32
V = 0.69
a14
x_X: Effort, in dollars, allocated to channel X.
27
H = 0.68
28/32
V = 0.88
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Entropy
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Success Rate
a1
a2
a3
a4
a5
a6
a7
a8
a9
a10
a11
a12
a13
a14
a15
a16
Figure 4: A motivating illustration of the relationship between downstream dispersion and empirical
correctness. At variable-definition step, we compare 16 candidate continuations and simulate 32
full downstream rollouts for each candidate.
full constraint, or an objective term often does. All definitions below can be extended immediately
if one replaces xt by a semantically meaningful block.
Let Ht = −Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t) [log p(x>t|x≤t)] denote the conditional entropy of future continuations
given the current prefix x≤t. A large value of Ht indicates that the current choice leads to many
competing future trajectories, while a small value indicates that the downstream continuation is
more concentrated and therefore more stable. Next, we define the entropy reward which is similar
to ϕ in (3.3)
ϕentropy,α,β(x≤t) = exp (α log p(xt|x<t) −βHt) ,
(4.1)
where α ≥0 and β ≥0 are tuning parameters. The first term on the right hand side (RHS) of (4.1)
encourages locally plausible continuations and reduces the chance of selecting unnatural tokens.
The second term on the RHS of (4.1) penalizes prefixes whose future paths are highly dispersed.
Thus, ϕentropy,α,β favors continuations that are both natural under the base model and structurally
18


--- Page 19 ---
stable under future rollout. This reward directly matches the intuition developed above. In OR
tasks, the ideal continuation is not merely one that looks locally likely, but one that keeps the
future formulation path concentrated around coherent variable definitions, compatible constraints,
or a stable objective structure. The entropy term is designed to capture exactly this notion of
downstream stability.
Besides explicit entropy penalization, it is also useful to consider a more likelihood-oriented
reward that favors prefixes whose future probability mass is concentrated on a small number of
strong continuations. This leads to the power reward
ϕpower,α(x≤t) = exp

α log p(xt|x<t) + log Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t) [p(x>t|x≤t)α]

,
(4.2)
where α ≥0. The interpretation of ϕpower,α is slightly different from that of the entropy reward. In-
stead of explicitly subtracting uncertainty, it rewards prefixes whose lookahead distribution assigns
substantial mass to a few high-probability future trajectories. In this sense, it is a softer and more
likelihood-driven proxy for continuation quality. When the downstream probability mass is diffuse,
the power moment is relatively small, while when the downstream mass is concentrated on a few
strong continuations, the power moment becomes large. Hence, ϕpower,α also prefers stable prefixes,
but it does so through high-probability concentration rather than explicit entropy regularization.
The relationship between the two rewards can be clarified by Jensen’s inequality. Since the
logarithm is concave, we have
log Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t) [p(x>t|x≤t)α] ≥Ex>t∼p(·|x≤t) [log p(x>t|x≤t)α] = −αHt.
Therefore, the power reward can be viewed as a more aggressive high-mass surrogate, whereas
the entropy reward explicitly penalizes dispersion. The former emphasizes strong future likelihood
concentration, while the latter more directly targets future uncertainty.
Importantly, our goal here is not to claim that one of these two rewards is universally superior.
Rather, they represent two principled ways of turning rollout-based downstream information into
an inference-time proxy for trajectory quality.
The entropy reward is closer to the structural-
stability intuition, while the power reward yields a cleaner likelihood-based transformation that
will be especially convenient in the next section. Both rewards above are still defined through
19


--- Page 20 ---
expectations over future continuations, and exact evaluation remains intractable. The next section
therefore develops an eﬀicient approximation scheme based on limited lookahead and importance
resampling, together with the corresponding theoretical justification.
4.2
Importance Resampling
In the following, we introduce how to estimate rewards and how to perform importance resampling.
Note that although ϕentropy,α,β and ϕpower,α in Section 4.1 formally rely on the expectation over
future continuations, it differs fundamentally from the objective in RLVR. Specifically, RLVR relies
on terminal, binary correctness (e.g., whether the final answer is TRUE or FALSE) that can only
be determined after completing the entire reasoning pipeline. In contrast, ϕentropy,α,β and ϕpower,α
are continuous metrics designed to capture downstream uncertainty and prefix stability. In OR and
strongly path-dependent tasks, this structural uncertainty typically manifests within a relatively
short continuation horizon. For example, an incorrect variable definition will quickly reveal itself
through inconsistent objective terms or mismatched constraints shortly after it is generated, without
needing to run the final solver (see Appendix B). Moreover, distant future tokens will also be
evaluated in subsequent lookahead windows as the generation advances. Therefore, we can only
consider the next H tokens to balance estimation accuracy and computational eﬀiciency.
Given a truncated reward function ϕH(x≤t) which may be either the entropy reward or the power
reward, we now describe how to incorporate this signal into inference. Since directly enumerating all
possible continuations is infeasible, we adopt an importance resampling strategy at each generation
step. Fix a step t < T and an already-generated prefix x<t. We define the local truncated selection
rule
qH(a|x<t) =
p(a|x<t)ϕH(x<t ⊕a)
P
a′∈At p(a′|x<t)ϕH(x<t ⊕a′),
a ∈At,
H < T −t.
(4.3)
This distribution assigns larger probability mass to candidates with higher reward values, so can-
didates that are both locally plausible under the base model and more promising under the chosen
lookahead-based reward are more likely to be selected. In particular, when ϕH is chosen as the
power reward, the resulting resampled distribution can be viewed as an approximation to a power
version of the original distribution, which is similar to the idea in Karan and Du (2025). Equation
(4.3) is local in the sense that it reweights only the current-step decision, rather than defining a
20


--- Page 21 ---
x1
1:t
xi
1:t
xN
1:t
x1
t+1:t+H
xM
t+1:t+H
Using LLM p(·)
Using LLM p(·)
Figure 5: Illustration of the sampling procedure at time step t < T. The prefix x1:t−1 is fixed, and
multiple candidate tokens at position t are evaluated using lookahead rollouts.
separate global target distribution over complete trajectories.
To apply the selection rule at step t, we draw N candidate tokens independently with replace-
ment from p(·|x<t), denoted by x1
t , ..., xN
t , and write xi
≤t = (x<t, xi
t) for the resulting candidate
prefixes. For each xi
≤t, we generate M rollouts to estimate ϕH(xi
≤t), denoted by ϕM,H(xi
≤t). The
sampling procedure is shown in Figure 5.
We then assign each candidate a nonnegative score
ewi = ϕM,H(xi
≤t) and normalize these scores to obtain wi = ewi/ PN
k=1 ewk. Finally, we sample an
index I according to the categorical distribution {wi}N
i=1 and set xt,N,M = xI
t . This procedure
preserves the support of the base model while shifting probability mass toward candidates that
receive larger reward values, thereby favoring continuations that are more promising under the
chosen lookahead criterion. In the following, we provide Theorem 4.1 to show that as the number
of sampled candidates and rollouts increases, the resampled token converges in distribution to the
target rule qH(·|x<t). Thus, the practical procedure can be viewed as a Monte Carlo approximation
to the ideal local reweighted selector. The proof of Theorem 4.1 is provided in Appendix A.
Theorem 4.1. Fix a step t, a prefix x<t, and a lookahead horizon H < T −t. Assume that At
is finite and that p(a|x<t) > 0 for all a ∈At. Then, as N, M →∞, we have xt,N,M ⇒qH(·|x<t),
where ⇒means convergence in distribution.
The theorem provides the basic justification for our inference procedure. Although exact eval-
uation of the local reweighted rule is intractable, the proposed importance resampling scheme
asymptotically recovers the same decision distribution. In this sense, the algorithm should be un-
derstood not as an ad hoc generation heuristic, but as a statistically consistent approximation to
the ideal reward-guided local selector.
Note that Theorem 4.1 is stated at the token level. However, in practice, the quality of a single
21


--- Page 22 ---
candidate token is often diﬀicult to assess, since many meaningful modeling decisions are only
expressed after several consecutive tokens. We therefore implement the procedure at the block level.
Specifically, at each decision point, we sample N candidate blocks of length B from the base model,
and for each candidate block we further simulate M rollout continuations of length H in order
to construct a Monte Carlo estimate of the truncated reward. This blockwise implementation is
more consistent with the way optimization formulations are actually generated, where semantically
meaningful units often appear as variable declarations, constraint clauses, or code fragments rather
than isolated tokens.
Another advantage of the blockwise implementation is its lower computational overhead. Sup-
pose the final generated sequence has length T, and for simplicity assume that B divides T. Then
the number of blockwise resampling stages is T/B. At each stage, generating N candidate blocks
costs NB tokens, while the lookahead simulation costs NMH tokens.
Hence, the total token
consumption is
E[token] = T
B (NB + NMH) = NT + NMH
B
T.
When B = 1, E[tokens] = N(MH + 1)T, while when B = H, this reduces to NT + NMT =
(1 + M)NT. Therefore, block-level lookahead provides a more meaningful evaluation unit while
keeping the additional inference cost manageable. The procedure is presented in Algorithm 1.
5
Numerical Experiments
We evaluate inference-time sampling strategies for improving reasoning performance of a fixed
base LLM. Following standard practice in prior work, we report pass@1 accuracy as the primary
evaluation metric. We conduct experiments on multiple operations research benchmarks:
• NL4OPT: a natural-language-to-optimization benchmark focusing on linear programming
formulation.
• MAMO: a benchmark for mathematical optimization modeling, including both EasyLP and
ComplexLP subsets.
• IndustryOR: an industry-oriented operations research benchmark consisting of domain-
22


--- Page 23 ---
Algorithm 1: Importance Resampling Generation
Input: Base model p(·), initial prompt x<1, block length B, rollout horizon H, numbers of
candidates and rollouts (N, M), total generation length T, truncated reward
estimator ϕM,H(·)
Output: Generated sequence x1:T
t ←1
while t ≤T do
for i = 1, ..., N do
Sample a candidate block bi ∼p(·|x<t) of length B
for m = 1, . . . , M do
Sample a rollout ri,m ∼p(·|x<t ⊕bi) of length H
Compute ϕM,H(x<t ⊕bi) using {ri,m}M
m=1
˜wi ←ϕM,H(x<t ⊕bi)
wi ←˜wi/ PN
k=1 ˜wk, for i = 1, ..., N
Sample I ∼Categorical(w1, ..., wN)
x<t+B ←x<t ⊕bI
t ←t + B
if bI contains the EOS token then
break
return x<t
specific optimization and decision-making problems.
We evaluate our methods using ORLM-LLaMA-3-8B, a model explicitly tailored for optimiza-
tion modeling and decision-making tasks. Evaluations are conducted in an instruction-following
generation framework, and based on (N, M, B, H) = (10, 4, 8, 8) in Table 1 and (N, M, B, H) =
(10, 4, 48, 48) in Figure 6. All experiments are executed on a single 48GB NVIDIA virtual GPU
(vGPU). We benchmark against the following inference-time sampling strategies:
• Standard sampling: Autoregressive sampling from the learned model distribution p(·) with
a temperature of τ = 1.
• Low-temperature sampling: Temperature scaled to τ = 0.25, serving as a robust, training-
free baseline for distribution sharpening and stochasticity reduction.
• Power reward sampling: A lookahead-driven strategy guided by the reward function
ϕpower,α.
At each generation step, we sample N blocks of length B.
For each block, we
execute M stochastic lookahead rollouts over a horizon H, resampling based on the estimated
23


--- Page 24 ---
lookahead weights.
• Entropy reward sampling: A variant of the lookahead strategy incorporating the reward
function ϕentropy,α,β. The algorithmic procedure parallels the power reward but inherently
regularizes the generation trajectory via entropy minimization.
Table 1 details the empirical performance of ORLM-LLaMA-3-8B across various inference con-
figurations on multiple OR benchmarks. We evaluate two primary metrics: success rate, indicat-
ing the generation of syntactically valid and executable programs, and correctness rate, verifying
whether the derived numerical solution perfectly aligns with the ground truth. Standard autore-
gressive sampling (τ = 1.0) yields suboptimal correctness, notably degrading on highly constrained
benchmarks such as MAMOComplexLP (22.7%) and IndustryOR (24.0%). Unlike open-ended text
generation, OR modeling presents a highly unforgiving output space where a single aberrant to-
ken can render an entire mathematical formulation structurally invalid or logically infeasible. The
inherent stochasticity of standard sampling exacerbates this fragility. While dampening the tem-
perature (τ = 0.25) stabilizes token-level emission and consistently elevates both metrics across all
benchmarks, it remains inherently myopic, lacking the capacity for long-horizon logical planning.
As demonstrated in Table 1, lookahead-augmented sampling strategies fundamentally overcome
the limitations of myopic policy, establishing superior performance across complex OR datasets. In
rigorous OR problems, the generated trajectory is highly susceptible to cascading structural fail-
ures. Lookahead mechanisms explicitly mitigate this by proactively anticipating downstream states,
thereby pruning erroneous trajectories and steering the model away from structural dead-ends be-
fore irreversible token commitments are made. Consequently, power reward sampling achieves ab-
solute correctness improvements of 17.6% and 9.0% over standard sampling on MAMOComplexLP
and IndustryOR, respectively. Furthermore, entropy reward sampling enhances this trajectory ro-
bustness by jointly optimizing for likelihood and future uncertainty. This regularization enables
the highest overall correctness on IndustryOR (37.0%). Ultimately, these findings underscore that
uncertainty-aware lookahead signals are indispensable for navigating the rigid constraints of math-
ematical optimization and ensuring robust autoregressive generation.
Figure 6 reports the parameter sensitivity of the two proposed reward-based sampling schemes.
Panel 6a shows the performance of the power reward sampling method. As α increases from 0 to 3,
the accuracy improves substantially, indicating that the power reward helps guide the model toward
24


--- Page 25 ---
Table 1: Performance of ORLM-LLaMA-3-8B under different inference strategies.
Model
Method
Params
NL4OPT
MAMOEasyLP
MAMOComplexLP
IndustryOR
Succ.
Corr.
Succ.
Corr.
Succ.
Corr.
Succ.
Corr.
Without lookahead
Standard sampling
T = 1.0
93.9%
70.2%
97.4%
75.3%
72.0%
22.7%
71.0%
24.0%
Low-temperature sampling
T = 0.25
98.0%
76.3%
99.5%
79.0%
82.9%
36.5%
83.0%
31.0%
With lookahead
Power reward sampling
α = 3
98.4%
76.7%
100%
80.2%
83.9%
40.3%
81.0%
33.0%
Entropy reward sampling
(α, β) = (3, 0.2)
98.8%
78.8%
99.7%
79.1%
81.0%
37.4%
83.0%
37.0%
higher-quality trajectories. For larger values, such as α = 7 and α = 99, the performance becomes
stable with only minor fluctuations. This pattern suggests that the power-reward mechanism is
fairly robust once α is chosen beyond a small range.
Panels 6b and 6c present the entropy reward sampling method under different combinations of
α and β. As shown in Panel 6b, where β is fixed, the effect of α is nontrivial. Increasing α from
a very small value often improves performance, suggesting that stronger reward shaping can be
beneficial. However, the gain becomes limited once α reaches a moderate range. This suggests that
α mainly controls the strength of the reward signal, while its effectiveness depends on its interaction
with the entropy coeﬀicient β.
Panel 6c examines the effect of β for fixed values of α. An important observation is that the case
β = 0 is generally not optimal, which indicates that the entropy reward provides useful guidance
in the sampling process. In this sense, the entropy term is not merely an auxiliary regularizer,
but an effective part of the reward design. At the same time, excessively large values of β may
lead to performance degradation. One possible reason is that a strong entropy penalty makes the
algorithm overly restrictive toward variations along subsequent trajectories. In sequential reasoning
or search problems, different trajectories may look different at the surface level while still being
semantically consistent. Penalizing all such variations in the same way may therefore suppress
valid and informative diversity, which in turn hurts performance. This observation suggests that
the main limitation lies not in the use of entropy itself, but in the level at which entropy is measured.
A natural direction for future research is therefore to move from surface-level entropy to a semantic-
level entropy measure (see, e.g., Farquhar et al., 2024) that can distinguish harmful instability from
semantically consistent variation.
25


--- Page 26 ---
0
1
3
7
99
0.19
0.23
0.27
0.30
0.34
Accuracy
(a) Power reward sampling
0
1
3
7
0.19
0.24
0.29
0.33
0.38
Accuracy
= 0
= 0.1
= 0.2
= 0.4
= 0.8
(b) Entropy reward sampling
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.19
0.24
0.29
0.33
0.38
Accuracy
= 0
= 1
= 3
= 7
(c) Entropy reward sampling
Figure 6: Sensitivity analysis of reward scaling hyperparameters α and β across different lookahead
sampling strategies on IndustryOR.
Figure 7 reports the Pass@1 accuracy of the power reward sampling method on the IndustryOR
benchmark under different hyperparameter configurations. To assess the role of each hyperparam-
eter separately, the three groups on the horizontal axis fix (M, H) = (2, 2), (N, H) = (10, 2), and
(N, M) = (10, 10), respectively, while varying the remaining parameter.
The figure shows that performance improves as the budget increases from very small values to
moderate values. For example, when (M, H) = (2, 2) is fixed, increasing N from 1 to 100 raises
the accuracy from 24% to 33%. Similar gains are observed when varying M with (N, H) = (10, 2)
fixed, and when varying H with (N, M) = (10, 10) fixed. This pattern indicates that the proposed
method benefits from additional sampling and lookahead, especially when the initial budget is
limited. At the same time, the improvement becomes noticeably smaller once N and M reach
26


--- Page 27 ---
(M,H)=(2,2)
(N,H)=(10,2)
(N,M)=(10,10)
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
36
IndustryOR Accuracy (%)
(1,2,2)
(10,0,2)
(10,10,1)
(2,2,2)
(10,1,2)
(10,10,2)
(5,2,2)
(10,2,2)
(10,10,4)
(10,2,2)
(10,5,2)
(10,10,8)
(100,2,2)
(10,10,2)
(10,10,16)
Figure 7: Pass@1 accuracy on IndustryOR using power reward sampling under various hyperparam-
eter configurations. Each bar is labeled as (N, M, H). The three groups show sensitivity to: (left)
N with (M, H) = (2, 2); (middle) M with (N, H) = (10, 2); and (right) H with (N, M) = (10, 10).
moderate levels. In particular, strong performance is already attained at configurations such as
(N, M, H) = (10, 5, 2), (10, 10, 2), and (10, 10, 4), while the best result is achieved at (10, 10, 16).
The gap between these moderate settings and the largest tested configurations is limited. This
suggests that the effectiveness of the method does not depend on large values of N or M.
This observation is important from a deployment perspective.
In practical applications, in-
creasing N and M directly raises computational cost and inference latency. The results show that
the proposed method can achieve strong accuracy without requiring large candidate sets or exten-
sive rollout budgets. Hence, the method offers a favorable balance between solution quality and
computational burden, which makes it more suitable for real-world deployment in latency-sensitive
settings.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we study how to improve the reliability of LLM-based formulation generation for OR
tasks. The main diﬀiculty in this setting is that formulation quality is determined by the consistency
27


--- Page 28 ---
of the entire generation path, whereas conventional methods make only local decisions and therefore
cannot adequately control trajectory-level risk. To address this issue, we propose a training-free
inference framework that performs distribution control during generation. The key idea is to use
lookahead-based rewards to evaluate the quality of partial trajectories and then apply importance
resampling to shift probability mass toward more reliable continuation paths. In this way, the
model is guided not only by immediate probabilities, but also by the downstream stability of the
generated formulation. Across multiple benchmarks, the proposed method consistently improves
formulation accuracy, while requiring only a moderate increase in inference cost.
For future work, the current framework measures uncertainty mainly through naive entropy.
A natural next step is to incorporate semantic entropy (Farquhar et al., 2024) into uncertainty
estimation, so that the reward can better distinguish genuinely unstable trajectories from semanti-
cally equivalent ones. Moreover, the allocation of computational budget across N and M deserves
further study. Since the method has a nested structure, with candidate generation and rollout eval-
uation interacting with each other, it may be possible to draw on ideas from the nested simulation
literature (e.g., Gordy and Juneja, 2010; Zhang et al., 2022) to design principled budget allocation
rules.
References
Aghazadeh et al. (2025).
CGES: Confidence-guided early stopping for self-consistency.
arXiv
preprint.
AhmadiTeshnizi, A., W. Gao, and M. Udell (2024). OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling with
(MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference
on Machine Learning, Volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR.
Chen, M., J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. de Oliveira Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda,
N. Joseph, G. Brockman, A. Ray, R. Puri, G. Krueger, M. Petrov, H. Khlaaf, G. Sastry,
P. Mishkin, B. Chan, S. Gray, N. Ryder, M. Pavlov, A. Power, L. Kaiser, M. Bavarian, C. Win-
ter, P. Tillet, F. P. Such, D. Cummings, M. Plappert, F. Chantzis, E. Barnes, A. Herbert-Voss,
W. H. Guss, A. Nichol, A. Paino, N. Tezak, J. Tang, I. Babuschkin, S. Balaji, S. Jain, W. Saun-
ders, C. Hesse, A. N. Carr, J. Leike, J. Achiam, V. Misra, E. Morikawa, A. Radford, M. Knight,
28


--- Page 29 ---
M. Brundage, M. Murati, K. Mayer, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, D. Amodei, S. McCandlish,
I. Sutskever, and W. Zaremba (2021). Evaluating large language models trained on code.
Chen, Z. et al. (2026). OPT-ENGINE: A complexity-controlled benchmark for evaluating LLM-
based optimization modeling. arXiv preprint.
Chuang, Y.-S., Y. Xie, H. Luo, Y. Kim, J. Glass, and P. He (2024). DoLa: Decoding by contrasting
layers improves factuality in large language models. In Proceedings of the 12th International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Ding, Z. et al. (2026). OR-R1: Automating modeling and solving of operations research optimiza-
tion problem via test-time reinforcement learning.
Farquhar, S., J. Kossen, L. Kuhn, and Y. Gal (2024). Detecting hallucinations in large language
models using semantic entropy. Nature 630(8017), 625–630.
Gordy, M. B. and S. Juneja (2010). Nested simulation in portfolio risk measurement. Management
Science 56(10), 1833–1848.
Guo, D., D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, P. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Xu, R. Zhang, S. Ma, X. Bi, et al.
(2025). Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.12948.
Hu, J., Y. Zhang, Q. Han, D. Jiang, X. Zhang, and H.-Y. Shum (2025). Open-reasoner-zero: An
open source approach to scaling up reinforcement learning on the base model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.24290.
Huang, C., Z. Tang, S. Hu, R. Jiang, X. Zheng, D. Ge, B. Wang, and Z. Wang (2025). Orlm: A cus-
tomizable framework in training large models for automated optimization modeling. Operations
Research.
Huang, X., Q. Shen, Y. Hu, A. Gao, and B. Wang (2024). Mamo: A mathematical modeling
benchmark with solvers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13144.
Jiang, C., X. Shu, H. Qian, X. Lu, J. Zhou, A. Zhou, and Y. Yu (2025). Llmopt: Learning to define
and solve general optimization problems from scratch.
Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
29


--- Page 30 ---
Jiang, Z., J. Araki, H. Ding, and G. Neubig (2021). How can we know when language models know?
on the calibration of language models for question answering. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics 9, 962–977.
Kadavath, S., T. Conerly, A. Askell, T. Henighan, D. Drain, E. Perez, N. Schiefer, Z. Hatfield-
Dodds, N. DasSarma, E. Tran-Johnson, S. Johnston, S. El-Showk, A. Jones, N. Elhage, T. Hume,
A. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Bowman, S. Fort, D. Ganguli, D. Hernandez, J. Jacobson, J. Kernion,
S. Kravec, L. Lovitt, K. Ndousse, C. Olsson, S. Ringer, D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, N. Joseph,
B. Mann, S. McCandlish, C. Olah, and J. Kaplan (2022). Language models (mostly) know what
they know. arXiv:2207.05221.
Karan, A. and Y. Du (2025). Reasoning with sampling: Your base model is smarter than you think.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14901.
Kuhn, L., Y. Gal, and S. Farquhar (2023). Semantic uncertainty: Linguistic invariances for un-
certainty estimation in natural language generation. In Proceedings of the 11th International
Conference on Learning Representations.
Liang, K., Y. Lu, J. Mao, S. Sun, C. Yang, C. Zeng, X. Jin, H. Qin, R. Zhu, and C.-P. Teo
(2026). Llm for large-scale optimization model auto-formulation: A lightweight few-shot learning
approach.
Lightman, H., V. Kosaraju, Y. Burda, H. Edwards, B. Baker, T. Lee, J. Leike, J. Schulman,
I. Sutskever, and K. Cobbe (2024). Let’s verify step by step. In Proceedings of the 12th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations.
Liu, A., M. Sap, X. Lu, S. Swayamdipta, C. Bhagavatula, N. A. Smith, and Y. Choi (2021). DEx-
perts: Decoding-time controlled text generation with experts and anti-experts. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rafailov, R., A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, C. D. Manning, S. Ermon, and C. Finn (2023).
Direct
preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural
information processing systems 36, 53728–53741.
Ramamonjison, R., H. Li, T. Yu, S. He, V. Rengan, A. Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Z. Zhou, and Y. Zhang
(2022).
Augmenting operations research with auto-formulation of optimization models from
30


--- Page 31 ---
problem descriptions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: Industry Track, pp. 29–62.
Ramamonjison, R., T. Yu, R. Li, H. Li, G. Carenini, B. Ghaddar, S. He, M. Mostajabdaveh,
A. Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Z. Zhou, et al. (2023). Nl4opt competition: Formulating optimization
problems based on their natural language descriptions. In NeurIPS 2022 competition track, pp.
189–203. PMLR.
Shi, Z., Y. Zhu, Y. Xie, J. Shi, G. Xie, H. Zhang, Y. Jiang, C. Miao, and Q. Li (2025). Reasoning
under uncertainty: Eﬀicient LLM inference via unsupervised confidence dilution and convergent
adaptive sampling.
In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing.
Wang, X., J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdhery, and D. Zhou (2023).
Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. In Proceedings of the
11th International Conference on Learning Representations.
Wei, L., Y. Zhang, and J. Yan (2025). Entropy-tree: Tree-based decoding with entropy-guided
exploration. arXiv:2601.15296.
Wen, X., Z. Liu, S. Zheng, S. Ye, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Liang, J. Li, Z. Miao, et al. (2025).
Reinforcement learning with verifiable rewards implicitly incentivizes correct reasoning in base
llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.14245.
Xiao, Z., D. Zhang, Y. Wu, L. Xu, Y. Wang, X. Han, X. Fu, T. Zhong, J. Zeng, M. Song, and
G. Chen (2024). Chain-of-experts: When LLMs meet complex operations research problems. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Learning Representations.
Yang, K. and D. Klein (2021). FUDGE: Controlled text generation with future discriminators.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yang, Z., Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Guo, W. Shi, X. Han, L. Feng, L. Song, J. Liang, and J. Tang
(2024). Optibench meets resocratic: Measure and improve llms for optimization modeling. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.09887.
31


--- Page 32 ---
Yue, Y., Z. Chen, R. Lu, A. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Song, and G. Huang (2025). Does reinforcement
learning really incentivize reasoning capacity in llms beyond the base model?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.13837.
Zhang, K., G. Liu, and S. Wang (2022). Bootstrap-based budget allocation for nested simulation.
Operations Research 70(2), 1128–1142.
Zhao, H. et al. (2024). ϕ-decoding: Foresight sampling for optimal step selection. arXiv preprint.
Zhao, S., R. Brekelmans, A. Makhzani, and R. Grosse (2024). Probabilistic inference in language
models via twisted sequential monte carlo. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.17546.
32


--- Page 33 ---
A
Proof of Theorem 4.1
Proof: Denote pt(·) = p(·|x<t), qt,H(·) = qH(·|x<t) and for each M,
qt,M,H(a) =
pt(a)ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a)
P
a′∈At pt(a′)ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a′),
a ∈At.
(A.1)
For any measurable set A ⊆At, let
RN,M(A) =
PN
i=1 qt,M,H(xi
t)/pt(xi
t)1{xi
t ∈A}
PN
j=1 qt,M,H(xj
t)/pt(xj
t)
.
Then
Pr(xt,N,M ∈A) = E

Pr
 xt,N,M ∈A | x1
t , . . . , xN
t , ϕM,H

= E
" N
X
i=1
wi1{xi
t ∈A}
#
= E [RN,M(A)] ,
where wi = ϕM,H(xi
≤t)/PN
j=1 ϕM,H(xj
≤t).
Since At is finite and for every a ∈At, we have ϕH(x<t ⊕a) > 0, we may define
c = 1
2 min
a∈At ϕH(x<t ⊕a) > 0,
C = 2 max
a∈At ϕH(x<t ⊕a) < ∞,
and let EM = {c ≤ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a) ≤C, ∀a ∈At}. Because for every a ∈At we have ϕM,H(x<t ⊕
a)
p
−→ϕH(x<t ⊕a) as M →∞, and At is finite, this convergence is uniform over a ∈At. Hence,
Pr(Ec
M) −→0. Define
UN,M(A) = 1
N
N
X
i=1
qt,M,H(xi
t)
pt(xi
t)
1{xi
t ∈A},
VN,M = 1
N
N
X
j=1
qt,M,H(xj
t)
pt(xj
t)
.
Then RN,M(A) = UN,M(A)/VN,M. Moreover, conditional on ϕM,H,
E [UN,M(A) | ϕM,H] = E
qt,M,H(xt)
pt(xt)
1{xt ∈A}|ϕM,H

=
X
a∈A
qt,M,H(a) = qt,M,H(A),
E [VN,M | ϕM,H] = E
qt,M,H(xt)
pt(xt)
|ϕM,H

=
X
a∈At
qt,M,H(a) = 1.
33


--- Page 34 ---
On the event EM, for every a ∈At, it follows from (A.1) that
c
C ≤qt,M,H(a)
pt(a)
=
ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a)
P
a′∈At pt(a′)ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a′) ≤C
c .
Hence, conditional on ϕM,H and EM, both random variables qt,M,H(xi
t)
pt(xi
t)
1{xi
t ∈A} and qt,M,H(xi
t)
pt(xi
t)
are
bounded by C/c. Therefore, by Hoeffding’s inequality, for every δ > 0,
Pr (|UN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)| > δ|ϕM,H, EM) ≤2 exp

−2Nδ2c2
C2

,
Pr (|VN,M −1| > δ|ϕM,H, EM) ≤2 exp

−2Nδ2c2
C2

.
For any ϵ > 0, let δϵ = min{1
2, ϵ
4}. On the event {|UN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)| ≤δϵ, |VN,M −1| ≤δϵ},
we have VN,M ≥1
2, and therefore
|RN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)| =

UN,M(A)
VN,M
−qt,M,H(A)
 ≤|UN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)|
VN,M
+ qt,M,H(A)|VN,M −1|
VN,M
≤2|UN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)| + 2|VN,M −1| ≤ϵ.
Thus,
Pr (|RN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)| > ϵ) ≤4 exp

−2Nδ2
ϵ c2
C2

+ Pr(Ec
M).
which implies RN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)
p
−→0. Because 0 ≤RN,M(A) ≤1 and 0 ≤qt,M,H(A) ≤1, it
follows from dominate convergence theorem that E [|RN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)|] −→0.
Next, because ϕM,H(x<t ⊕a)
p
−→ϕH(x<t ⊕a) uniformly over a ∈At, it follows from (A.1) that
for every A ⊆At, qt,M,H(A)
p
−→qt,H(A). Since 0 ≤qt,M,H(A) ≤1, boundedness again implies
E [|qt,M,H(A) −qt,H(A)|] −→0. Therefore, as N, M →∞,
|Pr(xt,N,M ∈A) −qt,H(A)| = |E[RN,M(A)] −qt,H(A)|
≤E [|RN,M(A) −qt,M,H(A)|] + E [|qt,M,H(A) −qt,H(A)|]
−→0.
This implies xt,N,M ⇒qt,H(·).
34


--- Page 35 ---
B
Examples
The following four responses represent the answers to the case study problem in Section 3.2 under
different generation methods.
1. Standard sampling
• Mathematical Model: To solve this optimization problem for the bodybuilder’s diet, we will
construct a linear programming model with the objective of minimizing the total cost while satisfying
the minimum requirements for protein, carbohydrates, and calories.
• Decision Variables: “xi: The quantity of the ith food chosen, where i can be Steak, Tofu, Chicken,
Broccoli, Rice, or Spinach.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “xi ≥0, ∀i as we cannot choose a negative quantity of food.”
[integer restriction missing]
…
2. Low-temperature sampling
• Mathematical Model: To solve the dietitian’s optimization problem, we will establish a linear
programming model aimed at minimizing the cost of food while meeting the nutritional requirements
of the bodybuilder.
• Decision Variables: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6: Represent the quantities of Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broc-
coli, Rice, and Spinach, respectively.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ≥0, as the quantities of food cannot be nega-
tive.” [integer restriction missing]
…
3. power reward sampling
• Mathematical Model: To solve this optimization problem, we will create a linear programming
model. The objective is to minimize the total cost while meeting the nutritional requirements.
• Decision Variables: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6: The quantities of Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broccoli, Rice,
and Spinach, respectively.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ≥0 and should be integers to ensure fea-
sible integer solutions.”
35


--- Page 36 ---
…
4. entropy reward sampling
Answer excerpt
• Mathematical Model: To solve this diet optimization problem, we will establish a linear program-
ming model. The objective is to minimize the total cost while meeting the nutritional requirements.
• Decision Variables: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6: Represent the quantities of Steak, Tofu, Chicken, Broc-
coli, Rice, and Spinach, respectively.”
• Non-negativity Constraints: “x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6 ≥0 and should be integers to ensure fea-
sible integer solutions.”
…
Takeaway
The objective and nutritional constraints are largely consistent across all four answers. The crucial dif-
ference lies in the variable domain. In both power reward and entropy reward sampling, candidates
without the integer restriction can still appear during generation. However, once the model omits the
integrality requirement, the subsequent reasoning process is affected: since the semantically appropriate
formulation should use integer-valued servings, the unconstrained formulation creates ambiguity and
makes the continuation more uncertain. Our reward-based methods reduce the probability of select-
ing such candidates by favoring continuations with lower uncertainty and more coherent downstream
reasoning, thereby improving the final modeling accuracy.
36
