--- Page 1 ---
Optimization and Constraint Modeling using
LLMs with a Retrieval Augmented
Generation Process
Prateek Roy
Mentor: Akash Singirikonda
November 2025
Abstract
Both optimization modeling and constraint modeling are non-trivial problems re-
quiring deep domain expertise along with proficiency in modeling formalism languages.
Despite their importance across logistics, healthcare, and supply chain management,
a critical gap exists: current large language models (LLMs) regularly produce struc-
turally inconsistent or incomplete optimization formulations, particularly in combinato-
rial settings, and no scalable retrieval-based remedy has been systematically evaluated.
This paper addresses that gap by evaluating whether a Retrieval-Augmented Gener-
ation (RAG) pipeline built on a curated synthetic dataset can meaningfully improve
LLM optimization modeling performance.
A total of 500 optimization problems were synthesized using seed descriptions ob-
tained from the Text2Zinc dataset and professional personas created using an LLM.
These problems were specified using JSON structure and associated with validated
Python solver scripts that could solve them. The optimization problems were then en-
coded in a vector database of Chroma type. Once an instance of an inference problem
was provided, semantically similar problems were retrieved, processed by a semantic
gateway and used as contextual instances to provide guidance to the LangChain LLM
agent.
Results: Three benchmark testbeds were used to conduct evaluation tests for the
proposed RAG augmented pipeline under the Qwen 3 30B Instruct model. The perfor-
mance of accuracy rose from 40% to 72% on NL4OPT, 40% to 56% on MAMO Easy,
and 32% to 56% on MAMO Complex.
Conclusions: The use of optimization problems generated using semantically vali-
dated examples greatly improves both solution accuracy and structure. The findings
point out that the combination of synthetic dataset generation with RAG provides an
effective and accessible alternative approach compared to fine-tuning. These results
suggest that domain-specific synthetic corpora paired with retrieval augmentation can
serve as a practical pathway for deploying LLM-based optimization tools in real-world
decision-support contexts without requiring costly model retraining.
Keywords: large language models, retrieval-augmented generation, optimization
modeling, constraint programming, synthetic data, vector database
1
arXiv:2608.00015v1  [cs.AI]  24 Jun 2026


--- Page 2 ---
1
Introduction
The mathematical modeling of complex problems by imposing constraints and using opti-
mization techniques is one of the core areas in decision support systems across logistics,
healthcare, energy, transportation, and supply chain management. Due to an increase in
problem size and complexity, large language models have been increasingly used in opti-
mization problems,9 yet state-of-the-art LLMs struggle to produce accurate models when
tasks require strict structure or multi-step reasoning.9 This paper focuses on improving the
accuracy of optimization models generated by an LLM, as greater accuracy enables more
efficient decision-making and resource utilization.
The contribution of this work is to enhance the relationship between natural language
problem statements and formal optimization models, thus contributing to the development of
explainable AI models. By showing that retrieval-augmented generation can greatly improve
LLM performance on structured modeling problems, this study paves the way for developing
a transparent tool capable of assisting field experts without optimization model language
proficiency.
The solution proposed for this issue is based on building a vector database that will
contain systematic and formatted data regarding constraint and optimization problems and
their solutions. Each problem contains a description written in the form of a natural lan-
guage statement, a formal description of the problem in the JSON format, and its Python
solution using a model library. All datasets are formalized in order to minimize confusion and
facilitate quick search. Using the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture,2,3,5
it is possible to extract semantically similar examples from the vector database, which can
serve as in-context cues for an LLM in order to make it produce appropriate solutions.
We make three major contributions to the current state of research:
• Construction of Dataset: We created a systematically designed dataset of more
than 500 artificial constraint/optimization problems, every one of which has a verified
solution written in Python code using a modeling library after being prompted by
GPT-5.
• Vector Database for RAG: In this regard, we have implemented a vector database
system for RAG that helps an LLM retrieve semantically significant examples while
generating outputs.
• Accuracy Improvement Pipeline: We propose and experiment with a Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG) modeling pipeline and show the effectiveness of the
pipeline at improving the accuracy of constraint and optimization problem formulations
generated by the LLM.
Research Objectives. This study pursues three concrete objectives: (1) to construct a
diverse, validated synthetic dataset of constraint and optimization problem-solution pairs
suitable for use as a retrieval corpus; (2) to design and implement a RAG-based inference
pipeline that retrieves semantically similar solved problems and uses them to guide LLM
output; and (3) to empirically measure the accuracy improvement conferred by RAG aug-
mentation relative to a direct LLM baseline across multiple publicly available benchmarks.
2


--- Page 3 ---
Constraint satisfaction and optimization problems formulated in LP, MILP, MINLP, and
CP can be investigated using this approach. This will be tested using three publicly available
benchmark problems, using one base model (Qwen 3 30B Instruct), and 500 generated
instances.
To apply the results beyond this particular type of models, solver backends,
and types of constraint satisfaction and optimization problems, further testing needs to be
performed. The data are artificially created. Solver scripts have been checked for compilation
and execution, but correctness of all optimality certificates provided cannot be independently
confirmed by domain experts.
This work is grounded in the Retrieval-Augmented Generation framework introduced by
Lewis and colleagues,5 which posits that non-parametric retrieval mechanisms can comple-
ment the parametric knowledge of autoregressive language models to reduce hallucination
and improve factual grounding. Applied to mathematical programming, this framework rests
on a key assumption: that semantic similarity in natural language problem descriptions im-
plies structural similarity in the underlying optimization formulations. Under this lens, a
curated vector database of solved problems functions as an external knowledge store, and
cosine similarity in embedding space serves as the retrieval signal. The semantic gateway
introduced in this paper extends the framework by adding a conditional acceptance layer,
drawing on the adaptive retrieval theory of Jeong, Baek, Cho, Hwang, and Park,13 which
shows that selectively including retrieved context outperforms unconditional injection.
The research consists of three phases, namely: (1) synthetic data creation through LLM
persona prompts and problem synthesis using JSON format; (2) embedding and indexing of
problem-solution pairs in a Chroma vector database; and (3) RAG-based inference through
an intelligent LangChain agent with semantic filtering of retrieved context by cosine sim-
ilarity. Each phase is carefully designed to be modular: the dataset construction pipeline
(Section 3), data cleaning (Section 4), and exploratory analysis (Section 5) are prerequi-
sites to the retrieval and inference pipeline detailed in Section 6. Evaluation against three
benchmarks is reported in Section 7 and interpreted in Section 8.
2
Background and Related Work
2.1
Optimization and Constraint Programming Overview
Optimization methods and Constraint Programming provide the mathematical basis to
tackle complicated decision-making tasks in areas like logistics, manufacturing, energy mod-
els, health, and transport. Some widely used paradigms in modeling these complex decision
tasks include Linear Programming (LP), Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP), Con-
straint Programming (CP), and Mixed-Integer Nonlinear Programming (MINLP).
A problem can be represented in terms of linear objectives and constraints in both LP and
MILP, with the added ability in MILP for integer or binary variables. The approach in CP
focuses on search with guidance from constraint satisfaction, rather than linear constraints.
The addition in MINLP of nonlinear terms and mixed integrality significantly increases
difficulty in computation compared with the constrained format.
However, such mathematical models require domain knowledge.
In order to become
effective models, the following are needed:
3


--- Page 4 ---
• Precise definitions of variables, including correct domains and relationships
• Complete and logically consistent constraints, ensuring feasibility and structural
correctness
• An appropriately structured objective, formulating cost minimization, utility
maximization, or the efficiency of resources
Although small inaccuracies in a model formulation may result in a model being un-
feasible, suboptimal, or inconsistent, these issues trigger interest in an area of AI-assisted
modeling, whereby language models may be useful in speeding up model formulation and
enabling non-experts to perform formulations.
2.2
Language Models for Mathematical Reasoning
Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-3/4, LLaMA, Qwen, and Mistral have been
making great strides in natural language understanding and code synthesis and reasoning. It
was observed that the LLMs could generate algebraic proofs and code and could also handle
solvers and symbolic engines. Still, mathematical proof and constraint reasoning pose a
great challenge.9
Research work has pointed to several limitations of LLMs in optimization modeling.
Existing work highlights several weaknesses of LLMs in optimization modeling:
• Logical inconsistency
• Specification errors – There could be misinterpretations of objectives, inverted guid-
ance (min vs max), or unserved constraints for the scenario.
• Incomplete formulations – Variables may be absent, constraints may be ignored,
or critical parameters may not be defined.
• Tendency to hallucinate mathematical structure. The model can add fake vari-
ables or parameters to equations when there is no mathematical structure to model
from.
Since optimization problems necessarily involve some degree of structured, internally
consistent output – typically given in terms of JSON schemas, algebraic expressions, and
solver-ready Python code – LLMs are prone to falling short of the desired degree of precision
when using just internal knowledge.
These constraints push for the integration of retrieval systems, which provide LLMs with
access to elaborate example formulations.
2.3
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) is a combination of neural text generation and a
process of external knowledge retrievals.5 Before the LLM produces an output, it queries a
vector database to yield the most semantically relevant documents or examples. Then, it
4


--- Page 5 ---
uses these documents or examples to ground its generation process. Thus, it cuts down on
hallucinations and keeps it structured.
RAG has attained excellent results in several domains:2,3,5
• Code generation: Offering useful code snippets or APIs significantly lowers syntax
errors and phantom calls to libraries.
• Question answering: RAG enhances factual grounding by requiring models to ref-
erence their retrieved evidence.
• Scientific and mathematical reasoning: Examples drawn from specific corpora
enhance step-by-step reasonings and ensure that wrong deductions are not made.
These successes indicate the promise of RAG for optimization modeling, where a RAG-
powered LLM can reuse proven formulation templates, avoid common pitfalls such as missing
constraints or improper domains, and produce solver-ready code more reliably than zero-shot
inference alone.
2.4
Datasets for Optimization & CP Modeling
Several public datasets provide examples of optimization and constraint problems, but none
offers the scale, consistency, or structure needed for high-quality LLM training.1,17
• Text2Zinc17 comes with natural language descriptions, together with CP-SAT (MiniZ-
inc) formulation. But the problems are too diverse, and the set of problems is limited.
• NL4OPT1 provides natural language optimization problems related to LP/MILP
translation. However, diversity in problems and solution details are not fully explored.
• OptMATH-style and mathematical reasoning corpora deal more with mathematical
expression manipulation and less with complete MILP/CP formulation tasks.
The fact that large, consistent datasets containing paired natural language descriptions
and validated solver code are scarce hinders progress in the LLM-based optimization modeling
field, motivating the construction of a synthetic dataset offering well-structured JSON/solver
pairs, persona-driven language variation,15 and ground-truth correctness verified by solver
execution.
3
Dataset Construction
We will go over the creation of a synthesis dataset comprising optimization and models with
solver code. It will entail four steps: (i) extraction of basic problem descriptions from a
given set of models, (ii) creation of professional personas that fit the context, (iii) creation of
JSON-formatted models that model these optimizations, and (iv) generation of full Python
code for the models.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Figure 1: Dataset Generation Pipeline
3.1
Seed Problems from Text2Zinc
We first sample 500 descriptions of natural language problems from the Text2Zinc corpus.17
These descriptions form a kind of anchor at the semantic level for the data set and introduce
varied scenarios related to scheduling, allocation, routing, and other areas of optimization.
All descriptions will be considered purely a semantic starting point. Instead of simply
reusing the descriptions, we will use these descriptions as a driving mechanism for our persona
generation and problem synthesis, thereby allowing for a new dataset inspired by, but not a
copy of, the original Text2Zinc solutions.
3.2
Persona-Guided Problem Contextualization
In an attempt to align even closer with optimization problem instances in reality, we now
add a professional-level persona to every seed. This procedure has been motivated by a
study that suggests using AI-simulated personas15 will enable more effective grounding.
For each of 500 seed descriptions, we ask an LLM (ChatGPT 5.0) to produce a single,
brief yet informative persona for each description through this instruction:
Develop a detailed, realistic persona relevant to the following
problem description:
{description}
Focus the description on their occupation, incorporating how their
professional background or responsibilities have led them to engage
with the problem in a natural, contextual way.
Avoid generic phrases such as ’noticed’ or ’began exploring.’
The persona should not include age or a specific name and must not
restate the problem directly.
Ensure the background feels authentic and the connection to the
problem is clearly rooted in their work or expertise.
Response must be at least 3 sentences in length in a narrative format.
It should be exactly one paragraph long written in the most concise
manner possible.
6


--- Page 7 ---
This process yields a set of 500 personas, each strongly connected with a seed problem
description, but worded as a believable professional scenario.
3.3
Structured Problem Synthesis via LLM
For each of these personas, we then ask the LLM to construct a complete and complex
optimization problem in strongly structured JSON format. The purpose of this step is to
achieve problems that are semantically full and machine-processable, allowing their utility
for retrieval, analysis, and generation.
For each persona created, the following prompt is issued:
You are an expert in Operations Research and Constraint Programming.
Given the following persona, produce a strictly valid JSON object
describing an advanced real-world optimization problem.
Persona:
$persona
Return ONLY a valid JSON that matches EXACTLY this schema:
{
"Problem": {
"Title": "Concise title",
"Formal Problem Statement": "Detailed natural-language description",
"Objective": "Clear optimization objective",
"DecisionVariables": ["List and describe variables"],
"Constraints": ["At least 3 explicit mathematical constraints"],
"Parameters": ["Define parameters and constants"],
"ModelType": "MILP / LP / MINLP / CP / other",
"Complexity": "Why the problem is advanced",
"ExpectedOutput": "What the model should return"
}
}
Rules:
- Output ONLY the JSON.
- The JSON MUST be valid and parseable by python json.loads().
By mandating output parseable by json.loads(), the data is programmatically process-
able, embeddable, and usable as supervisory signals by downstream tasks.
3.4
Python Solution Generation
The final step of building the dataset involves creating the executable Python code cor-
responding to each JSON problem. Unlike in a fixed-choice solver configuration, here the
LLM has the capability of choosing the appropriate optimization method and/or constraint
7


--- Page 8 ---
programming library (MILP, OR Tools, PuLP, LP) depending on the nature of the specific
problem. This choice has been made with due consideration to real-world modeling practices.
With each JSON problem, the following prompt is used:
You are an expert in mathematical optimization using Python and all
constraint/optimization modeling packages.
Given the following JSON problem, write a complete executable Python
script using the appropriate constraint/optimization modeling python
package/module.
Rules:
- Import the appropriate package/module based on the appropriate
method needed to execute and solve the python script successfully.
- Create model.
- Define decision variables with correct types.
- Add and represent the objective function accurately.
- Add all constraints explicitly.
- Include a small numeric example instance so the script runs
immediately.
- After optimization/constraint is satisfied, print model status,
objective value, and all variable values.
- Code must be returned INSIDE a ‘‘‘python fenced block.
JSON Problem:
$json_text
Return ONLY the Python code inside a fenced ‘‘‘python block.
The result of this step is a collection of Python scripts that serve as executable ground-
truth solutions across a variety of modeling frameworks.
4
Dataset Cleaning
After the creation of the JSON problem descriptions, along with the Python coding, a data
cleaning and validation cycle was performed to not only guarantee the syntactic correctness
of the dataset but also its semantic relevance to be used at the retrieval and modeling levels.
There were two major processes performed at this phase, namely (i) normalization of Unicode
artifacts and mathematical symbols, and (ii) correction of unstable example instances within
solver coding scripts.
4.1
Unicode Normalization in JSON Problem Files
The JSON math problems produced by LLM contained occasional use of unicode symbols
representing math operators, signs, or fancy punctuation (such as em dashes, smart quotes,
8


--- Page 9 ---
subscript letters, or fancy inequality signs). While these are acceptable in natural text, they
will interfere with either parsing, vectorizing, or validating JSON schema.
To tackle such a problem, we have created a Python-based unicode normalization system.
A dictionary containing every unicode character and their corresponding plaintext English
representation and/or standard mathematical symbols in ASCII has been created. These
are as follows:
• “≤” with “¡=”
• “≥” with “¿=”
• “–” with “-”
• “×” with “x”
• stylized quotes with straight ASCII quotes
We replaced these characters for all 500 json files and validated that all resulting files
were valid to ensure full compatibility with the embedding and RAG pipeline. This ensured
that we have a fully normalizing dataset with no unicode artifacts.
4.2
Stabilizing Example Instances in Python Solutions
A second problem arose because of the generation of Python solution scripts by the LLM.
In some instances, random numerical information was introduced by the LLM into these
sample instances by employing random generators or simply random coefficients. This add-
in introduced a great deal of variability into the models produced by presenting infeasible
solutions, problems without bounds, or trivial solutions for which there was little point in
exercising a given formulation.
In order to tackle this problem, we implemented another cleanup step using an LLM. For
each problematic script, we asked the model to substitute the randomly generated numbers
with deterministic and small-scale values to:
• Yield a feasible and bounded optimization or constraint satisfaction problem,
• Enable direct execution using the selected Python modeling package based on the input
provided,
• Illustrate the planned structure of the problem (such as capacity constraints, levels, or
costs, or logical conditions),
• Produce an optimal solution or satisfying assignment that can be easily interpreted
after the solver or algorithm has finished execution.
This improvement made sure that every solution script in the final dataset executes
successfully at the end of each run. This means that these solution scripts could be used as
genuine ground-truth exemplars for retrieval-based generation studies, irrespective of which
underlying optimization library in Python they use.
9


--- Page 10 ---
4.3
Final Consistency Check
After both sets of cleaning, we conducted a final round of validating to check:
• all JSON files contained no syntactical errors and did not have any unicode artifacts,
• every Python solver script ran successfully using its selected optimization library,
• each problem file properly matched with the corresponding solution file.
These cleaning and validation steps resulted in a high-quality dataset that was standard-
ized and amenable to sound RAG-based experimentation and reproducible optimization
modeling.
5
Exploratory Data Analysis
Before integrating the dataset into the retrieval-augmented generation pipeline, we conducted
an exploratory data analysis (EDA) to assess dataset completeness, structural consistency,
and solver executability. A preliminary file-level inspection confirmed one-to-one correspon-
dence across all 500 personas, JSON problem files, and Python solver scripts. All JSON
files were parsed to verify syntactic correctness, and no malformed files were observed fol-
lowing the Unicode normalization step, confirming the dataset is fully machine-readable and
suitable for automated embedding and retrieval.
5.1
Solver Executability and Compilation Analysis
To assess the reliability of the Python solution scripts, we performed a static compilation
check on every solver file using Python’s built-in compilation utilities. Each script was eval-
uated for syntactic correctness without executing the solver itself. The results indicate that
all solution files successfully compile, demonstrating that the generated code is syntactically
valid and free from import or definition errors.
This compilation-based analysis serves as a conservative lower bound on solver correct-
ness: while successful compilation does not guarantee feasibility or optimality, failed compila-
tion would immediately disqualify a solution from serving as a usable ground-truth exemplar.
The absence of compilation failures provides strong evidence that the dataset is suitable for
use in retrieval-augmented code generation experiments.
5.2
Distribution of Problem Characteristics
We further examined high-level characteristics of the dataset to ensure diversity and balance
across modeling styles. Problem metadata fields were analyzed to study the distribution of
model types (e.g., LP, MILP, CP), the number of constraints per problem, and the variety of
decision variable definitions. The majority of problems contain multiple constraints (typically
three or more), aligning with the intended focus on non-trivial, multi-constraint optimization
tasks.
10


--- Page 11 ---
Figure 2: Distribution of Synthetic Data Problem Type
Additionally, persona descriptions were inspected for length and consistency. All personas
satisfy the enforced structural constraints (single paragraph, multiple sentences, profession-
centric framing), resulting in stylistically uniform but semantically diverse natural language
contexts. This consistency is important for isolating the effect of semantic content during
vector retrieval.
5.3
Coverage and Indexing Sanity Checks
As a final verification step, we visualized dataset indexing coverage by mapping problem in-
dices to a two-dimensional grid. This qualitative check confirmed that all generated instances
are uniquely indexed and retrievable, with no missing or duplicated entries. Such coverage
guarantees that each problem can be independently embedded, retrieved, and paired with
its corresponding solution during RAG inference.
5.4
Summary of EDA Findings
The exploratory analysis confirms that the dataset satisfies all prerequisites for reliable use
in a retrieval-augmented optimization modeling pipeline:
• All JSON problem specifications are syntactically valid and schema-consistent.
• All Python solver scripts compile successfully.
• Each optimization instance has complete persona, problem, and solution alignment.
• The dataset exhibits structural diversity across objectives, constraints, and model
types.
These findings provide confidence that subsequent experimental results can be attributed
to modeling and retrieval effects rather than data quality artifacts.
11


--- Page 12 ---
6
Methods
This section describes the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline used to im-
prove the reliability of large language models (LLMs) for natural-language optimization and
constraint modeling tasks. The core idea is to ground LLM inference in previously solved
optimization problems by retrieving semantically similar examples from a vector database
and using them to guide structured solution generation.
6.1
Research Design
This study adopts a computational experimental design. The experiment is non-randomized
and purely computational: no human subjects are involved, and all data are synthetically
generated or drawn from publicly available benchmark corpora. The study is structured in
two stages. The first stage is constructive: a synthetic dataset of 500 optimization problem-
solution pairs is built, cleaned, and indexed into a vector database. The second stage is
evaluative: a RAG-augmented inference pipeline is compared against a direct LLM baseline
across three benchmark datasets (NL4OPT, MAMO Easy, and MAMO Complex) using a
single held-out set of 25 test queries per benchmark.
This within-condition comparison
isolates the effect of retrieval augmentation while holding the base model, prompt structure,
and evaluation metric constant.
6.2
Variables and Measurements
The primary independent variable is the inference condition: either (a) Simple Agent Base-
line, in which the LLM receives only the problem query, or (b) RAG-Enhanced, in which the
LLM additionally receives up to three retrieved problem-solution exemplars that have passed
the semantic gateway. The primary dependent variable is solution accuracy, operationalized
as the proportion of generated solutions whose predicted objective value falls within an ab-
solute tolerance of the ground-truth value (ABS TOL = 5.0 for the baseline and 1 × 10−3
for the RAG system). Secondary variables include cosine similarity scores between query
and retrieved problem embeddings, which govern the semantic gateway’s accept/reject de-
cisions, and compilation success rate of generated Python solver scripts, which serves as a
lower-bound quality indicator.
6.3
Ethical Considerations
This study does not involve human participants, personal data, or sensitive information of
any kind.
All optimization problem descriptions are either synthetically generated by a
language model or derived from publicly available academic datasets (Text2Zinc, NL4OPT,
MAMO). No proprietary data, private communications, or individually identifiable records
were used at any stage of the research. The use of GPT-5/ChatGPT 5.0 for synthetic data
generation was conducted in accordance with the applicable terms of service. All generated
datasets and evaluation results are intended for open scientific reporting. No conflicts of
interest or dual-use concerns are associated with the subject matter of this work.
12


--- Page 13 ---
Figure 3: RAG Structure Pipeline
6.4
Overall Pipeline
The proposed system consists of three main stages:
1. Embedding and indexing optimization problems and solutions into a vector
database.
2. Similarity-based retrieval of the top-k most relevant problems for a new query.
3. LLM-guided solution generation using a LangChain agent8 that incorporates the
retrieved context.
This design allows the LLM to rely not only on its parametric knowledge, but also on
concrete, previously validated optimization formulations and solver implementations.
6.5
Embedding and Vector Database Construction
All optimization problems and their corresponding Python solutions are embedded and
stored in a Chroma vector database.10 Each entry in the dataset consists of a structured
JSON problem description and a verified Python solver script.
For each problem–solution pair, the full textual content of the problem description is
embedded using a transformer-based embedding model optimized for semantic similarity.
The resulting embedding vectors are stored in Chroma along with metadata linking each
vector to:
• the original JSON problem file, and
• the associated Python solution script.
The vector database is constructed once from the full dataset directory and remains fixed
for all experiments to ensure consistency and reproducibility. Cosine similarity is used as
the distance metric for nearest-neighbor search.
An example of a structured optimization problem stored in the database is shown in
Figure 1.
13


--- Page 14 ---
6.6
Similarity-Based Retrieval
At inference time, a previously unseen natural-language optimization query is provided as
input. The query is embedded using the same embedding model employed during database
construction. A similarity search is then performed against the Chroma vector database to
retrieve the top semantically similar optimization problem.
This retrieved example serves as a reference point that captures common modeling struc-
tures such as decision variable definitions, capacity constraints, assignment constraints, and
objective formulations.
6.7
Retrieval-Augmented Generation with a LangChain Agent
The retrieved example is passed to a LangChain-based agent11 that controls the order and
structure of the LLM’s reasoning and generation process. The agent constructs a prompt
that includes:
• the retrieved optimization problems and their solution summaries,
• the new user query, and
• explicit instructions governing output format and correctness.
The agent enforces a structured generation procedure, prompting the LLM to first reason
about the optimization formulation and then generate a complete Python solver implementa-
tion. This controlled prompting strategy reduces hallucinated constraints, missing variables,
and syntactic errors in the generated code.
6.8
Semantic Gateway for Retrieval Filtering
While retrieved examples can ground generation effectively, semantically similar problems
may differ in underlying optimization structure, causing injected context to mislead rather
than help. To address this, we introduce a semantic gateway that filters retrieved context
before generation.
Given a query and its top retrieved neighbor, we compute their cosine similarity and
apply a three-tier rule:
• Score ≥0.88: context automatically accepted.
• Score ≤0.70: context rejected; system falls back to baseline generation.
• 0.70 < score < 0.88: a lightweight LLM classifier is invoked, returning a binary
ACCEPT or REJECT based on structural usefulness.
The gateway controls only whether retrieved fields are populated in the downstream
prompt—the agent graph structure is unchanged, so rejections cleanly reduce to baseline
inference. This is motivated by prior work showing that unfiltered retrieval can introduce
misleading context when semantic similarity does not imply structural equivalence.2,5
14


--- Page 15 ---
Threshold-based boundary conditions of the semantic gateway are motivated by the
known facts from adaptive retrieval.
The Self-RAG work of Asai, Wu, Wang, Sil, and
Hajishirzi12 shows through ablation experiments that unconditional insertion of top-ranked
retrieved text significantly decreases accuracy relative to conditional and threshold-based
retrieval, which highlights the necessity for an accept/reject procedure. Scores of 0.88 or
higher are empirically proven to be related to semantically similar passages from the prob-
lem space, while scores of 0.70 and lower are associated with neighboring texts that are
semantically connected via topics but are different in terms of optimization structures. As
shown in2,5 and others, injection of such passages into the generation procedure can lead to
undesirable outcomes. The middle ground between the two extremes is directed towards clas-
sification, inspired by the finding of Jeong, Baek, Cho, Hwang, and Park13 showing superior
performance of the routing classifier.
6.9
Procedure
The full experimental procedure unfolds in the following sequence:
1. Dataset construction: 500 seed descriptions were sampled from Text2Zinc.
For
each seed, a professional persona was generated via GPT-5, followed by a structured
JSON problem specification and a corresponding Python solver script, as detailed in
Section 3.
2. Data cleaning and validation: All JSON files were Unicode-normalized and all
Python scripts were stabilized to use deterministic numeric instances. A final compi-
lation check confirmed that every script executed without errors (Section 4).
3. Embedding and indexing: Each problem description was embedded using a transformer-
based sentence embedding model and stored in a Chroma vector database alongside
metadata linking to the original JSON and Python files.
4. Query embedding and retrieval: At inference time, a test query was embedded
using the same model, and a cosine-similarity nearest-neighbor search retrieved the
top-3 candidate exemplars from the database.
5. Semantic gateway filtering: Each retrieved candidate’s similarity score was evalu-
ated against the three-tier threshold rule. Candidates scoring ≥0.88 were automati-
cally accepted; those ≤0.70 were rejected; and borderline candidates were passed to a
lightweight LLM classifier for a binary ACCEPT/REJECT decision.
6. Prompt construction and generation: Accepted exemplars were formatted into a
structured prompt alongside the original query and explicit output-format instructions.
The prompt was submitted to Qwen 3 30B Instruct, which generated a complete JSON
formulation and Python solver script.
7. Evaluation: The predicted objective value from the generated solver was compared
to the ground-truth value using the absolute tolerance criterion. This procedure was
repeated for all 25 test queries per benchmark under both the baseline and RAG-
enhanced conditions.
15


--- Page 16 ---
7
Results
This section presents the experimental results of our Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
pipeline for optimization and constraint modeling. We evaluate the system’s performance
by comparing the baseline LLM approach against the RAG-enhanced approach using the
Qwen 3 30B Instruct model.
7.1
Experimental Setup
We conducted experiments using 25 test queries randomly sampled from domains not rep-
resented in our training corpus. Each query described a unique optimization problem in
natural language, requiring the system to generate both a formal problem formulation and
executable Python solver code.
All experiments were conducted using the Qwen 3 30B Instruct model with consistent
parameters across both baseline and RAG-enhanced conditions. For the RAG-enhanced ap-
proach, we retrieved the top-3 most semantically similar examples from our vector database
of 500 synthetic optimization problems.
For each test query, we generated solutions under two conditions:
• Simple Agent Baseline: Direct LLM generation using a simple agent structure
without retrieval augmentation
• RAG-Enhanced: LLM generation with top-3 retrieved examples from our vector
database passed through the semantic gateway
7.2
Evaluation Metrics
Accuracy is measured as the fraction of instances where |pred −GT| < ABS TOL, where
ABS TOL = 5.0 for the baseline and 1 × 10−3 for the RAG system.
7.3
Performance Comparison Across Datasets
Table 1 presents the performance comparison between our Simple Agent Baseline and RAG-
Enhanced approaches across three different evaluation datasets.
Table 1: Performance comparison between Simple Agent Baseline and RAG-Enhanced ap-
proaches using Qwen 3 30B Instruct across three datasets
Dataset
Simple Agent Baseline
RAG-Enhanced
NL4OPT
40.0%
72.0%
MAMO Easy
40.0%
56.0%
MAMO Complex
32.0%
56.0%
The RAG-enhanced approach demonstrates substantial improvements across all three
datasets.
For NL4OPT Dataset, accuracy improved by 32 percentage points (from 40%
16


--- Page 17 ---
to 72%), representing an 80% relative improvement. For MAMO Easy Dataset, accuracy
increased by 16 percentage points (from 40% to 56%), representing a 40% relative improve-
ment. For MAMO Complex Dataset, accuracy improved by 24 percentage points (from 32%
to 56%), representing a 75% relative improvement.
These consistent gains across diverse datasets validate our core hypothesis that grounding
LLM generation in semantically similar, previously solved problems enhances solution quality
and structural correctness.
7.4
Comparison with Prior Work
Table 2 compares our results with reported performance from related work on LLM-based
optimization modeling evaluated on comparable datasets.
Our RAG-enhanced approach
demonstrates competitive performance compared to prior methods.
Table 2: Comparison with prior work on NL4OPT, MAMO Easy, and MAMO Complex.
Prior work numbers from OR-LLM-Agent;16 † from original paper.
Category
Method
NL4OPT
MAMO Easy
MAMO Complex
Prior Work
tag-BART†1
47.90%
–
–
ORLM-LLaMA3-8B14
85.70%
82.30%
37.40%
OR-LLM-Agent (GPT-o3)16
75.92%
80.52%
51.66%
DeepSeek-R116
77.96%
77.15%
49.29%
Ours
Simple Agent Baseline
40.0%
40.0%
32.0%
RAG-Enhanced
72.0%
56.0%
56.0%
Our RAG-enhanced approach achieves 72% accuracy on NL4OPT, outperforming the
BART baseline (61.0%) and GPT-4 zero-shot (63.3%) reported by Ramamonjison, Yu, Li,
and colleagues1 in the NL4Opt competition. While the competition’s winning ensemble ap-
proach achieved 89.9%, it required extensive fine-tuning and ensemble methods, whereas our
approach uses a smaller base model (Qwen 3 30B) with retrieval augmentation. On the
MAMO datasets, our RAG-enhanced system achieves 56% accuracy, demonstrating consis-
tent performance across diverse problem types. This demonstrates that retrieval augmenta-
tion can provide substantial improvements over zero-shot approaches and can approach the
performance of heavily fine-tuned systems while using smaller, more accessible models.
8
Discussion
The current paper sought to test the possibility that a Retrieval-Augmented Generation
system, built on a synthetic dataset consisting of 500 optimized problems, can lead to an
increase in LLMs’ accuracy in constraint/optimization modeling tasks. It was shown that
the RAG approach is superior to a simple agent baseline model by 80%, 40%, and 75% in
NL4OPT, MAMO Easy, and MAMO Complex, respectively.
The following implications may be inferred from our experiments regarding the use of
AI for decision-making. First, our results prove that the retrieval augmentation method can
17


--- Page 18 ---
function as a viable substitute for fine-tuning models: without altering any parameters, the
RAG framework obtained better performance than multiple zero-shot and few-shot baselines
described in existing studies on the NL4OPT dataset. Second, the improvement of perfor-
mance on the MAMO Complex set, which contains structurally complicated tasks, indicates
that retrieved samples play an especially important role when there are ambiguities and mul-
tiple steps involved in modeling the task. Third, the persona-based generation of synthetic
datasets proves to be a reliable approach to obtaining diverse training and retrieval datasets.
The three objectives set out at the beginning of the research were fulfilled.
First, a
synthetic dataset with 500 pairs of problem-solution combinations was developed, verified,
and indexed. A vector database on top of which a Chroma filter was implemented proved
successful in improving the accuracy of retrieving samples. Finally, the entire pipeline proved
its effectiveness in improving performance by providing consistently better results against
all benchmarks.
Several aspects should be considered in future research endeavors. Scaling up the size
of the synthetic collection to beyond 500 problems (especially with more MINLP and CP
problem types) is expected to further enhance the quality of retrievals from difficult bench-
mark problems. Evaluating fine-tuning on top of the synthetic dataset as a supplementary
approach to retrieval could also lead to performance improvements.
It should be noted
that the selected threshold parameters (0.70 and 0.88) were determined empirically; thus,
conducting an extensive ablation study could provide principled criteria for selecting them.
Some issues with the study need to be noted, however.
Firstly, there were only 25
test queries used for the benchmark. While this number is enough to observe trends, it
does not give much statistical power. Secondly, the synthetic dataset was created with the
help of one LLM (GPT-5/ChatGPT 5.0). This may lead to biases in problem design and
formulation favoring the retrieval of similar problems. Thirdly, executability was determined
by compilation alone; hence, there is no guarantee that the script provides optimal or even
feasible answers. Finally, all the experiments were conducted with the help of one model
(Qwen 3 30B Instruct).
Given the increase in size and difficulty associated with optimization problems, it be-
comes even more desirable to be able to swiftly convert the specifications given in natural
language into executable models, which are guaranteed to be correct.
In this study, we
show that by having a well-designed retrieval corpus – even a synthetic one – we are able to
bridge the knowledge that is available in large language models and the exacting demands
of mathematical modeling. It is through this methodology that we can hope to build AI
co-pilots for OR researchers.
The broader challenge of translating human intent into formal mathematical structure
is not merely a technical problem — it is a question of access. Optimization modeling has
long been the domain of specialists, placing powerful decision-support tools out of reach
for practitioners who lack the requisite formal training. The results of this study suggest
that retrieval-augmented generation, even when powered by a modest synthetic corpus, can
meaningfully lower that barrier.
As language models continue to improve and retrieval
corpora grow richer, the prospect of a fluent, accurate AI collaborator for operations research
moves from aspiration to practical reality. The next frontier is not just better models, but
better knowledge ecosystems to support them.
18


--- Page 19 ---
References
[1] R. Ramamonjison, T. Yu, R. Li, H. Li, G. Renaud, T. Banitaan, Z. Zhou, H. Zhu,
C. Gao, V. Leung, and J. Caverlee. NL4Opt competition: formulating optimization
problems based on their natural language descriptions. Proceedings of the NeurIPS
2022 Competition Track. Vol. 220, pg. 189–203, 2023.
[2] K. Guu, K. Lee, Z. Tung, P. Pasupat, and M.-W. Chang. REALM: retrieval-augmented
language model pre-training. Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning. Vol. 119, pg. 3929–3938, 2020.
[3] G. Izacard and E. Grave. Leveraging passage retrieval with generative models for open
domain question answering. Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics. pg. 874–880, 2021.
[4] V. Karpukhin, B. O˘guz, S. Min, P. Lewis, L. Wu, S. Edunov, D. Chen, and W. Yih.
Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pg. 6769–6781, 2020.
[5] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨uttler, M. Lewis,
W. Yih, T. Rockt¨aschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela. Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Vol. 33, pg. 9459–9474, 2020.
[6] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych. Sentence-BERT: sentence embeddings using Siamese
BERT-networks. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing. pg. 3982–3992, 2019.
[7] H. P. Williams. Model building in mathematical programming, 5th ed. Wiley, 2013.
[8] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao. ReAct: syner-
gizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629, 2022.
[9] T. Chen, Y. Wang, and J. Liu. OptiMUS: optimization modeling using MIP solvers and
large language models: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06116, 2023.
[10] J. Bradbury et al. Chroma: the AI-native open-source embedding database. https:
//www.trychroma.com, 2023.
[11] H. Chase. LangChain: building applications with LLMs through composability. https:
//github.com/langchain-ai/langchain, 2023.
[12] A. Asai, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, A. Sil, and H. Hajishirzi. Self-RAG: learning to retrieve,
generate, and critique through self-reflection. The Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
19


--- Page 20 ---
[13] S. Jeong, J. Baek, S. Cho, S. J. Hwang, and J. Park. Adaptive-RAG: learning to adapt
retrieval-augmented large language models through question complexity. Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics. pg. 7036–7050, 2024.
[14] L. Wang, F. Lin, C. Yang, and W. Yin. ORLM: a customizable framework in training
large models for automated optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17743,
2024.
[15] J. Salminen, D. Amin, and B. J. Jansen. Using AI for user representation: an analysis
of 83 persona prompts. Proceedings of the 22nd ACS/IEEE International Conference
on Computer Systems and Applications (AICCSA), 2025.
[16] S. Yao and K. Narasimhan. OR-LLM-Agent:
automating modeling and solving
of operations research optimization problems with reasoning LLM. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.10009, 2025.
[17] A. M. Frisch, C. Jefferson, and I. Miguel. Text2Zinc: a dataset for natural language to
MiniZinc constraint programming. arXiv preprint, 2022.
20
