--- Page 1 ---
BBOWP-Bench: Evaluating LLMs on Black-Box
Optimization Word Problems
Yutaro Yamada∗
Kei Hiroshima∗
Nozomu Yoshinari∗
Kento Uchida
Shinichi Shirakawa
Yokohama National University
{yamada-yutaro-dw,hiroshima-kei-st,yoshinari-nozomu-ry}@ynu.jp
{uchida-kento-fz,shirakawa-shinichi-bg}@ynu.ac.jp
Abstract
Formulating an optimization problem strongly affects the quality of the final solu-
tion, yet good formulations usually require substantial expertise. Recent studies
have therefore examined how to automatically derive optimization problems from
natural-language descriptions, but existing benchmarks focus on settings where
objectives and constraints can be written explicitly as mathematical expressions.
Many practically important problems, including hyperparameter optimization in
machine learning, are naturally treated as black-box optimization (BBO) problems,
in which only objective values are observable, and the functional form is unavail-
able. In BBO, the search space design, a part of the problem formulation, and the
selection of the optimization algorithm are crucial for problem-solving. Automat-
ing these processes with large language models (LLMs) is a significant challenge.
This paper introduces Black-Box Optimization Word Problems (BBOWP), a novel
problem setting in which a system must infer both a search space and an optimiza-
tion algorithm from a natural-language description of a black-box optimization task.
To support research on this setting, we establish the BBOWP Benchmark Suite
(BBOWP-Bench), a dataset and evaluation framework for BBOWP. Each instance
combines a natural-language problem description, an executable evaluation envi-
ronment, and a human-designed baseline formulation, allowing evaluation of both
search-space design and algorithm selection. The benchmark covers 23 instances
from four different application domains and supports reproducible assessment
through actual black-box optimization runs. Using this benchmark, we provide
the first evaluation of LLMs and show that current LLMs are capable of selecting
suitable algorithms based on the given evaluation budget. However, they sometimes
struggle with search space design, particularly in identifying important variables
and balancing their ranges when the problem description is less informative or
the search space is highly problem-specific. Our code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/shiralab/bbowp-bench.
1
Introduction
Formulating an optimization problem has a major impact on solution quality. However, identify-
ing the key elements of a problem, such as design variables and objectives, and then expressing
them in a solver-ready form usually requires substantial expertise. Prior work has therefore studied
the automatic formulation of optimization problems from natural-language descriptions. Recent
datasets and benchmarks cover a range of optimization classes, from linear programming settings
such as NL4Opt [Ramamonjison et al., 2022b] to more recent resources for nonlinear optimiza-
∗Equal contribution.
Preprint.
arXiv:2608.02612v1  [cs.CL]  20 May 2026


--- Page 2 ---
I need a nice
prediction model
for my task.
The task is ...
1
Got it. I'll try it!
3
Okay, Random Forest
should fit your task well.
It has several
hyperparameters to tune.
For your task, a good
search space would be ...
2
{
 "algorithm": {
  "name": "TPE",
  ...
 },
 "search space": {
  "variables": [
    {
     "name": "algo_name",
     "choices": ["rf"],
     "type": "cat"
    },
    {
     "name": "num_trees",
     "low": 10,
     "high": 100,
     "type": "int"
    },
    ...
  ]
 }
}
Search space 
Selected algorithm 
Infer optimizer
and search space
Meta-solver
BBOWP instances
in broad domains
Problem description
System prompt
Algorithms
Task
Budget
You are an expert of black-box
optimization. The user will give
you a description of a black-box
optimization problem. Your goal
is to generate a JSON content ...
Candidate algorithms: {
  "TPE", "CMA-ES", ...
}
We need to optimize the selection
of a classification algorithm and
their hyparparameters to
maximize AUC.
...
The evaluation budget is 100.
Run BBO in built-in environments
Evaluation
Sample
via 
Update
optimizer
state
Evaluate
objective
Evaluate
built-in function
Map  to 
in built-in space
Figure 1: (Left) A typical scenario considered in BBOWP. Users ask a meta-solver to formulate a
BBO problem for their task, but they may not have an implemented objective function when they
describe the task. (Right) Overview of the BBOWP Benchmark Suite. Given a problem description d
that includes information such as the maximum number of function evaluations Nmax, a meta-solver
determines an appropriate optimization algorithm a and search space S. Then, the formulation is
evaluated through actual optimization runs, using a built-in objective function via identifier mapping.
tion [Huang et al., 2025b, Yang et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2025a, Lu et al., 2025], and support the
evaluation on tasks such as extracting variables, objectives, and constraints from text.
This line of work has produced useful datasets and evaluation settings, but existing benchmarks still
target problem classes in which objectives and constraints can be written explicitly as mathematical
expressions. In contrast, many important real-world tasks, including hyperparameter optimization,
molecular design, and structural shape optimization, are more naturally cast as black-box optimization
(BBO) problems. In BBO, only objective values are observable, and the underlying functional form
is unknown or intractable. As a result, progress in auto-formulation for BBO requires not only new
methods but also benchmark datasets that make formulation quality and downstream optimization
performance measurable.
In parallel, it has been argued that there is a need for metadata-rich BBO benchmarks [Song et al.,
2024]. Existing BBO benchmarks, such as COCO [Hansen et al., 2021], contain limited metadata
describing the problem context. However, in practice, utilizing prior knowledge is essential to realize
efficient optimization, and leveraging large language models (LLMs) to exploit such information can
be a key direction. This viewpoint also motivates the development of a BBO benchmark with task
information written in natural language.
Building on these research streams, we introduce Black-Box Optimization Word Problems (BBOWP),
a novel problem setting for auto-formulation in BBO domains. In BBOWP, a system receives a
natural-language problem description and must infer both a search space and a suitable optimization
algorithm. To accelerate research on BBOWP, we develop the BBOWP Benchmark Suite (BBOWP-
Bench), which pairs natural-language problem descriptions with design-variable domain definitions,
executable evaluation environments, and human-designed reference formulations. We also design an
evaluation protocol that supports both comparison against a human baseline and assessment through
actual BBO runs. Using this framework, we conduct the first benchmark study of several LLMs and
find that they can select suitable algorithms for the evaluation budget when provided with detailed
problem descriptions. However, they often struggle to identify important variables and set appropriate
ranges when problem descriptions are less informative.
Our contributions are summarized as follows: (1) We propose BBOWP, a new problem setting in
which a system must infer both a search space and a suitable optimization algorithm for a BBO
task from its natural-language description. (2) We introduce the BBOWP-Bench, a dataset for
BBOWP that pairs natural-language problem descriptions with executable evaluation environments
and human-designed baseline formulations. (3) We design an evaluation protocol that supports both
2


--- Page 3 ---
formulation-level comparison and downstream assessment through actual BBO runs. (4) We provide
the first benchmark study of several LLMs on BBOWP and show that several task settings remain
challenging for current LLMs.
2
Related Work
Constructing solver-ready formulations from natural-language problem descriptions requires substan-
tial expertise. To reduce this reliance on experts, recent work has developed datasets and benchmarks
for auto-formulation of optimization problems [Jiang et al., 2025, Ramamonjison et al., 2022a,b,
Xiao et al., 2024, Ahmaditeshnizi et al., 2024, Huang et al., 2025b, Yang et al., 2024, Huang et al.,
2025a, Lu et al., 2025]. Most of these studies focus on linear programming, integer programming,
and mixed-integer linear programming [Ramamonjison et al., 2022a,b, Huang et al., 2025b], with
more recent extensions to nonlinear programming [Huang et al., 2025a, Yang et al., 2024, Lu et al.,
2025]. Despite this progress, many real-world optimization problems do not admit explicit symbolic
objectives. Hyperparameter optimization, expensive simulations, materials discovery, and human-in-
the-loop design are all naturally modeled as BBO problems. Our work extends the auto-formulation
perspective to this broader setting.
Closely related but distinct text-to-optimization studies include [Li et al., 2025] and [Imajuku et al.,
2026]. Li et al. [2025] studied automated code generation for a part of the BBO formulation from
natural-language description, where the code computes objectives and constraints from simulation
outputs. Imajuku et al. [2026] introduced ALE-Bench, which evaluates whether agents can improve
performance on hard optimization tasks from task descriptions. In contrast, BBOWP focuses on an
earlier formulation stage: given only a natural-language description, the system must infer not only a
suitable search algorithm but also what search space should be exposed to the optimizer. Our work is
therefore complementary to these studies as part of an end-to-end automated pipeline for BBO.
Algorithm selection is a central issue in BBO. Because the suitable optimizer depends on the search
space, objective function landscape, and evaluation budget, the optimizer should be carefully chosen
to match the task formulation rather than fixed in advance [Munoz et al., 2015, Kerschke et al., 2019].
BBOWP is closely related to this issue because solving a BBOWP instance requires inferring a search
space and selecting an optimizer that is compatible with it.
3
Black-Box Optimization Word Problem (BBOWP)
BBOWP is formulated for settings in which the problem description may be written by a non-expert,
so the underlying objective function is not assumed to be fully specified beforehand. Hence, the users
may prepare their objective function after receiving an answer to BBOWP as shown in Figure 1 (left).
Because any maximization problem can be converted into a minimization problem by minimizing the
negative of the objective, we consider only minimization in what follows. In this paper, we assume
BBO problems with a single and noiseless objective.
In BBOWP, the input is a natural-language problem description d. The description includes infor-
mation such as the problem background, the target performance metric, the maximum number of
function evaluations Nmax, and the set of available algorithms A. Because the instruction may be
written at a high level, the design variables are not always stated explicitly in d.
The output for BBOWP is a search space S ∈S and an optimization algorithm a ∈A. Here, S
denotes the class of admissible search spaces, and S denotes a formulation of the search space suitable
for the target BBO problem described in d. For instance, the system for solving BBBOWP determines
the number, names, types, and ranges of design variables as the search space design, aligning with
the problem description. We include algorithm selection in the output because the suitability of an
optimizer depends on the problem formulation and the available evaluation budget.
The quality of the answer (a, s) can be measured by the final solution quality when running the
algorithm a to minimize the objective function on the search space s within the given budget
Nmax. Namely, BBOWP asks for an optimizer and a search space that minimizes the expected
objective value attained within the given budget: (a∗, S∗) = argmina∈A, S∈S E [V(a, S, Nmax)],
where V(a, S, Nmax) denotes the best objective value obtained by running algorithm a under the
search space S with budget Nmax, evaluated on the underlying performance metric intended by d.
3


--- Page 4 ---
Because black-box optimizers are typically stochastic, V is generally a random variable. We study
the performance of policies that output a suitable optimization algorithm a and a search space S for a
given input d. We refer to such a policy as a meta-solver.
4
BBOWP Benchmark Suite
The input of BBOWP is a problem description written in natural language. Existing BBO benchmark
datasets such as COCO [Hansen et al., 2021] and NeuroEvoBench [Lange et al., 2023] do not
include natural-language descriptions of the problems, which makes them unsuitable for evaluating
performance on BBOWP. To address this limitation, we propose the BBOWP-Bench, a benchmark
dataset designed specifically for the BBOWP task. An overview of the framework is shown in
Figure 1 (right).
4.1
Benchmark Design
At the abstract level, BBOWP does not assume that the search space is fixed in advance. Therefore,
a meta-solver is free to design the search space, deciding which variables to optimize and how to
identify them, based on the natural-language description and its intended optimization objective.
Ideally, the evaluation should be able to assess any search space generated by a meta-solver. In
principle, this could be done by having a human interpret the meta-solver’s output and implement the
corresponding objective interface for that formulation. However, such a procedure is impractical for a
benchmark that must rely on pre-built execution environments and support automatic evaluation. The
central design choice of the BBOWP-Bench is therefore to approximate this ideal evaluation protocol
using a fixed executable objective together with an adapter that maps generated search spaces to the
variable space expected by the executable environment.
The benchmark provides pre-built executable objectives and their problem descriptions derived from
existing real-world BBO benchmarks (see Section 4.2). For a given description d, the objective
gd : Xd →R is defined on a sufficiently large canonical design space Xd = Xl1 × · · · × XlI. Each
component is indexed by an identifier li representing the semantic role of a design variable. For
example, one such identifier may be learning_rate. The benchmark also specifies default values
xdef
li
∈Xli.
By contrast, a meta-solver outputs a search space S = Sl′
1 × · · · × Sl′
J together with an optimization
algorithm. Because Xd is not always given to the meta-solver directly, the generated identifiers l′
j need
not coincide with the canonical identifiers li. The meta-solver may omit relevant variables, introduce
irrelevant ones, or use alternative names for the canonical executable names. Each generated variable
additionally specifies its type, domain, and choice of sampling scale, either linear or logarithmic. If
a logarithmic scale is selected, the optimization algorithm searches in the transformed space, and
the realized value is mapped back before evaluation. The domain is defined by the upper and lower
bounds of the search range for a design variable or by a singleton set for a constant value.
To evaluate a point x = (xl′
1, . . . , xl′
J) ∈S, the benchmark resolves correspondence between
generated and canonical variables through an equivalence relation ∼over identifiers. For each
canonical variable li, let Mi = {j ∈{1, . . . , J} | li ∼l′
j} denote the set of generated variables
matched to li. When this correspondence is not ambiguous, the benchmark constructs a canonical
point ¯x = (¯xl1, . . . , ¯xlI) ∈Xd by
¯xli =
(
xl′
j
if Mi = {j} ,
xdef
li
if Mi = ∅
.
(1)
The benchmark then evaluates the generated point through the induced wrapper objective
fd(x) =
gd(¯x)
if |Mi| ≤1 for all i, and if x can be cast to ¯x ∈Xd
ωd
otherwise
,
(2)
where ωd denotes the worst objective value for task d (∞for minimization and −∞for maximization).
Here, omitted variables are filled with task-specific default values, and irrelevant generated variables
are ignored unless they create an ambiguity in the correspondence. We note that the worst objective
value is returned when the canonical point ¯x lies outside the canonical design space Xd, i.e., ¯x /∈Xd.
4


--- Page 5 ---
This construction is the key design choice in the BBOWP-Bench. It enables evaluation of a broad
range of generated search spaces using a fixed executable objective gd. In this sense, the benchmark
approximates the ideal flexible objective needed by the abstract task definition without requiring a
new execution environment for every generated formulation. Further details of the benchmark design
are discussed in Appendix C.
BBOWP-Bench also includes the list of candidate black-box optimizers. The system for solving
BBOWP is expected to select a suitable one from the candidate list in addition to designing the search
space. Then, the output, a pair of a selected algorithm and a designed search space (a, S), can be
automatically evaluated by running the algorithm a on the wrapper objective (2) with S.
4.2
Data Description
Table 1: Examples of the instances in BBOWP-Bench.
Source
Task Scenario
Dim Float Int Cat
YAHPO
3
HPO of Ranger
8
✓
✓
✓
4
HPO of SVM
6
✓
✓
✓
Olympus
14 SNAr reaction
4
✓
15 HPLC system
6
✓
MECHBench 17 Star-shaped crash box
5
✓
MuJoCo
19 Inverted Pendulum
5
✓
20 Inverted Double Pendulum
10
✓
We created BBOWP instances
from four sources:
YAHPO
Gym [Pfisterer et al., 2022],
Olympus [Häse et al., 2021,
Hickman et al., 2023], MECH-
Bench [Rodríguez et al., 2025],
and MuJoCo-based continuous-
control tasks [Todorov et al.,
2012]. YAHPO Gym is a bench-
mark dataset for hyperparameter
optimization (HPO) of machine learning models. Olympus covers experimental science domains,
such as materials science and drug discovery, and consists of tasks that emulate real-world physical
experiments and chemical simulations. MECHBench is a benchmark dataset for shape optimiza-
tion in structural mechanics and consists of tasks that involve designing structures modeled after
vehicle components to achieve high crash-safety performance. MuJoCo provides physics-based
continuous-control tasks in simulated robotic environments.
From these sources, we built 7 tasks from YAHPO Gym, 9 from Olympus, 2 from MECHBench,
and 5 from MuJoCo, yielding 23 tasks in total. We carefully extract the appropriate tasks for
BBOWP-Bench by excluding those with ambiguous variable names (HPO of the glmnet scenario in
YAHPO) and those with implementation problems inconsistent with the paper (Alkoxylation scenario
in Olympus). Examples of scenarios and design-variable types are shown in Table 1 (see Table 4 for
complete details). The execution environment for each benchmark is prepared as a separate Docker
image for each problem domain.
For each problem instance, we prepare a JSON record containing the canonical variables, their
domains, and default values used by the executable environment. We also prepare three problem
descriptions with different difficulty levels: Easy, Intermediate, and Hard. The Easy description
explicitly includes an explanation of the full canonical design space, the Intermediate description
includes partial clues from which the canonical design space can be inferred, and the Hard description
contains no direct information about the canonical design space and instead describes only the task
background and optimization objective.
To define the equivalence relation ∼among identifiers, we also create a list of semantically equivalent
names for each design variable. For example, for a design variable learning_rate, we include
synonymous identifiers such as lr and step_size.
Each task is accompanied by a search space and an optimization algorithm selected and verified
by multiple BBO experts as the human baseline. It also provides the reasons behind the choice
of variables, ranges, scales, and optimizer under different settings for evaluation budget: Small
with Nmax = 100, Large with Nmax = 10,000, where Nmax is the maximum number of function
evaluations. The experts designed the search space to avoid missing important variables and to
balance its size with the given budget, and selected the optimization algorithm based on variable
types and budget. Note that these human baselines were created by referring to the Easy description.
This information makes the benchmark useful as a reference baseline, a source of few-shot examples,
and a basis for further analysis. We emphasize that the expert formulation is not intended to represent
the optimal answer. Rather, it serves as a high-quality reference baseline for validation and analysis.
See Appendix D for details of the input and output of BBOWP-Bench.
5


--- Page 6 ---
Table 2: Comparison of optimization performance in Easy and Hard difficulties with Small budget.
We present the results for several tasks here; the complete results are shown in Section G.1.
YAHPO
Olympus
MECHBench
Difficulty
Model
Task 3 (↑)
Task 4 (↑)
Task 14 (↓)
Task 15 (↑)
Task 17 (↓)
Easy
Gemini 3 Flash
0.92
0.98
0.19
2695.47
-11687.66
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.87
0.94
0.20
2364.52
-11687.66
GPT-5 mini
0.94
0.97
0.32
2310.73
-10758.91
GPT-5.2
0.95
0.94
0.20
2246.71
-10758.91
Hard
Gemini 3 Flash
0.88
0.95
0.89
−∞
-8535.27
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.82
0.95
2.27
−∞
-8528.84
GPT-5 mini
0.84
0.93
0.79
−∞
∞
GPT-5.2
0.81
0.95
0.78
1320.79
-8507.17
Human Baseline
0.91
0.98
0.20
2366.82
-11740.92
5
Experiments
We assess the performance of representative LLMs as meta-solvers and demonstrate the usefulness of
BBOWP-Bench.
5.1
Experimental Setup
Evaluated Meta-Solvers.
To investigate the impact of model size and reasoning capability on
BBOWP, we evaluated four representative LLMs: Gemini 3 Flash [Google DeepMind, 2025], Gemini
3.1 Pro [Google DeepMind, 2026], GPT-5 mini [OpenAI, 2025b], and GPT-5.2 [OpenAI, 2025a].
Prompting and Difficulty Levels.
For each problem, the LLM receives a prompt containing
an overview of the BBOWP task, the required JSON output format, the problem description, and
the target maximum number of function evaluations (budget). To rigorously assess the models’
capabilities to build a search space, we evaluated the LLMs across three difficulty levels of problem
descriptions: Easy, Intermediate, and Hard (see Section 4.2). We evaluated them in both zero-shot
and one-shot settings and discuss the results of the zero-shot setting in this section. The results of
one-shot are provided in Section G.2. Complete prompt templates are provided in Section D.1.
Candidate Algorithms and Budget Conditions.
The LLMs are instructed to select an optimization
algorithm from a predefined pool of standard optimizers for BBO: CMA-ES [Hansen and Ostermeier,
1996], CMA-ES with Margin (CMA-ESwM) [Hamano et al., 2022], CatCMA [Hamano et al., 2024],
CatCMA with Margin (CatCMAwM) [Hamano et al., 2025], Differential Evolution (DE) [Storn and
Price, 1997], Nelder-Mead [Nelder and Mead, 1965], Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [Kennedy
and Eberhart, 1995], Bayesian optimization with Gaussian process regression (GP) [Jones et al.,
1998], SMAC3 [Lindauer et al., 2022], and Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) [Bergstra et al.,
2011]. We query the LLMs to design search spaces and select algorithms for three distinct budgets.
Execution of Optimization.
For the end-to-end evaluation through actual optimization runs, we
use the predefined script to execute the optimization according to the JSON specification generated by
a LLM. The optimization script is implemented using OptunaHub library [Ozaki et al., 2026]. While
the optimization runs on the generated search space, actual function evaluations are performed using
the built-in function as described in Section 4.1. We ran the optimization algorithm for each search
space once and collected the best evaluation values obtained during the optimization. For Small
budget settings, the optimization runs are executed across all 23 tasks. For Large budget settings, the
optimization runs are executed across 21 tasks other than the MECHBench tasks (Tasks 17 and 18)
since each evaluation takes a minute or more in those tasks.
5.2
Behavioral Analysis of LLMs as Meta-Solvers
Sensitivity to Problem Domains and Difficulties.
A critical requirement for a meta-solver is the
ability to infer the variables to be optimized when problem descriptions are ambiguous. Table 2
6


--- Page 7 ---
presents the optimization performance in Easy and Hard difficulties with Small budget. In the Easy
setting, where the full canonical design spaces are explicitly provided in the prompt, most models
act as highly capable instruction followers, successfully mapping the text to valid search spaces
across all domains. However, in the Hard setting, where models must infer the design variables and
bounds entirely from an ambiguous background description, a significant gap across application
domains emerges. For Tasks 3 and 4 in HPO (YAHPO Gym), we observed that LLMs successfully
reconstruct valid search spaces even in the Hard setting. For example, for Task 4 (HPO of SVM),
all LLMs include the key variables cost, kernel, and gamma with appropriate ranges (see Table 17
for details). Conversely, for tasks in Olympus and MECHBench, models frequently design invalid
or ineffective search spaces in the Hard setting. For example, Task 14 in Olympus includes four
variables, residence_time, ratio, concentration, and temperature (see Table 18). This task
treats a chemical experiment under pressurization and thus requires to keep temperature high to
accelerate the reaction. Against the canonical domain [60.0, 140.0] for temperature, Gemini 3.1 Pro
designs [20.0, 140.0] while Gemini 3 Flash sets the range to [0.0, 250.0]. Given that the worst value
is returned when a solution lies outside the canonical domain, Gemini 3.1 Pro successfully designs
its search space suitable for the task scenario, and thus achieves a better score than other models
in this task. Appendix H provides the details of the actual designed search spaces by LLMs. We
note that several search spaces designed by LLMs from Hard and Intermediate descriptions contain
design variables that lack a mapping to their canonical executable variable names. Our framework
incorporates alias dictionaries that map each design variable in an LLM-generated search space to its
canonical counterpart by covering as broad a range of name variations as possible. Developing an
effective method to map variables more precisely is left for future work.
Budget Awareness in Algorithm Selection.
A desired capability in BBOWP is the ability to
select an algorithm suited to the computational budget. We analyze the distribution of optimization
algorithms selected by the LLMs with Small (Nmax = 100) versus Large (Nmax = 10,000) evalua-
tion budgets. The detailed figure of comparison can be found in Appendix F. We observe a highly
rational shift in model behavior against the evaluation budget, confirming that all four LLMs possess
a strong degree of budget awareness. For example, the proportion of selecting Bayesian optimization
algorithms (GP, SMAC3, and TPE) by GPT-5.2 is 56.5% for Small budget, whereas it decreases to
30.4% for Large budget. More clearly, Gemini 3.1 Pro selects these algorithms at a rate of 78.3%
for Small budget, whereas 30.4% for Large budget. This behavior indicates that LLMs correctly
recognize that with an abundant evaluation budget, population-based evolutionary algorithms are
preferable for exploiting their scalability and convergence ability.
5.3
Scale-Invariant Evaluation of Search Space and Selected Algorithm
Evaluating meta-solver performance across vastly different application domains presents a significant
aggregation challenge, as raw objective values have incommensurable scales and bounds. To evaluate
the quality of the meta-solvers’ formulations composed of the search space S and the selected
algorithm a in a scale-invariant manner, we propose a quantile-based evaluation metric.
Formulation Ranking Score (FRS).
We measure the probability that the best objective function
value found based on the meta-solver’s answer is superior to the results obtained from search spaces
and optimization algorithms obeying a certain distribution. Formally, let y(a, S) denote the best
objective function value achieved by running an optimization algorithm a ∈A on a search space
S ∈S for a given task. Assuming a minimization problem without loss of generality, we define
Formulation Ranking Score (FRS) for a specific configuration (a, S) as follows:
FRS(a, S) =
Pr
(a′,S′)∼P(a,S)
(y(a, S) ≤y(a′, S′)) ,
(3)
where P(a,S) indicates the reference distributions of algorithms and search spaces. This metric
quantifies the quality of the configuration (a, S) relative to those distributed according to P(a,S).
In practice, since this exact probability cannot be computed analytically, we employ a Monte Carlo
approximation to Equation (3) to estimate it:
d
FRS(a, S) =
1
|R|
X
(a′,S′)∈R
I {y(a, S) ≤y(a′, S′)} ,
(4)
7


--- Page 8 ---
Table 3: Comparison of FRS between different models in the Small budget setting. Each value is the
average of FRS across Tasks 3, 14, and 20. The average FRS of the human baseline is 0.964. Full
results are provided in Appendix I. Bold and Underline indicate the best and the second best score
among the four models, respectively.
Difficulty
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
Easy
0.965
0.936
0.855
0.843
Intermediate
0.434
0.557
0.730
0.416
Hard
0.728
0.133
0.588
0.503
Avg.
0.709
0.542
0.724
0.588
where I(·) is the indicator function, and R represents a finite reference set of optimization algorithms
and search spaces drawn from P(a,S). In our experiments, to construct the reference set R, we
sampled the search space S′ by sampling variable bounds and categorical choices from the canonical
decision space according to a uniform distribution, while the optimization algorithm a′ was randomly
sampled from the candidate algorithms defined in Section 5.1, excluding high-overhead solvers:
SMAC3 and Bayesian optimization with Gaussian process. The number of samples is |R| = 100, 000.
The approximated FRS indicates the proportion of elements in the reference set R that perform worse
than the given configuration (a, S). As the range of FRS is [0, 1], we can measure the performance of
meta-solvers on tasks with different domains in the same scale, regardless of the scales or landscape
complexities of the underlying objective functions. For simplicity, we hereafter denote d
FRS as FRS.
FRS-based Comparison.
Using the FRS metric, we evaluate the performance of the LLMs
across the specified tasks under the Small budget (Nmax = 100). The aggregated results in Table 3
reveal significant variance in meta-solver performance depending on problem difficulty. Most
notably, GPT-5 mini achieves the highest overall average FRS (0.724), closely followed by Gemini 3
Flash (0.709). Both significantly outperform the larger foundation models, with Gemini 3.1 Pro
demonstrating the lowest overall score (0.542).
Analyzing performance across difficulty levels uncovers distinct model behaviors. In the Easy setting,
where full canonical bounds are explicitly provided in the prompt, Gemini 3 Flash (0.965) and Gemini
3.1 Pro (0.936) achieve the highest scores, leveraging capabilities to map the given description into
highly optimized search spaces. For instance, Gemini 3.1 Pro successfully prunes its search space by
fixing some variables to constant values, as the human baseline also does (see Table 21 for details).
However, the Hard setting sometimes exposes severe fragility in large models. While Gemini 3 Flash
achieves an FRS of 0.728, Gemini 3.1 Pro achieves 0.133. This is because it performs poorly on
Tasks 14 and 20. For example, in Task 14, Gemini 3.1 Pro shows the worst performance among
the four LLMs since it fails to specify the variable concentration, which the other three models
include in their search spaces (see Table 18 for details).
5.4
Isolating Search Space Quality
While the FRS metric evaluates the quality of a pair consisting of a selected algorithm a and a
search space S, it does not disentangle whether high performance stems from a robust optimization
algorithm or a well-designed search space. In this section, we therefore isolate the quality of the
generated search space S independently of the optimization algorithm. We achieve this by analyzing
the empirical probability density function (EPDF) of objective function values within the search
space designed by the LLMs. For the same three representative tasks analyzed in Section 5.3, we
uniformly sample 100,000 points from both the canonical domain and each LLM-designed search
space, evaluating the objective function value for every point.
Aggressive Dimensionality Reduction by Advanced LLMs.
The left panel of Figure 2 illustrates
the EPDFs of the objective function values for Task 3, HPO of Ranger in YAHPO. The gray curve
represents the canonical domain, which exhibits a wide variance and a median objective value of
0.780. Because the canonical domain is broad, an optimization algorithm operating under a strict
budget of Nmax = 100 is highly likely to waste evaluations in low-performing regions.
8


--- Page 9 ---
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Probability
1e−2
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.805
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.824
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.797
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.812
Variable
Domain
GPT-5 mini
Gemini 3.1 Pro
sample.fraction
[0.1, 1.0]
[0.2, 1.0]
[0.5, 1.0]
mtry.power
[1, 2000]
[50, 1000]
500
num.random
splits
[1, 100]
[1, 100]
1
min.node.size
[1, 100]
[1, 100]
[1, 20]
splitrule
{gini,
extratrees}
{gini,
extratrees}
{gini,
extratrees}
respect.unordered
factors
{ignore, order,
partition}
{ignore, order,
partition}
ignore
imputation
{impute.mean,
impute.median,
impute.hist}
{impute.mean,
impute.median,
impute.hist}
impute.mean
Figure 2: Search space comparison designed by LLMs for Task 3 in Easy difficulty. (Left) Empirical
probability density function (EPDFs) of objective function value over the canonical domain (gray)
versus the search spaces designed by four LLMs. (Right) Comparison table of ranges or categorical
choices for each variable in the canonical domain and the search spaces designed by GPT-5 mini
(achieved the highest median) and Gemini 3.1 Pro (exhibits the worst median). Underline in the
table indicates that the variable is set to a constant value. Gemini 3.1 Pro aggressively reduced the
dimensionality by setting four variables to constant values.
The EPDFs over the search spaces designed by LLMs reveal the mechanical causes behind the FRS
observed in Section 5.3. GPT-5 mini (green curve), which achieved the highest FRS overall, shifts
the bulk of the probability mass rightward to a median of 0.824. It successfully covers a desirable
region with high-quality solutions. Conversely, Gemini 3.1 Pro (red curve), which exhibited the worst
overall FRS among the four LLMs, yields a lower median of 0.797. Its EPDF exhibits exceptionally
high kurtosis, with a sharp and narrow peak strictly concentrated around its median, resulting in
highly homogeneous objective function values.
The right panel of Figure 2 shows the canonical domain alongside the search spaces designed by
GPT-5 mini and Gemini 3.1 Pro. This explicitly explains the distributional differences: while GPT-5
mini pruned the bounds to exclude only low-performing regions, Gemini 3.1 Pro designed the narrow
search space by fixing four variables to constant values. By inadvertently collapsing these dimensions,
the model eliminated the region necessary for the optimizer to find high-quality solutions, thereby
trapping the optimization algorithm in a suboptimal subspace. See Appendix J for more results.
6
Conclusion
This paper proposed the Black-Box Optimization Word Problem (BBOWP), a novel problem setting
requiring LLM to infer both a search space and an optimization algorithm from the natural-language
description of the target BBO task, and established the BBOWP-Bench as the first dataset and
evaluation framework for the BBOWP. Each problem instance in BBOWP-Bench provides a natural-
language problem description, an executable evaluation environment, and a human-designed baseline
formulation, enabling the evaluation of both search-space design and algorithm selection. Using
BBOWP-Bench, we evaluated several LLMs and uncovered their ability for BBOWP. We also
introduced FRS, a quantitative and intuitive evaluation metric, to evaluate search configurations,
whereas we analyzed EPDF of objective function value for evaluating the generated search space.
The empirical evaluations demonstrate that while current LLMs are capable of selecting suitable
algorithms, they sometimes struggle with search space design, particularly in identifying important
variables and balancing their ranges.
While this work opens a new frontier in BBO research, BBOWP-Bench has several limitations that
suggest future directions. A major limitation is the removal of generated variables whose identifiers
are not included in the alias dictionaries. This may be resolved by using an additional LLM to map
the generated identifier to a pre-defined identifier more appropriately. Moreover, BBOWP-Bench
does not support providing conditional search space information to optimizers, which often appears
in HPO tasks, indicating the need to improve our benchmark. In addition, because the optimization
algorithm is selected from the set of algorithm candidates, expanding the set of algorithm candidates
9


--- Page 10 ---
or generating a new algorithm tailored to given tasks using an agent-based meta-solver is another
possible future direction.
References
Ali Ahmaditeshnizi, Wenzhi Gao, and Madeleine Udell. OptiMUS: Scalable optimization modeling
with (MI)LP solvers and large language models. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico Kolter, Katherine
Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp, editors, Proceedings
of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 577–596. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.
James Bergstra, Rémi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Balázs Kégl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter
optimization. In NeurIPS, 2011.
Google DeepMind.
Gemini 3 Flash Model Card.
https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-flash/, December 2025.
Google DeepMind.
Gemini 3.1 Pro Model Card.
https://deepmind.google/models/
model-cards/gemini-3-1-pro/, February 2026.
Ryoki Hamano, Shota Saito, Masahiro Nomura, and Shinichi Shirakawa. CMA-ES with margin:
lower-bounding marginal probability for mixed-integer black-box optimization. In Proceedings of
the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 639–647, 2022.
Ryoki Hamano, Shota Saito, Masahiro Nomura, Kento Uchida, and Shinichi Shirakawa. CatCMA:
Stochastic optimization for mixed-category problems. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evo-
lutionary Computation Conference, GECCO ’24, page 656–664, New York, NY, USA, 2024.
Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400704949. doi: 10.1145/3638529.3654198.
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3638529.3654198.
Ryoki Hamano, Masahiro Nomura, Shota Saito, Kento Uchida, and Shinichi Shirakawa. CatCMA
with margin: Stochastic optimization for continuous, integer, and categorical variables. In Pro-
ceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference, pages 737–745, 2025.
N. Hansen, A. Auger, R. Ros, O. Mersmann, T. Tušar, and D. Brockhoff. COCO: A platform for
comparing continuous optimizers in a black-box setting. Optimization Methods and Software, 36:
114–144, 2021. doi: https://doi.org/10.1080/10556788.2020.1808977.
Nikolaus Hansen and Andreas Ostermeier. Adapting arbitrary normal mutation distributions in
evolution strategies: The covariance matrix adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Evolutionary Computation, pages 312–317. IEEE, 1996.
Florian Häse, Matteo Aldeghi, Riley J. Hickman, Loïc M. Roch, Melodie Christensen, Elena Liles,
Jason E. Hein, and Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Olympus: a benchmarking framework for noisy optimiza-
tion and experiment planning. Machine Learning: Science and Technology, 2(3):035021, July
2021. ISSN 2632-2153. doi: 10.1088/2632-2153/abedc8.
Riley Hickman, Priyansh Parakh, Austin Cheng, Qianxiang Ai, Joshua Schrier, Matteo Aldeghi, and
Alán Aspuru-Guzik. Olympus, enhanced: benchmarking mixed-parameter and multi-objective
optimization in chemistry and materials science, May 2023.
Chenyu Huang, Zhengyang Tang, Shixi Hu, Ruoqing Jiang, Xin Zheng, Dongdong Ge, Benyou Wang,
and Zizhuo Wang. ORLM: A customizable framework in training large models for automated
optimization modeling. Operations Research, 2025a.
Xuhan Huang, Qingning Shen, Yan Hu, Anningzhe Gao, and Benyou Wang. LLMs for mathematical
modeling: Towards bridging the gap between natural and mathematical languages. In Luis
Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang, editors, Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 2678–2710, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025b. Association
for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.findings-naacl.
146.
10


--- Page 11 ---
Yuki Imajuku, Kohki Horie, Yoichi Iwata, Kensho Aoki, Naohiro Takahashi, and Takuya Akiba.
ALE-bench: A benchmark for long-horizon objective-driven algorithm engineering. In The Thirty-
ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks
Track, 2026. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=JCjGvbsOmQ.
Caigao Jiang, Xiang Shu, Hong Qian, Xingyu Lu, JUN ZHOU, Aimin Zhou, and Yang Yu. LLMOPT:
Learning to define and solve general optimization problems from scratch. In The Thirteenth
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/
forum?id=9OMvtboTJg.
Donald R Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive
black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization, 1998.
James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart. Particle swarm optimization. In ICNN, 1995.
Pascal Kerschke, Holger H Hoos, Frank Neumann, and Heike Trautmann. Automated algorithm
selection: Survey and perspectives. Evolutionary Computation, 27(1):3–45, 2019.
Robert Tjarko Lange, Yujin Tang, and Yingtao Tian. NeuroEvoBench: Benchmarking evolutionary
optimizers for deep learning applications. In NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023.
Yuchen Li, Handing Wang, Bing Xue, Mengjie Zhang, and Yaochu Jin. Solver-independent au-
tomated problem formulation via llms for high-cost simulation-driven design. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2512.18682, 2025.
Marius Lindauer, Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, André Biedenkapp, Difan Deng, Carolin
Benjamins, Tim Ruhkopf, René Sass, and Frank Hutter. SMAC3: A versatile bayesian optimization
package for hyperparameter optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 2022. URL
http://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0888.html.
Hongliang Lu, Zhonglin Xie, Yaoyu Wu, Can Ren, Yuxuan Chen, and Zaiwen Wen. OptMATH:
A scalable bidirectional data synthesis framework for optimization modeling. In Forty-second
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2025. URL https://openreview.net/forum?
id=9P5e6iE4WK.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed representations
of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 26, 2013.
Mario A. Munoz, Yuan Sun, Michael Kirley, and Saman K. Halgamuge. Algorithm selection for
black-box continuous optimization problems: A survey on methods and challenges. Information
Sciences, 317:224–245, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2015.05.010.
J. A. Nelder and R. Mead. A simplex method for function minimization. The Computer Journal, 7
(4):308–313, 01 1965. ISSN 0010-4620. doi: 10.1093/comjnl/7.4.308. URL https://doi.org/
10.1093/comjnl/7.4.308.
OpenAI. Update to GPT-5 System Card: GPT-5.2. https://deploymentsafety.openai.com/
gpt-5-2, December 2025a.
OpenAI. GPT-5 System Card. https://cdn.openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf, August
2025b.
Yoshihiko Ozaki, Shuhei Watanabe, and Toshihiko Yanase. OptunaHub: A platform for black-box
optimization, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.02798.
Florian Pfisterer, Lennart Schneider, Julia Moosbauer, Martin Binder, and Bernd Bischl. YAHPO
Gym - an efficient multi-objective multi-fidelity benchmark for hyperparameter optimization. In
Isabelle Guyon, Marius Lindauer, Mihaela van der Schaar, Frank Hutter, and Roman Garnett,
editors, Proceedings of the First International Conference on Automated Machine Learning,
volume 188 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 3/1–39. PMLR, 25–27 Jul 2022.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v188/pfisterer22a.html.
11


--- Page 12 ---
Rindra Ramamonjison, Haley Li, Timothy Yu, Shiqi He, Vishnu Rengan, Amin Banitalebi-dehkordi,
Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. Augmenting operations research with auto-formulation of op-
timization models from problem descriptions. In Yunyao Li and Angeliki Lazaridou, editors,
Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
Industry Track, pages 29–62, Abu Dhabi, UAE, December 2022a. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.emnlp-industry.4. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2022.emnlp-industry.4/.
Rindranirina Ramamonjison, Timothy Yu, Raymond Li, Haley Li, Giuseppe Carenini, Bissan Ghaddar,
Shiqi He, Mahdi Mostajabdaveh, Amin Banitalebi-Dehkordi, Zirui Zhou, and Yong Zhang. NL4Opt
competition: Formulating optimization problems based on their natural language descriptions. In
Marco Ciccone, Gustavo Stolovitzky, and Jacob Albrecht, editors, Proceedings of the NeurIPS
2022 Competitions Track, volume 220 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages
189–203. PMLR, 28 Nov–09 Dec 2022b.
Iván Olarte Rodríguez, Maria Laura Santoni, Fabian Duddeck, Carola Doerr, Thomas Bäck, and
Elena Raponi. Mechbench: A set of black-box optimization benchmarks originated from structural
mechanics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.10821, 2025.
Xingyou Song, Yingtao Tian, Robert Tjarko Lange, Chansoo Lee, Yujin Tang, and Yutian Chen.
Position: Leverage foundational models for black-box optimization. In Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Zico
Kolter, Katherine Heller, Adrian Weller, Nuria Oliver, Jonathan Scarlett, and Felix Berkenkamp,
editors, Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 46168–46180. PMLR, 21–27 Jul 2024.
Rainer Storn and Kenneth Price. Differential Evolution –a simple and efficient heuristic for global
optimization over continuous spaces. Journal of Global Optimization, 1997.
Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 5026–5033.
IEEE, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2012.6386109.
Ziyang Xiao, Dongxiang Zhang, Yangjun Wu, Lilin Xu, Yuan Jessica Wang, Xiongwei Han, Xiaojin
Fu, Tao Zhong, Jia Zeng, Mingli Song, and Gang Chen. Chain-of-experts: When LLMs meet
complex operations research problems. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
Zhicheng Yang, Yiwei Wang, Yinya Huang, Zhijiang Guo, Wei Shi, Xiongwei Han, Liang Feng,
Linqi Song, Xiaodan Liang, and Jing Tang. OptiBench meets resocratic: Measure and improve
llms for optimization modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09887, 2024.
12


--- Page 13 ---
A
Details of the instances in BBOWP-Bench
Table 4 present the list of all instances in BBOWP-Bench.
Table 4: All instances in BBOWP-Bench. Dim indicates the number of canonical design variables.
Float, Int, and Cat mean whether floating (continuous), integer, and categorical variables are included,
respectively.
Source
Task Scenario
Dim Float Int Cat
YAHPO
1
HPO of MLP
7
✓
✓
2
HPO of RcppHNSW
6
✓
✓
3
HPO of Ranger
8
✓
✓
✓
4
HPO of RPART
5
✓
✓
✓
5
HPO of SVM
6
✓
✓
✓
6
HPO of XGBoost
14
✓
✓
✓
7
Algorithm selection, HPO
36
✓
✓
✓
Olympus
8
N-benzylation
4
✓
9
Color mixing BOB
5
✓
10
Color mixing N9
3
✓
11
Fullerenes synthesis
3
✓
12
Photo PCE10 blend
4
✓
13
Photo WF3 blend
4
✓
14
SNAr reaction
4
✓
15
HPLC system
6
✓
16
Suzuki reaction
4
✓
MECHBench
17
Star-shaped crash box
5
✓
18
Three-point bending of layered beam
10
✓
MuJoCo
19
Inverted Pendulum
5
✓
20
Inverted Double Pendulum
10
✓
21
Hopper
36
✓
22
Reacher
22
✓
23
Swimmer
18
✓
B
Code and Data Availability
BBOWP-Bench includes four existing assets: YAHPO Gym [Pfisterer et al., 2022], Olympus [Häse
et al., 2021, Hickman et al., 2023], MECHBench [Rodríguez et al., 2025], and MuJoCo [Todorov
et al., 2012]. YAHPO Gym and MuJoCo are licensed under Apache-2.0 License. Olympus and
MECHBench are licensed under MIT License. Our codes are available under MIT License at
https://github.com/shiralab/bbowp-bench. Our benchmark and dataset are also released
under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0) at https://github.
com/shiralab/bbowp-bench/benchmark.
C
Further Discussion on Benchmark Design
In building BBOWP-Bench, we made several decisions about the benchmark design. Here, we
discuss other possibilities.
Evaluation Using Prebuilt Functions.
Instead of using prebuilt functions, we had another option:
building an objective function according to a given search space on the fly, using coding agents.
This would make it possible to evaluate broader search spaces than those we considered. We did
not adopt this approach due to two concerns. First, automatically generating objective functions
is itself a challenging task and has been studied as a research topic in [Li et al., 2025]. This could
confound the evaluation results, as it would entangle the capabilities of meta-solvers with those of
coding agents. Second, coding agents are large, expensive, and frequently updated, which detracts
from the portability and stability of the benchmark. We therefore prefer a more compact and stable
design. For the same reason, we did not adopt LLM-as-a-Judge.
13


--- Page 14 ---
Identifier Matching Using Alias Lists.
An obvious limitation of BBOWP-Bench is that valid
design variables may be overlooked due to the limited coverage of the alias lists. Using vector
representations of identifiers, such as Word2Vec [Mikolov et al., 2013], could alleviate this limitation.
However, doing so would introduce a dependency on another model, which is generally difficult
to control. As a first step in the BBOWP research, we chose a more controllable approach. This
simple procedure allows us to easily control the precision–recall trade-off in identifier matching,
while leaving room for improvement through additional alias lists. Combining these approaches
could be a promising direction for further development.
D
Details for Input and Output of BBOWP-Bench
D.1
Prompt Template for LLMs
We use the prompt template provided in Figure 3 as the input of BBOWP-Bench. For one-shot
settings, we use the system prompt with the example based on Task 19, provided in Figure 4.
D.2
Task Description
As described in Section 4.2, we prepare three descriptions for each task with different difficulty levels
(Easy, Intermediate, and Hard). We illustrate the example of the task descriptions of Task 3 (HPO of
Ranger in YAHPO Gym) for the three difficulties in Figure 5.
D.3
Output Example
Figure 6 shows the example of an output for Task 4 with Easy difficulty and Small budget.
E
Experimental Environment
Compute Resources.
We executed the experiments on multiple computer resources as follows:
• Two computers running Ubuntu 22.04 with AMD EPYC7763 × 2 CPUs, 1024GB memory,
and SSD 3.8TB.
• Two computers running Ubuntu 20.04 with AMD EPYC7763 × 1 CPU, 512GB memory,
and SSD 3.8TB.
• Two computers running Ubuntu 22.04 with AMD EPYC7742 × 1 CPU, 512GB memory,
and SSD 3.8TB.
• Three computers running Ubuntu 22.04 with Xeon E-2186G × 1 CPU, 64GB memory, and
SSD 2TB.
Execution Time.
For the Small budget (Nmax = 100), a single optimization run requires less than
a minute for all tasks except Tasks 17 and 18 in MECHBench. For Tasks 17 and 18, some settings last
for about 3 hours. For the Large budget (Nmax = 10,000), a single optimization run takes about 3
hours when the optimizer is not Bayesian optimization with Gaussian process (GP) or SMAC3. Some
settings require more than 48 hours when using GP or SMAC3 as the optimizer, and we terminated
optimization runs for such settings.
F
Results of Algorithm Selection
Figure 7 shows the proportion of tasks for which each algorithm is selected by each LLM with
the Small and Large budgets. The results demonstrate strong budget awareness across all models:
sample-efficient surrogate methods (GP, SMAC3, and TPE) are favored under Small budget, whereas
population-based evolution strategies (CMA-ES) dominate under Large budget.
14


--- Page 15 ---
Prompt Template
System Prompt:
# Task
You are an expert in black-box optimization. The user will give you a task description of a black-box optimization
problem. Your goal is to generate a JSON content that defines all of the following items based on the description:
1. search space
2. the best choice of an optimization algorithm, which must be selected from the predefined algorithms in the
schema
# Policy
To achieve the best result within the limited budget, please follow the policy below when generating the JSON content.
• For efficient optimization under the given budget, you can flexibly control the size of the search space by
1. reducing the dimensionality of the search space (e.g., by fixing some parameters to be constant).
2. adjusting the range of numerical parameters.
3. reducing the number of choices for categorical parameters.
• You should choose the optimization algorithm that is most suitable for the defined search space and the given
budget.
# Output Format
Your output must be a JSON content that strictly follows the schema defined below.
{SCHEMA}
Additionally, the search space in the JSON content must be defined according to the following schema, where you can
choose any combination of the variable types (int, float, bool, cat) and the constraints mentioned below:
• int: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "int", "low": 1, "high": 10, "step": 1, "log": false}
• float: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "float", "low": 1e-4, "high": 1.0, "log": true}
• bool: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "bool"}
• cat: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "cat", "choices": [{"actual_name": "a"}, {"actual_name": "b"}]}
• const_int: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "const_int", "value": 5}
• const_float: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "const_float", "value": 0.1}
• const_bool: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "const_bool", "value": true}
• const_cat: {"actual_name": "...", "type": "const_cat", "value": "gbtree"}
Make sure to include reasons for your search space design and algorithm choice in the JSON content, each of which
should be written in the following aspects:
• search space design
– the reason why each variable is included in the search space
– the reason why each variable is optimized/fixed
– the reason for the range/choices of each variable
• algorithm choice
– the reason why the chosen algorithm is suitable for the defined search space and the given budget
# Constraints
1. The name of each variable in the search space must be in snake_case.
2. The name of each choice for categorical variables must be in snake_case.
User Prompt:
Based on the task description given below, generate a JSON content according to the defined schema and system
instructions.
# Task Description
{TASK_DESCRIPTION}
Figure 3: Prompt template. {SCHEMA} defines the JSON schema for the output, specifying the
available optimization algorithms, the required properties for each variable type, and the reasons
behind the search space design and algorithm selection.
15


--- Page 16 ---
Prompt Template
System Prompt:
# Task
...
# Policy
...
# Output Format
...
# Constraints
...
# Example
## Task Description
{EXAMPLE_TASK_DESCRPITION}
## Task Description
The objective is to maximize the number of timesteps an inverted pendulum remains balanced,
simulated in MuJoCo via the Gymnasium interface (InvertedPendulum-v5). The control is
performed by a linear policy that computes a horizontal force applied to the cart based on the
current observation at each timestep. The episode terminates early if the absolute value of the
pole angle exceeds 0.2 radians, and the maximum episode length is 1000 timesteps. The
observation variables are: position (position of the cart along the linear track, in meters), angle
(vertical angle of the pole relative to the upright position, in radians), velocity (linear velocity
of the cart, in meters per second), and angular_velocity (angular velocity of the pole, in
radians per second). The action variable force (horizontal force applied to the cart, in
Newtons) is clipped to [-3.0, 3.0] by the simulator. The design variables consist of 5
continuous variables. Four of them are feedback gains that multiply each observation variable,
and the remaining one is a bias term. The feedback gains are named as ’observation
variable’_to_’action variable’, and the bias term is named as bias_to_force. Each design
variable ranges over [-1000, 1000]. Please note that while these specified ranges define the
absolute implementational boundaries for each parameter, they serve primarily as a reference
frame; you can flexibly control the actual search space depending on your optimization
strategy. The evaluation budget is 100.
## Output
{ "search_space": { "variables": [ { "actual_name": "position_to_force", "value": 0.0, "type":
"const_float" }, { "actual_name": "angle_to_force", "low": -150.0, "high": 150.0, "log": false,
"type": "float" }, { "actual_name": "velocity_to_force", "low": -6.0, "high": 6.0, "log": false,
"type": "float" }, { "actual_name": "angular_velocity_to_force", "low": -30.0, "high": 30.0,
"log": false, "type": "float" }, { "actual_name": "bias_to_force", "value": 0.0, "type":
"const_float" } ], "reason": "The search space is designed based on the scale of the action
variable, which is bounded to [-3.0, 3.0] by the simulator, and has a margin to allow broad
exploration. The reduction of the search space is needed due to the limited evaluation budget.
The gain of angle, velocity, and angular velocity can be considered the three most important
parameters for the control of the inverted pendulum, and the gain of position is fixed to 0.0 to
reduce the search space. The bias term is fixed to 0.0 as this is expected to be less important."
}, "algorithm": { "name": "TPE", "reason": "The search space involves three continuous
variables. TPE is suitable for finding a reasonable solution within a limited budget and can
handle continuous optimization problems." } }
Figure 4: System prompt for one-shot settings. The same parts as the prompt of zero-shot settings are
omitted.
16


--- Page 17 ---
Task Descriptions of Task 3 (HPO of Ranger):
Easy difficulty:
We need to optimize the hyperparameters of a random forest (Ranger) model to maximize
AUC for a classification task. This optimization is formulated within an 8-dimensional mixed
search space comprising continuous, integer, and categorical variables. It is important to
consider the mechanics of ensemble learning and decision tree construction. Achieving robust
predictive performance heavily relies on the discrete size of the tree ensemble, explicitly
controlled by the variable ’num.trees’ (typically evaluated within the bounds of 1 to 2000),
alongside the continuous proportion of the training data sampled to build each individual tree,
represented by the variable ’sample.fraction’ (ranging from 0.1 to 1.0). Furthermore, the
model’s ability to capture complex patterns while maintaining diversity is governed by several
factors: the strategy used to determine the subset of features evaluated at each split, defined by
the variable ’mtry.power’ (ranging from 0.0 to 1.0), the categorical rule chosen to measure
split quality, corresponding to the variable ’splitrule’ (with options being ’gini’ or ’extratrees’),
and the discrete number of random threshold evaluations per feature, controlled by the
variable ’num.random.splits’ (ranging from 1 to 100). To prevent the individual trees from
growing too deep and overfitting, you must also carefully tune the discrete stopping criterion
that defines the minimum allowed number of samples in a terminal leaf, which is managed by
the variable ’min.node.size’ (ranging from 1 to 100). Finally, the categorical approach taken to
handle non-ordinal features, determined by the variable ’respect.unordered.factors’ (accepting
values like ’ignore’, ’order’, or ’partition’), combined with the preliminary strategy chosen to
resolve missing data points, specified by the variable ’num.impute.selected.cpo’ (with options
’impute.mean’, ’impute.median’, or ’impute.hist’), plays a critical role in the stability and
ultimate performance of the resulting model. Please note that while these specified ranges and
categorical options define the absolute implementational boundaries and available choices for
each parameter, they serve primarily as a reference frame; you can flexibly control the actual
search space depending on your optimization strategy.
The evaluation budget is {MAX_EVAL_VALUE}.
Intermediate difficulty:
We need to optimize the hyperparameters of a random forest (Ranger) model to maximize
AUC for a classification task. It is important to consider the mechanics of ensemble learning
and decision tree construction. Achieving robust predictive performance heavily relies on the
discrete size of the tree ensemble, alongside the continuous proportion of the training data
sampled to build each individual tree. Furthermore, the model’s ability to capture complex
patterns while maintaining diversity is governed by several factors: the strategy used to
determine the subset of features evaluated at each split, the categorical rule chosen to measure
split quality, and the discrete number of random threshold evaluations per feature. To prevent
the individual trees from growing too deep and overfitting, you must also carefully tune the
discrete stopping criterion that defines the minimum allowed number of samples in a terminal
leaf. Finally, the categorical approach taken to handle non-ordinal features, combined with the
preliminary strategy chosen to resolve missing data points, plays a critical role in the stability
and ultimate performance of the resulting model.
The evaluation budget is {MAX_EVAL_VALUE}.
Hard difficulty:
We need to optimize the hyperparameters of Ranger (random forest) to maximize AUC.
The evaluation budget is {MAX_EVAL_VALUE}.
Figure 5: Task descriptions of Task 3 (HPO of Ranger in YAHPO) for the different difficulties, Easy,
Intermediate, and Hard.
17


--- Page 18 ---
{
"search_space": {
"variables": [
{"actual_name": "cp", "low": 0.0009118819655545162, "high": 1.0,
"log": true, "type": "float"},
{"actual_name": "maxdepth", "low": 1, "high": 30, "step": 1,
"log": false, "type": "int"},
{"actual_name": "minsplit", "low": 1, "high": 100, "step": 1,
"log": false, "type": "int"},
{"actual_name": "minbucket", "low": 1, "high": 100, "step": 1,
"log": false, "type": "int"},
{"actual_name": "num_impute_selected_cpo",
"choices": [
{"actual_name": "impute_mean"},
{"actual_name": "impute_median"},
{"actual_name": "impute_hist"}
],
"type": "cat"
}
],
"reason": "The search space consists of 5 dimensions (one continuous, three integers, and one
categorical variable). Given the generous evaluation budget of 10,000 trials, there is ample capacity
to comprehensively explore the entire space without needing to freeze or narrow down any
hyperparameters. Thus, all 5 variables are selected to be optimized across their originally
prescribed ranges and choices, giving the optimization algorithm maximum flexibility to uncover
complex interactions and effectively maximize the AUC. Variable names and categorical choices
originally containing periods were converted to strictly follow snake_case format constraints."
},
"algorithm": {
"name": "TPE",
"reason": "Tree-structured Parzen Estimator (TPE) natively and robustly handles mixed search
spaces encompassing continuous, integer, and categorical design variables. For this
5-dimensional problem with a large evaluation budget of 10,000, TPE demonstrates superior
scalability and computational efficiency compared to standard Gaussian Process-based
techniques. It maintains an effective balance between exploration and exploitation across the
thousands of trials, securing excellent convergence toward optimal hyperparameters while
keeping algorithmic overhead manageable."
}
}
Figure 6: Output for Task 4 with Easy difficulty and Small budget. Generated by Gemini 3 Pro
Preview.
G
Results of Optimization
G.1
Zero-Shot Settings
We conducted the experiments for all 23 tasks in BBOWP-Bench for Small budget (Nmax = 100).
The results are provided in Table 5 for Easy difficulty, Table 6 for Intermediate difficulty, and Table 7
for Hard difficulty.
Additionally, we conducted the experiments for 21 tasks for Large budget (Nmax = 10,000). Tasks
17 and 18 in MECHBench are excluded because each evaluation takes a minute or more in those
tasks. The results are provided in Table 8 for Easy difficulty, Table 9 for Intermediate difficulty, and
Table 10 for Hard difficulty. We terminated the optimization runs, which took more than 48 hours,
and omitted their results from each table, denoting such runs as “–”.
Focusing on Small budget, there is no significant difference across the model size (Gemini 3 Flash
vs. Gemini 3.1 Pro and GPT-5 mini vs. GPT-5.2) for all difficulties. We observe the same tendency
for Large budget. In both budget settings, the best evaluation values on YAHPO tasks remain
18


--- Page 19 ---
CMA-ES
CMA-ESwM
GP
SMAC3
TPE
0.0
0.5
1.0
Proportion of Tasks
GPT-5.2
Small (Nmax = 100)
Large (Nmax = 10,000)
CMA-ES
CMA-ESwM
GP
SMAC3
TPE
GPT-5 mini
CMA-ES
CMA-ESwM
GP
SMAC3
TPE
0.0
0.5
1.0
Proportion of Tasks
Gemini 3.1 Pro
CMA-ES
CMA-ESwM
GP
SMAC3
TPE
Gemini 3 Flash
Figure 7: Distribution of optimization algorithms selected by the four evaluated LLMs across different
evaluation budgets. Solid blue bars represent the Small budget (Nmax = 100), while striped orange
bars represent the Large budget (Nmax = 10,000).
relatively stable, whereas they tend to decline as the settings become more challenging for Olympus,
MECHBench, and MuJoCo.
G.2
One-Shot Settings
Similarly to zero-shot settings, we conducted the experiments for all 23 tasks in BBOWP-Bench for
Small budget (Nmax = 100). We added Task 19’s description and output into the system prompt as a
one-shot example. The results are provided in Table 11 for Easy difficulty, Table 12 for Intermediate
difficulty, and Table 13 for Hard difficulty.
Additionally, we conducted the experiments for 21 tasks for Large budget (Nmax = 10,000). Tasks
17 and 18 in MECHBench are excluded. Task 19 in MuJoCo is also omitted because it is included in
the system prompt as the example. The results are provided in Table 14 for Easy difficulty, Table 15
for Intermediate difficulty, and Table 16 for Hard difficulty. We terminated the optimization runs that
exceeded 48 hours and omitted their results from each table, denoting such runs as “–”.
Compared with zero-shot prompting in Easy difficulty, one-shot prompting improves 8/16 settings for
Small budget and 11/16 settings for Large budget, especially on Tasks 20-23, which share the same
domain (MuJoCo) owing to the example of one-shot. Conversely, there are fewer settings where
one-shot prompting improves the best evaluation value when the task is out of the domain of one-shot
(YAHPO, Olympus, and MECHBench), both for Small and Large budgets.
19


--- Page 20 ---
Table 5: Comparison of optimization performance for Easy difficulty and Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
99.62
99.57
99.62
99.31
Task 2 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.95
Task 3 (↑)
0.92
0.87
0.94
0.95
Task 4 (↑)
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
0.98
0.94
0.97
0.94
Task 6 (↑)
1.00
0.99
1.00
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.99
0.96
0.99
0.99
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
2.54
2.53
2.56
2.52
Task 9 (↓)
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.07
Task 10 (↓)
0.02
0.04
0.08
0.08
Task 11 (↑)
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.96
Task 12 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.04
Task 13 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Task 14 (↓)
0.19
0.20
0.32
0.20
Task 15 (↑)
2695.47
2364.52
2310.73
2246.71
Task 16 (↑)
99.81
99.73
−∞
98.44
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-11687.66
-11687.66
-10758.91
-10758.91
Task 18 (↓)
3.41
3.39
3.42
3.39
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
1000.00
267.00
1000.00
187.70
Task 20 (↑)
136.66
150.58
88.21
83.71
Task 21 (↑)
270.05
884.00
1009.84
384.93
Task 22 (↑)
-54.33
-60.92
-12.25
-14.68
Task 23 (↑)
262.14
272.23
262.14
324.97
Table 6: Comparison of optimization performance for Intermediate difficulty and Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
99.52
97.38
98.37
99.28
Task 2 (↑)
0.95
0.96
0.93
0.92
Task 3 (↑)
0.84
0.88
0.88
0.82
Task 4 (↑)
0.90
0.92
0.91
0.91
Task 5 (↑)
0.94
0.95
0.94
0.94
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.91
−∞
0.91
0.96
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
∞
3.41
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.17
0.16
0.17
0.05
Task 10 (↓)
0.31
0.31
0.32
0.31
Task 11 (↑)
0.82
−∞
−∞
0.92
Task 12 (↓)
0.33
0.33
0.33
0.32
Task 13 (↓)
0.36
0.36
0.36
0.35
Task 14 (↓)
∞
∞
0.74
0.94
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
1283.76
Task 16 (↑)
79.59
−∞
−∞
69.42
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-8503.76
-8529.99
800.31
800.31
Task 18 (↓)
3.61
3.61
3.61
3.61
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
367.10
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
Task 20 (↑)
99.20
101.61
92.94
75.02
Task 21 (↑)
138.52
1000.27
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
−∞
−∞
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
20


--- Page 21 ---
Table 7: Comparison of optimization performance for Hard difficulty and Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
98.01
99.61
−∞
97.34
Task 2 (↑)
0.93
0.94
0.94
0.92
Task 3 (↑)
0.88
0.82
0.84
0.81
Task 4 (↑)
0.91
0.91
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
0.95
0.95
0.93
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.91
0.92
0.91
−∞
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
∞
∞
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.03
Task 10 (↓)
0.30
0.05
0.13
0.15
Task 11 (↑)
0.94
0.95
0.95
0.80
Task 12 (↓)
0.33
0.32
0.34
0.33
Task 13 (↓)
0.36
0.35
0.36
0.35
Task 14 (↓)
0.89
2.27
0.79
0.78
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
1320.79
Task 16 (↑)
55.25
−∞
−∞
−∞
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-8535.27
-8528.84
∞
-8507.17
Task 18 (↓)
3.61
3.61
3.61
3.61
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
98.70
−∞
24.00
1000.00
Task 20 (↑)
106.98
−∞
93.25
90.41
Task 21 (↑)
138.52
138.52
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
-0.66
0.02
0.02
Table 8: Comparison of optimization performance for Easy difficulty and Large budget. The symbol
“–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than 48 hours of computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
–
99.66
99.66
99.57
Task 2 (↑)
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
Task 3 (↑)
0.96
0.97
0.96
0.96
Task 4 (↑)
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
–
0.98
–
–
Task 6 (↑)
1.00
1.00
0.99
–
Task 7 (↑)
–
–
1.00
–
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
1.75
0.93
0.05
1.06
Task 9 (↓)
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.02
Task 10 (↓)
0.04
–
0.02
0.01
Task 11 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
Task 12 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Task 13 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Task 14 (↓)
0.20
0.20
0.22
0.21
Task 15 (↑)
2671.77
2621.12
2759.50
2732.99
Task 16 (↑)
101.42
99.31
99.56
99.82
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
Task 20 (↑)
239.60
143.05
143.05
315.08
Task 21 (↑)
1180.92
2589.99
1182.72
2759.21
Task 22 (↑)
-71.12
-5.40
-66.62
-71.12
Task 23 (↑)
355.17
360.35
0.02
355.17
21


--- Page 22 ---
Table 9: Comparison of optimization performance for Intermediate difficulty and Large budget. The
symbol “–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than 48 hours of computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
–
99.66
99.63
99.57
Task 2 (↑)
–
0.96
0.96
–
Task 3 (↑)
–
0.91
–
–
Task 4 (↑)
–
0.92
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
0.95
0.96
–
–
Task 6 (↑)
–
0.99
–
–
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
1.13
∞
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.09
Task 10 (↓)
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.29
Task 11 (↑)
0.95
0.96
0.95
0.93
Task 12 (↓)
0.31
0.31
–
0.31
Task 13 (↓)
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
Task 14 (↓)
0.62
∞
0.71
1.75
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
1342.70
1350.47
Task 16 (↑)
–
−∞
82.89
–
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
1000.00
Task 20 (↑)
100.72
100.72
119.98
145.58
Task 21 (↑)
138.52
138.52
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Table 10: Comparison of optimization performance for Hard difficulty and Large budget. The symbol
“–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than 48 hours of computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
99.50
−∞
98.45
99.50
Task 2 (↑)
–
0.96
–
–
Task 3 (↑)
0.91
0.91
0.89
0.86
Task 4 (↑)
–
0.92
–
–
Task 5 (↑)
–
0.96
0.96
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
–
0.99
0.99
−∞
Task 7 (↑)
–
–
–
0.91
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
–
∞
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.09
Task 10 (↓)
0.11
0.03
0.19
0.10
Task 11 (↑)
–
0.96
–
0.81
Task 12 (↓)
0.32
0.32
0.31
0.30
Task 13 (↓)
0.34
0.34
0.33
0.34
Task 14 (↓)
–
0.65
–
–
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
1380.15
Task 16 (↑)
–
−∞
−∞
–
MuJoCo
Task 19 (↑)
1000.00
1000.00
460.30
229.40
Task 20 (↑)
119.96
−∞
323.52
90.41
Task 21 (↑)
–
138.52
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
22


--- Page 23 ---
Table 11: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Easy difficulty and
Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
97.01
96.12
99.55
98.11
Task 2 (↑)
0.95
0.96
0.96
0.96
Task 3 (↑)
0.88
0.86
0.91
0.94
Task 4 (↑)
0.92
0.91
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
0.95
0.95
0.98
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.98
0.97
0.99
1.00
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
2.54
2.30
2.73
2.64
Task 9 (↓)
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.06
Task 10 (↓)
0.04
0.05
0.08
0.05
Task 11 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.95
0.95
Task 12 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.12
Task 13 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.09
0.01
Task 14 (↓)
0.19
0.20
0.38
0.34
Task 15 (↑)
2498.78
2511.32
2211.82
2295.25
Task 16 (↑)
99.69
100.86
90.31
91.29
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-11687.66
-11602.07
-11298.41
-10086.18
Task 18 (↓)
3.41
3.41
4.68
3.40
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
243.67
156.76
236.18
376.58
Task 21 (↑)
999.21
836.11
1021.98
367.91
Task 22 (↑)
-49.59
-90.06
-50.74
-16.72
Task 23 (↑)
357.92
346.59
34.92
350.42
Table 12: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Intermediate
difficulty and Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
98.33
95.25
99.36
99.45
Task 2 (↑)
0.95
0.96
0.94
0.92
Task 3 (↑)
0.84
0.79
0.89
0.81
Task 4 (↑)
0.90
0.92
0.92
0.91
Task 5 (↑)
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.92
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
9.06
3.26
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.15
0.12
0.18
0.16
Task 10 (↓)
0.31
0.31
0.31
0.31
Task 11 (↑)
0.95
0.90
0.89
0.93
Task 12 (↓)
0.34
0.34
0.32
0.33
Task 13 (↓)
0.36
0.35
0.34
0.36
Task 14 (↓)
∞
∞
0.80
0.91
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
1274.15
Task 16 (↑)
−∞
−∞
81.96
60.14
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-8538.19
-8528.84
∞
800.31
Task 18 (↓)
3.61
3.61
3.61
3.61
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
90.41
94.14
90.41
176.75
Task 21 (↑)
998.72
138.52
138.52
1055.56
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
−∞
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
23


--- Page 24 ---
Table 13: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Hard difficulty and
Small budget.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
97.78
96.52
−∞
−∞
Task 2 (↑)
0.94
0.93
0.93
0.92
Task 3 (↑)
0.86
0.76
0.84
0.83
Task 4 (↑)
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.91
Task 5 (↑)
0.95
0.95
0.94
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
−∞
0.99
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
0.91
0.91
0.91
0.91
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
∞
∞
∞
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.03
0.05
0.04
0.04
Task 10 (↓)
0.31
0.12
0.13
0.31
Task 11 (↑)
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.80
Task 12 (↓)
0.33
0.34
0.33
0.33
Task 13 (↓)
0.35
0.36
0.36
0.36
Task 14 (↓)
0.83
0.84
0.79
1.23
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
1316.15
1257.63
Task 16 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
−∞
MECHBench
Task 17 (↓)
-8503.76
-8482.05
∞
800.31
Task 18 (↓)
3.61
3.61
3.61
3.61
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
92.00
98.08
189.01
96.43
Task 21 (↑)
138.52
138.52
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
−∞
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Table 14: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Easy difficulty and
Large budget. The symbol “–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than 48 hours of
computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
–
99.66
−∞
99.57
Task 2 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
Task 3 (↑)
0.96
0.91
0.96
0.96
Task 4 (↑)
0.92
0.92
0.92
0.92
Task 5 (↑)
0.96
0.98
0.98
0.96
Task 6 (↑)
–
0.99
1.00
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
–
1.00
–
1.00
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
0.30
0.83
2.20
1.97
Task 9 (↓)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Task 10 (↓)
0.00
0.01
0.03
0.03
Task 11 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.96
Task 12 (↓)
0.00
0.00
–
0.00
Task 13 (↓)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Task 14 (↓)
0.22
0.23
0.21
0.27
Task 15 (↑)
2532.92
2692.48
2704.45
2568.60
Task 16 (↑)
100.00
97.88
97.58
99.92
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
443.79
456.84
9359.43
9359.86
Task 21 (↑)
1029.72
2589.99
1199.98
1347.54
Task 22 (↑)
-5.84
-28.56
-6.00
-5.04
Task 23 (↑)
359.10
360.35
108.94
361.33
24


--- Page 25 ---
Table 15: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Intermediate
difficulty and Large budget. The symbol “–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than
48 hours of computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
98.53
99.57
99.50
99.57
Task 2 (↑)
–
0.96
–
–
Task 3 (↑)
–
0.91
–
0.89
Task 4 (↑)
–
0.92
0.92
–
Task 5 (↑)
–
–
–
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
0.99
0.99
–
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
–
–
–
–
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
0.22
0.16
∞
3.00
Task 9 (↓)
0.15
0.15
0.15
0.03
Task 10 (↓)
0.29
0.30
0.30
0.30
Task 11 (↑)
0.96
0.96
0.96
0.93
Task 12 (↓)
0.30
0.31
0.30
0.31
Task 13 (↓)
0.34
0.34
0.34
0.34
Task 14 (↓)
0.63
∞
0.68
∞
Task 15 (↑)
−∞
−∞
−∞
–
Task 16 (↑)
81.46
−∞
83.81
83.39
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
112.44
123.07
363.04
123.07
Task 21 (↑)
1039.23
138.52
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
−∞
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
Table 16: Comparison of optimization performance with one-shot prompting for Hard difficulty and
Large budget. The symbol “–” indicates that the run was terminated due to more than 48 hours of
computational time.
Domain
Task
Gemini 3 Flash
Gemini 3.1 Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
YAHPO
Task 1 (↑)
–
99.57
−∞
−∞
Task 2 (↑)
–
0.93
–
0.96
Task 3 (↑)
0.86
0.91
0.87
–
Task 4 (↑)
–
0.92
0.92
–
Task 5 (↑)
–
0.95
0.95
0.95
Task 6 (↑)
–
0.99
–
0.99
Task 7 (↑)
–
–
0.91
0.96
Olympus
Task 8 (↓)
–
∞
–
∞
Task 9 (↓)
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.02
Task 10 (↓)
0.30
0.02
0.11
0.12
Task 11 (↑)
–
0.96
–
–
Task 12 (↓)
0.31
0.32
0.31
0.30
Task 13 (↓)
0.33
0.33
0.34
0.33
Task 14 (↓)
–
0.66
–
–
Task 15 (↑)
–
–
−∞
1390.82
Task 16 (↑)
–
–
–
–
MuJoCo
Task 20 (↑)
100.72
88.20
323.52
260.96
Task 21 (↑)
138.52
1104.08
138.52
138.52
Task 22 (↑)
-12.25
-12.25
-12.25
−∞
Task 23 (↑)
0.02
0.02
-0.26
0.02
25


--- Page 26 ---
H
Search Spaces Designed by LLMs
Tables 17 to 21 present representative examples of the search space designed by the LLMs for specified
tasks and settings: Table 17 corresponds to Task 4 (HPO of SVM in YAHPO) in Hard difficulty under
Small budget; Table 18 corresponds to Task 14 (SNAr reaction in Olympus) under Hard difficulty
under Small budget; Table 19 corresponds to Task 17 (Star-shaped crash box, MECHBench) in Hard
difficulty under Small budget; Tables 20 and 21 correspond to Task 20 (Inverted Double Pendulum,
MuJoCo) in Hard and Easy difficulty under Small budget, respectively.
For Task 4 (HPO of SVM in YAHPO), the best objective values of all LLMs and the human baseline
are comparable since all LLMs correctly inferred several important variables in their search space,
such as cost, kernel, and gamma. However, only GPT-5 mini yielded a narrow range restricted to
small values of [1e-4, 1.0] for cost and gamma, which could result in a slightly lower best objective
value than those of the other LLMs.
For Task 14 (SNAr reaction in Olympus), the best objective values achieved by the LLM-designed
search spaces and selected algorithms remained below that of the human baseline. This gap is
attributable to the suboptimal search space designs proposed by the LLMs: although most models
correctly identified one or both of residence_time and temperature as design variables, the
specified value ranges were poorly calibrated. Excessively long residence times promote side
reactions, thereby increasing impurity, while excessively low temperatures suppress the reaction rate
and reduce substrate conversion, both of which are detrimental to impurity minimization.
The best objective values achieved by the LLM-designed search spaces and selected algorithms
also fell short of the human baseline in Task 17 (Star-shaped crash box, MECHBench). In the
LLM-designed search spaces, only the variable thickness was mapped to the canonical variables.
The best objective value of GPT-5 mini was −∞because its value range of [5e-4, 2e-2] was outside
the canonical variable range, and those of the other LLMs did not reach the human baseline. The
LLMs designed their search spaces based on a polar coordinate system, while a rectangular coordinate
system was expected in the canonical design space. This variation in coordinate system conventions
for designing search space presents a significant challenge that lies beyond the scope of the current
framework. This topic is one of the directions of future work.
For Task 20 (Inverted Double Pendulum, MuJoCo), some LLMs tended to design their search spaces
with some or all variables asymmetric about zero in both Hard and Easy difficulty. This asymmetric
design potentially demonstrates that LLMs leverage their knowledge about control engineering for
designing search spaces, and contributed to superior optimization results of Gemini 3 Flash and
Gemini 3.1 Pro over that of the human baseline in Easy difficulty.
Based on the analyses above, although inferring correct variables and value ranges is highly chal-
lenging for LLMs in general, the best objective values in several tasks are comparable to those of
the human baseline. These results stem from the design of effective search spaces that leverage the
domain knowledge LLMs possess.
26


--- Page 27 ---
Table 17: Comparison of search space designed by human and LLMs, and the best achieved objective
value for Task 4 (HPO of SVM in YAHPO) in Hard difficulty and Small budget. The symbol “−”
indicates the variable was not included in the search space provided by the model.
Variables
Canonical
Domain
Human
Baseline
Gemini 3
Flash
Gemini 3.1
Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
cost
[4.54e-5,
22026.47]
[4.54e-5,
22026.47],
log
[1e-3, 1e3],
log
[1e-3, 1e3],
log
[1e-4, 1.0],
log
[1e-3, 1e3],
log
kernel
{linear,
radial, poly-
nomial}
{linear,
radial, poly-
nomial}
{linear,
radial, poly-
nomial}
{linear,
radial}
{linear,
radial, poly-
nomial}
{linear,
radial}
tolerance
[4.54e-5,
2.0]
[4.54e-5,
2.0], log
−
−
−
[1e-5, 1e-2],
log
degree
[2, 5],
step=1
[2, 5],
step=1
−
−
[2, 5],
step=2
−
gamma
[4.54e-5,
22026.47],
log
[4.54e-5,
22026.47],
log
[1e-4, 10.0],
log
[1e-4, 10.0],
log
[1e-4, 1.0],
log
[1e-4, 10.0],
log
num.impute.selected.cpo {mean, hist,
median}
hist
−
−
−
−
Additional variables
probability
−
−
True
True
−
False
coef0
−
−
−
−
0.0
−
class_weight
−
−
−
−
−
{none,
balanced}
shrinking
−
−
−
−
−
{True,
False}
max_iter
−
−
−
−
−
-1
Best obj. (↑)
−
0.9773
0.9493
0.9516
0.9281
0.9503
27


--- Page 28 ---
Table 18: Comparison of search space designed by human and LLMs, and the best achieved objective
value for Task 14 (SNAr reaction in Olympus) in Hard difficulty and Small budget. The symbol “−”
indicates the variable was not included in the search space provided by the model.
Variables
Canonical
Domain
Human
Baseline
Gemini 3
Flash
Gemini 3.1
Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
residence_time
[0.5, 2.0]
[0.5, 2.0]
[0.0, 1440]
[1.0, 24.0]
−
−
ratio
[1.0, 5.0]
[1.0, 5.0]
−
−
−
−
concentration
[0.1, 0.5]
[0.1, 0.5]
[0.01, 2.0],
log
−
[0.01, 1.0],
log
[0.05, 1.0],
log
temperature
[60.0,
140.0]
[60.0,
140.0]
[0.0, 250.0]
[20.0,
140.0]
[20, 150],
step=1
[20.0,
140.0]
Additional variables
solvent
−
−
{dmf, dmso,
nmp, thf,
acetoni-
trile}
{dmf, dmso,
nmp}
{ dimethyl-
formamide,
dimethyl-
sulfoxide,
acetoni-
trile}
{dmf, dmso,
acetonitrile,
nmp}
base_equivalents
−
−
[0.5, 5.0]
−
−
[0.5, 3.0]
base_type
−
−
{k2co3,
cs2co3, tea,
naoh, koh}
{k2co3,
cs2co3,
dipea}
{potassium
carbonate,
cesium
carbonate,
triethy-
lamine}
{k2co3,
cs2co3,
dipea}
nucleophile
equivalents
−
−
−
[1.0, 3.0]
[1.0, 3.0]
[0.8, 2.0]
reaction_time_min
−
−
−
−
[15, 480],
step=5
−
reaction_time_h
−
−
−
−
−
[0.5, 24.0]
Best obj. (↓)
−
0.1990
0.8937
2.2738
0.7923
0.7771
28


--- Page 29 ---
Table 19: Comparison of search space designed by human and LLMs, and the best achieved objective
value for Task 17 (Star-shaped crash box, MECHBench) in Hard difficulty and Small budget. The
symbol “−” indicates the variable was not included in the search space provided by the model.
Variables
Canonical
Domain
Human
Baseline
Gemini 3
Flash
Gemini 3.1
Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
width
[60, 120]
[60, 120]
−
−
−
−
depth
[60, 120]
[60, 120]
−
−
−
−
notch_width
[0, 30]
15
−
−
−
−
notch_depth
[0, 30]
15
−
−
−
−
thickness
[0.7, 3.0]
[1.1, 2.4]
[1.0, 3.0]
[1.0, 5.0]
[5e-4, 2e-2]
[0.8, 4.0],
log
Additional variables
inner_radius
−
−
[20.0, 40.0]
[20.0, 60.0]
[1e-2, 0.2]
[0.35, 0.85]
outer_radius
−
−
[41.0, 60.0]
[65.0,
120.0]
[5e-2, 0.3]
[25.0, 75.0]
corner_radius
−
−
[2.0, 10.0]
−
−
[0.5, 8.0]
number_of_corners
−
−
4
−
−
−
length
−
−
−
200.0
−
−
num_points
−
−
−
−
[3, 12],
step=1
[4, 10],
step=1
crash_box_height
−
−
−
−
−
[80.0,
220.0]
inner_radius_ratio
−
−
−
−
−
[0.35, 0.85]
taper_angle_deg
−
−
−
−
−
[0.0, 6.0]
Best obj. (↓)
−
-11740.92
-8535.27
-8528.84
∞
-8507.17
29


--- Page 30 ---
Table 20: Comparison of search space designed by human and LLMs, and the best achieved objective
value for Task 20 (Inverted Double Pendulum, MuJoCo) in Hard difficulty and Small budget. The
symbol “−” indicates the variable was not included in the search space provided by the model.
Variables
Canonical
Domain
Human
Baseline
Gemini 3
Flash
Gemini 3.1
Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
position_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-50, 0]
−
[0, 10]
−
sin_pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-10, 10]
−
−
−
−
sin_pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-10, 10]
−
−
−
−
cos_pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
−
−
−
−
cos_pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
−
−
−
−
velocity_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-20, 0]
−
−
−
angular_velocity
pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
−
−
−
−
angular_velocity
pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
−
−
−
−
constraint_force
_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
−
−
−
−
bias_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
−
−
[-10, 10]
[-2, 2]
Additional variables
k_pole1_ang
−
−
[10, 300]
−
−
−
k_pole1_vel
−
−
[2, 100]
−
−
−
k_pole2_ang
−
−
[10, 300]
−
−
−
k_pole2_vel
−
−
[2, 100]
−
−
−
w0
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w1
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w2
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w3
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w4
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w5
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w6
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w7
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w8
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w9
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
w10
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
−
−
kp_pole1
−
−
−
−
[0, 50]
−
kp_pole2
−
−
−
−
[0, 50]
−
kd_angles
−
−
−
−
[0, 20]
−
w_cart_position
−
−
−
−
−
[-5, 5]
w_cart_velocity
−
−
−
−
−
[-5, 5]
w_pole_1_angle
−
−
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
w_pole_1
angular_velocity
−
−
−
−
−
[-5, 5]
w_pole_2_angle
−
−
−
−
−
[-10, 10]
w_pole_2_angular
velocity
−
−
−
−
−
[-5, 5]
Best obj. (↑)
−
135.08
106.98
−∞
93.25
90.41
30


--- Page 31 ---
Table 21: Comparison of search space designed by human and LLMs, and the best achieved objective
value for Task 20 (Inverted Double Pendulum, MuJoCo, maximization) in Easy difficulty and Small
budget. The symbol “−” indicates the variable was not included in the search space provided by the
model.
Variables
Canonical
Domain
Human
Baseline
Gemini 3
Flash
Gemini 3.1
Pro
GPT-5 mini
GPT-5.2
position_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-5e2, 5e2]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
sin_pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-10, 10]
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
sin_pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-10, 10]
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
cos_pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-5e2, 5e2]
0
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
cos_pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-5e2, 5e2]
0
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
velocity_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
angular_velocity
pole1_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
angular_velocity
pole2_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-50, 50]
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
constraint_force
_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-10, 10]
0
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-1e2, 1e2]
bias_to_force
[-1e3, 1e3]
0
[-10, 10]
0
[-2e2, 2e2]
[-50, 50]
Best obj.
−
135.08
136.66
150.58
88.21
83.71
31


--- Page 32 ---
I
Results of FRS Mertic
We calculate the FRS metrics for Tasks 3, 14, and 20 under Small budget. The complete results
are provided in Tables 22 and 23 with zero-shot prompting and one-shot prompting, respectively.
Focusing on the differences in FRS values between Tables 22 and 23, the one-shot prompting
improves the average FRS of Task 20 for the models other than Gemini 3 Flash, since we provide the
example in the prompt using Task 19, which shares its domain with Task 20 (MuJoCo). Conversely,
one-shot prompting sometimes deteriorates the FRS values for Tasks 3 and 14, whose domain differs
from that of the example.
Table 22: Comparison of FRS between different models in Small budget and zero-shot prompting
setting.
Difficulty
Model
Task 3
Task 14
Task 20
Avg. (Task)
Easy
Gemini 3 Flash
0.999
1.000
0.896
0.965
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.887
1.000
0.922
0.936
GPT-5 mini
1.000
0.994
0.570
0.855
GPT-5.2
1.000
1.000
0.530
0.843
Intermediate
Gemini 3 Flash
0.615
0.000
0.687
0.434
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.958
0.000
0.714
0.557
GPT-5 mini
0.952
0.617
0.620
0.730
GPT-5.2
0.359
0.425
0.463
0.416
Hard
Gemini 3 Flash
0.953
0.469
0.763
0.728
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.393
0.005
0.000
0.133
GPT-5 mini
0.577
0.561
0.624
0.588
GPT-5.2
0.341
0.576
0.594
0.503
Avg.
(Difficulty)
Gemini 3 Flash
0.856
0.490
0.782
0.709
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.746
0.335
0.545
0.542
GPT-5 mini
0.843
0.724
0.605
0.724
GPT-5.2
0.567
0.667
0.529
0.588
Table 23: Comparison of FRS between different models in Small budget and one-shot prompting
setting.
Difficulty
Model
Task 3
Task 14
Task 20
Avg. (Task)
Easy
Gemini 3 Flash
0.944
1.000
0.980
0.975
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.795
1.000
0.931
0.909
GPT-5 mini
0.998
0.971
0.978
0.983
GPT-5.2
1.000
0.988
0.996
0.995
Intermediate
Gemini 3 Flash
0.604
0.000
0.594
0.399
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.148
0.000
0.633
0.260
GPT-5 mini
0.985
0.556
0.594
0.712
GPT-5.2
0.304
0.454
0.951
0.570
Hard
Gemini 3 Flash
0.794
0.523
0.609
0.642
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.058
0.517
0.676
0.417
GPT-5 mini
0.559
0.561
0.959
0.693
GPT-5.2
0.492
0.223
0.656
0.457
Avg.
(Difficulty)
Gemini 3 Flash
0.781
0.508
0.728
0.672
Gemini 3.1 Pro
0.334
0.506
0.747
0.529
GPT-5 mini
0.847
0.696
0.844
0.796
GPT-5.2
0.598
0.555
0.868
0.674
32


--- Page 33 ---
J
Results of Search Space Quality
Figures 8 and 9 visualize how the objective function values distribute when sampling 100,000 points
from the canonical domain of the task and search spaces designed by the LLMs with zero-shot and
one-shot prompting, respectively.
In both zero-shot and one-shot settings, for Task 3 in Easy difficulty, the median values of the
samples from the search spaces designed by LLMs are better than those from the canonical domains.
Conversely, in Intermediate and Hard difficulty, where more implicit descriptions are given, the
median values for the search spaces by LLMs deteriorate even with one-shot prompting.
Comparing zero-shot and one-shot settings, one-shot prompting improves the median values slightly
in Easy and Intermediate difficulties for Task 20, which shares its domain with the one-shot example.
However, the effectiveness of one-shot prompting is limited as seen in Hard difficulty for Task 20
and the difficulties for Tasks 3 and 14.
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Easy difficulty
Probability
1e−2
Task 3 ( ↑)
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.805
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.824
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.797
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.812
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1e−2
Task 14 ( ↓)
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: 1.471
GPT-5 mini
median: 1.257
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 1.475
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 1.474
0
50
100
150
200
0
1
2
3
4
5
1e−1
Task 20 ( ↑)
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 22.061
GPT-5 mini
median: 22.062
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 26.587
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 21.200
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Intermediate difficulty
Probability
1e−2
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.664
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.779
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.746
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.727
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e−2
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: inf
GPT-5 mini
median: inf
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: inf
Gemini 3 Flash
median: inf
0
50
100
150
200
0
1
2
3
4
1e−1
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 25.783
GPT-5 mini
median: 26.757
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 47.208
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 23.014
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Hard difficulty
Probability
1e−2
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.704
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.767
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.752
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.761
0
1
2
3
4
5
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1e−2
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: inf
GPT-5 mini
median: inf
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: inf
Gemini 3 Flash
median: inf
0
50
100
150
200
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 90.409
GPT-5 mini
median: 36.368
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 61.088
Figure 8: EPDF of objective function values obtained by uniformly sampling 100,000 points from
the canonical domain (gray) versus the search spaces generated by four LLMs. This result is the case
of zero-shot prompting. The worst objective function value is omitted in the figure.
33


--- Page 34 ---
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Easy difficulty
Probability
1e−2
Task 3 ( ↑)
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.799
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.803
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.799
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.788
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
1e−2
Task 14 ( ↓)
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: 1.154
GPT-5 mini
median: 1.369
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 1.472
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 1.473
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
1e−1
Task 20 ( ↑)
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 35.156
GPT-5 mini
median: 28.586
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 26.645
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 29.708
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Intermediate difficulty
Probability
1e−2
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.695
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.744
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.742
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.739
0
1
2
3
4
5
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00 1e−2
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: inf
GPT-5 mini
median: inf
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: inf
Gemini 3 Flash
median: inf
0
50
100
150
200
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 32.279
GPT-5 mini
median: 90.409
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 34.325
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 90.409
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Objective Function Value
0
1
2
3
4
Hard difficulty
Probability
1e−2
domain
median: 0.780
GPT-5.2
median: 0.697
GPT-5 mini
median: 0.716
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 0.734
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 0.767
0
1
2
3
4
5
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1e−1
domain
median: 1.470
GPT-5.2
median: 1.300
GPT-5 mini
median: inf
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: inf
Gemini 3 Flash
median: inf
0
50
100
150
200
Objective Function Value
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
1e−1
domain
median: 25.692
GPT-5.2
median: 27.601
GPT-5 mini
median: 30.468
Gemini 3.1 Pro
median: 27.588
Gemini 3 Flash
median: 26.601
Figure 9: EPDF of objective function values obtained by uniformly sampling 100,000 points from
the canonical domain (gray) versus the search spaces generated by four LLMs. This result is the case
of one-shot prompting. The worst objective function value is omitted in the figure.
34


--- Page 35 ---
K
Potential Societal Impact
We believe that our proposed benchmark can support research on automated formulation for black-
box optimization, potentially reducing the expertise required to apply optimization methods. A
possible negative societal impact is that more automated optimization could be misused in harmful
applications if combined with inappropriate objectives or unsafe evaluation environments. However,
this paper introduces a benchmark and does not release high-risk models, scraped datasets, or
deployed optimization systems.
35
